S/PV.8266*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8266

th meeting
Wednesday, 23 May 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (S/2018/432)

		 * Reissued for technical reasons on 10 September 2018.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-15698* (E)
*1815689*

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda.
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(S/2018/432)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Maman Sidikou,
Permanent Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel;
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations; and Mr. João
Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2018/432, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita: It is my pleasure to address the Security
Council today and provide it with an update on the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), relevant international support,
including by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
and challenges encountered thus far, as well as possible
measures for further consideration in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 2391 (2017).
I do not need to remind the Council that the security
situation in the Sahel is dire. Just yesterday, we once
again received reports of a shooting in Ouagadougou.
Over the past weeks and months, local security forces
in the Liptako-Gourma triangle, as well as international
forces and MINUSMA, continued to face devastating
terrorist attacks, including on 18 April in Timbuktu.
However, let us not forget those who suffer the most:
local populations and civilians, who continue to be
intimidated and harassed, live in fear for their lives on
a daily basis, cannot send their children to school and/
2/25

23/05/2018

or are unable to meet their most basic needs, including
access to food and nutrition. Terrorism and transnational
organized crime continue to be two of most pressing
security challenges facing the Sahel region, and I fear
that we will have to grapple with them for many years
to come.
Against that backdrop, I can only express
admiration for the member States of the G-5 Sahel,
which have taken their fate into their own hands, and
commend them for the efforts that they have undertaken
over the past year to operationalize the Joint Force. As
reported by the Secretary-General (S/2018/432), since
the authorization of its deployment by the African
Union Peace and Security Council this past April and
the subsequent renewal of its mandate only a month ago,
notable progress has been made. Member States of the
G-5 for the Sahel have begun deploying their troops and
equipping the command posts and sector headquarters
in all three sectors. Burkina Faso and the Niger have
each deployed one battalion on their respective borders
with Mali, while the deployment of the Malian battalion
in the Litpako-Gourma triangle is under way.
The Joint Force conducted its first two operations
in the Central Sector and undertook important
first steps towards establishing its human rights
compliance framework, including defining screening
and monitoring mechanisms to address human rights
violations. Nonetheless, much work remains ahead
of us. The operationalization of the Joint Force has
incurred delays and has yet to attain full operational
capability. I call on G-5 Sahel member States to
relentlessly follow up on the efforts made to date and
deploy remaining troops as quickly as possible so that
the Joint Force can resume its operations. I also call on
the G-5 Sahel to further clarify the Joint Force’s concept
of operations and come together to jointly define its
end state and objectives. I also acknowledge that the
Joint Force continues to urgently require equipment
and training, including air and communication assets.
Those capability gaps are another important factor
delaying the full operationalization of the Joint Force,
and the support of the international community will be
required to overcome them.
While not underestimating the complexity of
military operations, we also believe it is important to
address the recent reports about allegations of human
rights violations by security forces in the region as a
matter of priority, as those may constitute obstacles for
the provision of United Nations support. In particular,
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

I urge the member States of the G-5 Sahel to take
advantage of the efforts carried out by the Joint Force,
MINUSMA and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to establish a human
rights and international humanitarian law compliance
framework and cooperate for its rapid and effective
implementation, including by supporting effective
accountability mechanisms, ensuring the systematic
deployment and presence of provost officers at the
company level, and supporting the deployment of
United Nations teams in countries of the G-5 Sahel.
I also express my profound gratitude to the
international community for its sustained and continual
support to this important initiative. The outcomes of
the international high-level conference on the Sahel
held on 23 February in Brussels are a testament to that.
An additional €80 million was raised at the conference,
bringing the total amount of pledges in support of the
Joint Force for the first year to over €400 million, which
is almost the entirety of its projected budget for the first
year of operations. The member States of the G-5 for the
Sahel, the European Union and the United Nations also
signed the technical arrangement defining the scope
and modalities for providing MINUSMA support to the
Joint Force, as requested by resolution 2391 (2017), on
which we briefed the Council on 13 April.
I applaud the European Union for managing the
coordination hub, which is no small task. The hub is an
important tool for coordinating and mobilizing member
States’ and partners’ contributions. I also thank the
European Union for its own generous and important
contributions to MINUSMA’s support to the Joint Force.
However, I am also concerned that, while the support
mobilized by the international community to date is
indeed commendable, the support mechanisms, such as
they have been set up by resolution 2391 (2017), will
require perpetual resource-generation efforts to fund
support to the Joint Force, including replenishing the
African Peace Facility. In the medium to long term, it
will be challenging to sustain the momentum achieved
so far. What is more, the United Nations will continue
to depend on others to be able to implement the support
measures it has been mandated to provide to the G-5 for
the Sahel Joint Force by resolution 2391 (2017).
(spoke in French)
To date, despite the significant number of pledges
received, the funds necessary to fully implement
MINUSMA’s support to the Joint Force has still not

S/PV. 8266*

been received. With the funds we have received so far,
the Mission can provide only essential consumable
goods and casualty evacuation. MINUSMA is still in
urgent need of funds to provide engineering support to
allow it to be able to assist in strengthening the G-5 for
the Sahel camps in Mali. The lack of secure operational
bases in Mali has proven to be a major obstacle to the full
operationalization of the Joint Force. The troops who
have already been deployed must live and conduct their
operations under the most difficult conditions. However,
MINUSMA’s own experience in Mali demonstrates the
need for effective camp-protection measures. In that
regard, I call on all donors to make a contribution or
to earmark additional funds for MINUSMA’s support
to the Joint Force. As the Council knows, MINUSMA’s
support to the Joint Force is limited to Mali itself,
which is part of the Central Sector of the Joint Force’s
operations. Therefore, I also call on donors to step up
their support to Sector East and Sector West, which so
far have not received support from the United Nations.
Finally, few of the pledges have been disbursed to date.
I call on donors to disburse them as soon as possible.
Over the long term — and here I echo the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
his most recent report — our overall goal must be to
consider together which mechanisms will allow for
more predictable funding, including through mandatory
contributions, as well as support measures and more
predictable and sustainable financing, for the G-5
Sahel Joint Force. That would provide better support
for MINUSMA and ensure that it can effectively fulfil
its own mandate.
Ultimately, any attempt to overcome instability and
insecurity in the Sahel will succeed only if it focuses on
the link between development, peace and security. The
interventions of the Joint Force will remain a securityfocused initiative, but must be embedded within
a broader and holistic framework, combined with
initiatives to improve governance, access to nutrition
and basic social services, and creating opportunities
for young people. They must also always maintain
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali as their primary objective, as
that is the cornerstone of all stabilization efforts in
the region.
I welcome the progress made in the establishment
of the Joint Force compliance framework, but I remain
concerned about reports of human rights violations
committed by local law-and-order forces. The Joint

18-156983/25

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

Force will succeed only if it enjoys the trust and support
of the local population.
I also welcome the efforts undertaken by the G-5
for the Sahel to strengthen its Permanent Secretariat
and its links with the Joint Force command in Sevaré.
An important next step, which I urge the G-5 for the
Sahel to pursue, is the strengthening of its ownership
of efforts to operationalize the Joint Force, as well as
efforts to mobilize resources and to therefore establish
the support group. The establishment of such an
important structure would allow for more concerted
and systematic cooperation with the region, the African
Union and other international partners, and would
ensure that the Joint Force’s operations were aligned
with a broader strategy for the region as a whole.
The commitment of the United Nations to that
important initiative remains unwavering. It is up to all
of us to ensure that the Joint Force succeeds.
The President: I thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sidikou.
Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by thanking the Security Council for organizing
this meeting on the situation in the Sahel, a region of
the world that is facing a thorny and complex crisis.
This demonstrates the Council’s interest in our
subregion, despite the many other sources of concern
for international peace and security.
On behalf of the member countries of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), I would like to
thank Secretary-General António Guterres, whose
pertinent and strategic report on the establishment of
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel (S/2018/432) perfectly
summarizes the reality of the current issues in that
region of Africa and proposes several pragmatic ways
to make the international community’s response to the
multifaceted crisis more effective.
Faced with multiple challenges, which are often
minimized or ignored, the Sahel region has gradually
become a major area of instability in Africa and is
today a growing threat to international security. Five
countries at the heart of the Sahelian space — Burkina
Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger — decided
to join forces as an organization and form a core group
to face with solidarity the immense shared challenges
that threaten the stability of already fragile States and
hinder socioeconomic development. Foremost among
those challenges is the security crisis, which has for
4/25

23/05/2018

several years, but with extreme urgency recently, been
characterized by the proliferation of armed conflicts in
our countries, the spread of extremist religious terrorism,
drug trafficking and other forms of cross-border crime
with international ramifications, the migratory crisis
and its most hideous manifestation, namely, the abject
trafficking in human beings, organized by illegal
immigration channels towards Europe.
On the strictly military level, the mobilization of
our five countries and the support of the international
community have enabled the taking of a very positive
first step forward. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report, over recent months, we have been in the process
of successfully establishing the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, which is composed of 5,000
soldiers and which enjoys the support of the international
community, in particular through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) and Operation Barkhane, led
by France. A so-called technical arrangement was
concluded in that regard among the United Nations, the
European Union and the Group of Five for the Sahel last
February, and was signed by the President of the Niger
and current President of the G-5 Sahel, His Excellency
Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou. Moreover, in order to
comply with United Nations standards in this area, the
Joint Force has integrated into its strategic concept of
operations the human rights compliance framework
advocated by the United Nations. This United Nations
support following resolution 2391 (2017) is therefore to
be welcomed. It has already enabled us to collaborate
during the setting up of the Joint Force’s headquarters
in Sévaré, Mali, and during the conduct of the first two
operations of the Force, namely, Operation Hawbi and
Operation Pagnali, in the sensitive border area between
Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger.
In line with the Secretary-General’s statements, we
must acknowledge that we are still far from reaching
a good cruising speed in the concrete implementation
of our security response to the crisis that threatens
to totally destabilize the Sahel and its surroundings.
Although more than 80 per cent of our troops are
already deployed at headquarters in Sévaré and in the
three operational areas, the fact remains that the troops
are still generally poorly equipped, and the military
bases and, more generally, the logistics necessary for
an effective intervention are lacking, especially in an
environment that is often hostile in several respects. In
the same vein, the configuration of MINUSMA support
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

for the Joint Force currently authorized by resolution
2391 (2017) severely limits effective regional coverage
and operational control on all fronts identified as urgent
for future interventions by the Force to fight terrorist
groups and other criminal organizations determined to
spread terror in the Sahelian space.
We therefore confirm the diagnosis established by
the Secretary-General in his report, which highlights in
particular the inadequacy of the mechanism put in place
to support the Joint Force. It is “neither sustainable
nor commensurate with the challenges we face in the
Sahel” (S/2018/432, para. 74). Against that backdrop,
it would undeniably be a matter for the Security
Council to place the United Nations contribution at a
more appropriate level, which will include compulsory
contributions as the best option in order to be able to
provide long-term support. This is an opportunity to
reiterate our call to the Council to provide the Joint
Force with the strengthened mandate it deserves and the
resources necessary to complete its operationalization
and ensure its full and efficient response capability.
Such an evolution of the Joint Force’s mandate
would be precisely in line with the recommendations
resulting from the consultations conducted last March
by the Security Council in the context of improving
peacekeeping operations with a view to making them
more flexible, more dynamic and more adapted to
the different theatres of operations — in short, more
effective in a constantly changing world. This is
therefore also a good opportunity to take advantage of
this more pragmatic and dynamic approach to United
Nations interventions.
More specifically, with respect to the solutions for
supporting the Joint Force suggested by the SecretaryGeneral and better adapted to the context, as Council
members know, before taking up my duties last February
at the helm of the G-5 Sahel, I had the honour of leading
two important international missions, one under the
auspices of the African Union — the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) — and the other under
the auspices of the United Nations — the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). In both cases,
the good collaboration between African forces and
the United Nations led to positive results, particularly
in Somalia, through the substantial logistical support
provided by the United Nations to AMISOM and, in
the case of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the establishment within MONUSCO of a rapid Force

S/PV. 8266*

Intervention Brigade, which is made up exclusively of
troops from the countries of the subregion and has been
responsible for the most significant successful military
interventions by the United Nations in that country
since the establishment of a United Nations mission
there nearly 20 years ago. I am therefore speaking
from experience, having recently had an opportunity to
experience the various realities of intervention missions
on a daily basis, but always in a context framed by a
Security Council resolution.
It is therefore a question of succeeding, on the
Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, in setting up an effective
operational force with an African backbone but strongly
supported by the entire international community, led by
the United Nations, in order to send a clear and strong
message to all the negative forces and thereby carry
out one of the most dangerous missions, whose failure
would mean the total destabilization of a good part of
the African continent, a region, we should recall, that
is a neighbour to the Mediterranean, and therefore the
European continent. It is also an important crossroads
of traffic towards the rest of the world — America, Asia
and the Middle East, in particular. For the nebulous
international terrorist network and all related groups,
the failure of our intervention would mean offering them
on a silver platter the best possible operational basis to
organize the almost unlimited spread throughout the
world of an even more terrifying mass terrorism than
we are already unfortunately experiencing today.
Aware that they are the first to be affected, our
States, despite their very limited financial resources,
recently undertook major efforts to increase the
capabilities of our defence forces and security sectors,
which now benefit, on average, from more than
20 per cent of our five countries’ budgets, often to the
detriment of social sectors, despite their critical nature,
which constitutes a particularly painful trade-off
for our Governments. The expected share of the five
countries to the financing the Joint Force is therefore
paid by all, sometimes with some delays. In addition,
the trust fund established to manage the financial effort
of the international community in support of the Joint
Force already has an account with the Central Bank of
Mauritania, the headquarters country of the G-5 Sahel.
Following the meeting of our organization’s Defence
Ministers two weeks ago in Ouagadougou, instructions
were given to urgently appoint the members of the Trust
Fund Support Committee, including its guarantor,
the European Union, with a view to accelerating

18-156985/25

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

its operations. It should also be noted with gratitude
that the first financial contributions, mainly African,
to date, have already arrived or are in the process of
arriving, particularly from Rwanda and the member
countries of the West African Economic and Monetary
Union. Also, all the mobilization for the Sahel currently
taking place must materialize very quickly in a tangible
way on the ground so as to restore hope and confidence
to our populations, their support being essential to
the success in the long term of the multidimensional
intervention of the international community that has
come to the aid of our region.
It is with this in mind that we are also involved in
the in-depth work that is beginning to be carried out,
particularly with the support of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, with
a view to ensuring strict respect for human rights in
this fight against terrorism. The promotion of citizens’
rights and freedoms should be considered an asset
and not a constraint, because it greatly contributes to
discrediting the discourse of the backward forces we
are fighting.
It is crucial for our success to be long term and not
ephemeral, and for the security response not be isolated
from the rest of the complex Sahel problem. Without
peace and security there can be no development
or prosperity. The clear lack of development and
socioeconomic progress favours the increase in
insecurity and instability. We are therefore faced with
a vicious circle that requires a more global solution
and a more holistic approach in our response to the
Sahelian situation. The security-development nexus
must therefore be at the heart of our effort. It should be
very tangible on the ground for the people of the Sahel.
From here, from the Chamber, the necessary momentum
will emerge to transform the commitments made by
all into concrete actions in order to rapidly achieve
the crucial goal of pacification and of securing the
Sahel region in parallel with the implementation of an
ambitious socioeconomic development plan that meets
the expectations of our populations, in particular young
people and women. To that end, the United Nations
developed the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel together with the African Union, which we
commend. At the specific level of the G-5 Sahel, we
have in place a development and security strategy that
includes an operational plan — the Priority Investment
Programme — for whose implementation we count on
the contribution of the entire international community.
6/25

23/05/2018

I note with satisfaction that a number of friends and
partners of the Sahel, many of whom are represented in
the Chamber, have already indicated their intention to
support the Priority Investment Programme.
We can clearly see that the deliberations to find the
proper solutions to adequately deal with the immense
challenges of the Sahel region have taken place and that
multifaceted solutions, as well as some of the necessary
resources, have been identified. It remains only to
take strong action to realize all those good intentions
in an appropriate framework and to thereby meet the
expectations of the people of the Sahel, including young
people without hope for the future who are reluctant to
join the ranks of the retrograde terrorist groups or to
attempt the suicidal venture of clandestine migration,
and women living in the desert areas of the Sahel who
face drought and see their newborns die in their arms
owing to the prevailing insecurity that has caused the
medical staff to flee the area and, more generally, the
population’s lack of basic services.
It is high time to act for the Sahel beyond speeches
and half-measures. The time for resolute action must
begin here in the Chamber under the momentum of the
Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Sidikou for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed: At the outset allow me to commend
your delegation, Madam President, for convening this
timely meeting and for giving me the opportunity to
share with the Security Council the perspectives of
the African Union (AU) on the important and urgent
matter concerning the situation in the Sahel region and
the operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five States for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
The African Union remains deeply concerned about
the continuing deterioration of the security situation
in Mali and of the greater Sahel region as a result of
the increasing threat posed by terrorism and violent
extremism and its spread to the surrounding countries.
The events in that region again remind us of the fact that
terrorist groups know no borders. They think and act
globally. The international approach in dealing with that
scourge must therefore be coherent, comprehensive and
integrated. Sustainable and simultaneous engagement
is needed in all affected areas and regions.
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

There is therefore an urgent need for robust
international engagement in support of the efforts of
the countries of the region. The African Union has
been very supportive of the various regional initiatives,
in particular the G-5 Sahel and the Nouakchott
process, which demonstrate the political will and the
commitment of the countries concerned to combating
the serious threat of terrorism and transnational crime.
Such initiatives deserve international support
that is commensurate with the threat confronting the
region. We should be fully aware that the efforts being
deployed by the region will prevail only if they continue
to benefit from strong international consensus and
robust support. The African Union will spare no effort
towards that objective and will continue to sensitize its
member States and the international community with
regard to the urgent need to enhance its support.
(spoke in French)
The African Union commends the progress
made to date by the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, which
has successfully led its first two operations since the
establishment of its headquarters in Sévaré, Mali. I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
leaders of the States members of the G-5 Sahel, namely,
Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad,
for their renewed resolve to work together for the peace,
security and stability of the region.
I would also like to express the gratitude of
the African Union to the bilateral and multilateral
partners for their multifaceted assistance, including
those that pledged at the high-level conference held
in Brussels on 23 February. We also welcome the
first African financial contributions, in particular
those of Rwanda and States members of the West
African Economic and Monetary Union.
In that regard, while reiterating our call for the
rapid disbursement of the pledged funds, I wish once
again to underscore the urgent need to ensure the
predictable and sustainable funding of the Joint Force,
for, as the Security Council already knows, owing to
financial difficulties and the lack of major equipment,
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has fallen behind in achieving
its operational capacity. To that is added the fact that
the Joint Force cannot lead large-scale operations,
ultimately leaving the way open for terrorist groups
and organized crime, in particular the trafficking of
weapons, drugs and human beings, which is wreaking
havoc in the region.

S/PV. 8266*

The needs in terms of logistical support and
intelligence gathering are also vast and require huge
contributions. That is why it seems prudent to us to
once again request the support of the Security Council
for the G-5 Sahel and to draw attention to the volatile
security situation in the Liptako-Gourma region, where
the civilian population, symbols of the State and the
international forces are increasingly becoming prime
targets. In that context, only a robust mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as significant resouces made available to the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force, would help to eliminate the
identified threats.
(spoke in English)
Before concluding, I would like to report that, at
its seven hundredth and fifty-ninth meeting, held in
Addis-Ababa on 23 March, the African Union Peace
and Security Council decided to extend the deployment
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force for an additional period of
12 months, effective from 12 April.
Going forward, the African Union will continue
to work towards strengthening the region’s ownership
and will pursue its efforts to achieve greater
coherence within the framework of the African
Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahel region.
Our objective is to ensure increasing support and
cooperation from countries in the region, including
in terms of border security and intelligence sharing.
An important step in that direction was completed by
the signing of the memorandum of understanding for
the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
concluded on 24 March between the AU Peace and
Security Department and the Permanent Secretariat of
the G-5 Sahel. In that context, it would be remiss not to
acknowledge and to applaud the efforts of Mr. Maman
Sidikou since his appointment at the helm of the G-5
Sahel Permanent Secretariat.
The African Union will also continue to lend its
support to ensuring the effective implementation of
the Algiers process Peace Agreement. That remains
the best way to further isolate terrorist and criminal
groups. We urge all Malian parties to redouble their
efforts in order to ensure the timely implementation of
the key provisions of the Agreement.
Finally, the complexity and the multidimensional
nature of the challenges facing the Sahel region attest
to the necessity for our collective response to fully
take into account the strong nexus between security

18-156987/25

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

and development. We therefore need to recalibrate
our respective interventions in order to better respond
to the national and regional needs to address the root
causes of instability and to put an end to violence. In
that regard, we are taking steps to map out the various
projects and programmes carried out by African Union
institutions in the region in a number of areas. These
cover infrastructure, human development, health,
the environment, agriculture, food safety and the
fight against terrorism and transnational organized
crime. The objective is to ensure greater synergy in
our interventions and align them with the region’s
priorities, bearing in mind that no lasting security and
peace can be achieved that is not rooted in sustainable
and inclusive development.
The President: I now give the floor to the Head of
the Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (spoke in French): I wish to
thank for you for providing the European Union with
this opportunity to address the Security Council at this
briefing. This meeting is a further clear expression of
the international community’s support for the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and for the fight again
terrorism in the Sahel. The European Union and its
member States have long enjoyed close ties of friendship
with the G-5 Sahel countries. We are neighbours, and as
neighbours we share not only challenges but also hopes.
For that reason, the European Union will continue to
play its full part, standing shoulder to shoulder with our
neighbours in the Sahel.
On behalf of the European Union, I should like to
pay tribute to the efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries to
foster regional cooperation in the framework of the
G-5 Sahel format. We firmly support these cooperation
efforts in all their dimensions.
Allow me to focus my remarks on the European
Union’s support for the operationalization of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force. That support is at the heart of not
only our bilateral relations with the region, but also of
the strategic partnership between the European Union
and the United Nations on the maintenance of peace
and crisis management. It is also a key component of
the trilateral cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union.
Since the conference held in Brussels on
23 February, at which the international community
pledged more than €400 million, and with the technical
arrangement between the G-5 Sahel, the United Nations
8/25

23/05/2018

and the European Union now set up, the G-5 Sahel
now has the international support necessary to make
headway in the deployment and operationalization of
its Joint Force.
We hope that the disbursement by the European
Union of €10 million euros to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) will allow for the rapid rollout of
effective support for the Joint Force. We invite other
partners to use this fully operational mechanism to
channel their own financing to MINUSMA. This is
key, as the kind of support that MINUSMA can provide
on the ground to the Joint Force cannot be delivered
directly by any other means or channel, including
bilateral ones. The European Union is also preparing
a €10 million contribution for the establishment and
implementation of a human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework. We have also
provided €70 million for the provision of equipment,
infrastructure and services to the Joint Force.
The European Union is convinced that the Joint Force
must be firmly embedded within a broader political and
institutional framework to guide its operations and to
ensure that is but one part of a broader regional strategy.
The EU has therefore pledged €5 million to support
the G-5 Sahel in the operationalization of its trust
fund and the establishment of the support and steering
committees and the Defence and Security Bureau of the
Permanent Secretariat. We welcome this new dynamic,
which bodes well for the ongoing leadership and
integration of the G-5 Sahel at the national and regional
levels. We welcome the efforts made in that respect by
Mr. Sidikou, whose presence here today I welcome.
In this respect, it is vital to bear in mind the recent
memorandum of understanding concluded recently
between the African Union and the G-5 Sahel, which
gives the African Union a coordination role and sees
the Joint Force as part of the larger African peace
architecture. In addition, the European Union will
continue to manage the coordination hub for as long we
deem it necessary, in order to help the Joint Force and
the Permanent Secretariat of the G-5 Sahel to organize
and ensure coherence in the voluntary international
contributions to the Force. The hub meets once a
month in Brussels, with the participation of G-5 Sahel
representatives and all international partners, to take
stock of existing support and identify shortfalls. It is
also in contact every two weeks with the G-5 Sahel
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Permanent Secretariat in Nouakchott, the G-5 Sahel
presidency in Niamey and the Joint Force in Bamako.
In addition to the financial and institutional
support that I have just outlined, European efforts to
build defence and security capacities in the region,
particularly in Mali and the Niger, are currently being
reviewed in order to extend such efforts to include
training and advisory functions to the Joint Force, with
full respect for the prerogatives and authority of the
G-5 Sahel. To that end, we are working in very close
cooperation with the Commander of the Joint Force,
General Dacko.
The European Union is also a strong supporter of
the development and operationalization of the police
component of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We believe
this to be the key to ensuring to ensure a sound legal
framework for any efforts to counter organized crime
and terrorism. We believe also that this will help to
ensure that the desired results are achieved and ensure
appropriate protection for the civilian population.
The security-capacity-building missions of the
European Union in Mali and the Niger are focused
on the setting up by the authorities of Mali and the
Niger of police components within the Joint Force, in
coordination with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and other partners.
It is also important not to lose sight of the
security dimension of the European contribution to
the economic, social and political development of the
region. In this respect, the European Union has provided
€8 billion in aid to the Sahel over the past seven years.
The European Union is also a strong supporter of the
Sahel Alliance, which was set up to promote, expand
and accelerate this integrated approach to security and
development and to deliver tangible results. However,
we must be clear. There can be no lasting progress if no
concomitant headway is made on the political track. We
must more than ever before use all forms of leverage at
our disposal to encourage the Malian parties to fulfil
their commitments.
Allow me to conclude by noting, as the SecretaryGeneral rightly points out in his report (S/2018/432),
that just one year after the African Union Peace and
Security Council authorized the deployment of the
Joint Force, our collective efforts have made it possible
to achieve significant progress in the mobilization of
resources and support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Looking ahead, it will be vital that we all continue

S/PV. 8266*

to play our respective roles and show our support for
the Force, including by providing ongoing support
to MINUSMA. In so doing, we must also ensure
coherence in our pledges and assistance to the Force
and work with full transparency and full respect for the
authority and participation of the G-5 Sahel.
Rest assured of the unflagging support of the
European Union as we stand shoulder to shoulder with
our neighbours in the Sahel.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Ms. Bintou Keita, the Permanent
Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel), Mr. Maman Sidikou, whom I welcome and
thank particularly for his exemplary commitment, as
well as the Permanent Observer of the African Union,
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, and the Permanent
Observer of the European Union, Mr. João Vale de
Almeida, for their very informative briefings. They
demonstrate once again the full mobilization of the
international community in support of the G-5 Sahel
and the fight against terrorism in the Sahel.
Almost six months after the adoption of resolution
2391 (2017), significant progress has been made in the
operationalization of the Joint Force. Following the
Brussels conference and the signing of the technical
arrangement, the G-5 Sahel now has the necessary
support to move forward with the deployment of the
Joint Force. Progress on the ground is real, in particular
through the operationalization of command structures,
the deployment of the majority of troops expected in
the Central Sector, the adoption of the operational and
administrative framework of the force and the conduct
of new operations. The endorsement of the human
rights compliance framework is also a very positive
development, since it is an essential dimension for the
success of the Joint Force and its work in the service
of the people. Finally, the ongoing strengthening of
the Permanent Secretariat and the instruments at its
disposal — particularly financial — is a step in the
right direction and must be supported. All of that serves
to make the Joint force a potential model for an African
intervention force.
Despite our lofty ambitions and the sustained
momentum, we must be realistic and reasonable in our
short-term expectations. The Joint Force still faces many

18-156989/25

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

challenges, including with regard to the availability
of critical equipment such as communications links
between its command structures and its contingents on
the ground. It cannot be operationalized overnight. It
is important that the G-5 Sahel States continue in the
coming months to make the best use of the support
provided to finalize the operationalization of the force
as a matter of priority. That includes the effective
deployment of all troops, as well as the transfer of
authority to the Force Commander. The establishment of
a police component is also crucial in order to guarantee
the judicial nature of the activities of the Joint Force
and the indispensable link with the criminal justice
system of each of the G-5 States. Finally, all allegations
of human rights violations must be investigated and, if
proved, prosecuted in accordance with the principles
set out in the compliance framework.
The fulfilment of pledged contributions is an
important condition for the G-5 Sahel States to make
progress in the operationalization of the Joint Force.
Our responsibility, as partners of the G-5 Sahel, is
therefore to do everything possible to ensure that such
support is provided as quickly as possible, which is
unfortunately not always the case today. When it comes
to the Joint Force, we cannot promote expectations that
are disconnected from the pace of implementation of our
own support. Indeed, we must advance on both fronts.
The coordination of bilateral aid is also crucial at
a time when the G-5 Sahel is facing a large influx of
goodwill, with limited means of absorption. That is
the point of the outstanding work carried out by the
European Union through the coordination hub at the
request of, and in close cooperation with, the G-5 Sahel
States. That work must be continued and supported,
in full association with the G-5 Sahel Permanent
Secretariat. France, for its part, continues to provide
material and operational support to the G-5 Sahel States.
The activation of the support provided for under the
technical arrangement, thanks to an initial contribution
from the European Union, is also very important.
It allows for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to provide the Joint Force with logistical and operational
support directly on the ground, which cannot be
provided through other funding channels, including
bilateral funding. However, MINUSMA could do even
more if additional funding were secured. We therefore
call on donors that have not yet made their contributions
to participate in the financing of this useful mechanism.
10/25

23/05/2018

It is clear that the military response is only part of
the solution and that there can be no lasting stabilization
of the Sahel without making political and development
progress. That is a crucial point. On the political
front, we must more than ever use all the levers at our
disposal to encourage the Malian parties to implement
their commitments, including before the next elections.
In recent weeks there have been several encouraging
signals in that direction, including the inauguration
of the Kidal Operational Coordination Mechanism,
which must now be confirmed and enhanced. In terms
of development, our objective must be to coordinate
the actions of the various donors around limited and
targeted priorities — defined in conjunction with the
partners of the G-5 Sahel and aimed at ensuring a direct
impact for the most vulnerable populations. That is the
thrust of the Alliance for the Sahel’s approach, which
fits perfectly into the broader framework set by the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
France intends to persistently bring the issue
of the fight against terrorism in the Sahel to the
Security Council. The situation on the ground
justifies that more than ever. The latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/432) presents relevant and
appropriate recommendations to provide the Joint
Force with support that is predictable, sustainable and
commensurate with the challenges. We will continue to
work in that arena, taking into account the pace of the
operationalization of the Joint Force on the ground and
seeking to maintain consensus within the Council on
that issue. But expectations remain high, and we must
meet them.
In the short term, it is important to call on the
international community to provide all the pledged
support as soon as possible, as well as to encourage the
G-5 Sahel States to continue their mobilization towards
the effective deployment of the Joint force. At the end
of this meeting, France will submit a proposed press
statement of the Security Council along those lines.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Poland for having organized
this informational meeting on developments of the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel):
I also thank the briefers — Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent
Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel. We also
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

thank Ms. Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, whose
statement on behalf of the African Union we support,
and Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, for the relevance of his briefing.
From the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/432),
we note the progress made in operationalizing the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It also updates us on the many
challenges that persist, including the mobilization of
international assistance, the implementation of the
technical agreement and human rights compliance
framework, adopted by the G-5 Sahel countries. Despite
those difficulties, the unity of action of the Security
Council and the unwavering commitment of State
and institutional actors have provided for the robust
implementation of the recommendations of resolutions
2391 (2017) regarding logistical and operational support
from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to the Joint
Force. Côte d’Ivoire encourages all actors concerned, in
particular the States of the G-5 Sahel, to continue their
efforts to strengthen the Joint Force, which illustrates
the willingness of African countries to take ownership
of their collective security.
Côte d’Ivoire endorses the concerns expressed
by the Secretary-General regarding the deterioration
of the security situation in the Sahel region and the
challenges to the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force. Progress in force generation, with the
Joint Force initially scheduled to reach full operational
capacity in March 2018, continues, according to
the report, to fall short of the expectations of the
international community. Côte d’Ivoire therefore
echoes the Secretary-General’s call to the G-5 Sahel
States to step up dialogue with international partners to
strengthen and better coordinate multifaceted support
for the operationalization of the Joint Force. Rapid
deployment capabilities and a strong grasp of the sociocultural environment are comparative advantages in
combating the spread of terrorism and cross-border
crime in the Sahel.
MINUSMA’s logistical and operational support to
the Joint Force, as defined by resolution 2391 (2017), is
a good example of cooperation between United Nations
and African peace operations. Côte d’Ivoire therefore
welcomes the signing of the technical agreement
among the United Nations, the European Union and the
G-5 Sahel countries, and hopes that funding pledges

S/PV. 8266*

will be honoured, thereby advancing the process of the
operationalization of the Joint Force.
We also welcome the adoption by the G-5 Sahel
States of a compliance framework intended to ensure
strict respect for human rights by the Joint Force, whose
operational success will depend on the buy-in and
cooperation of local communities. The implementation
of this compliance framework will require targeted
training on respect for basic human rights for Joint
Force military components and punishments that make
an example of those who violate human rights.
Moreover, even if it reaches full operational
capacity, the effectiveness of the Joint Force will remain
dependent on current efforts to stabilize the regional
political environment. The Joint Force must therefore
serve as just one component of a political solution,
going beyond security alone, to the ongoing crises in
the Sahel.
In the same spirit, my delegation urges parties to
seek a political solution to the Malian crisis via the
implementation without delay by all signatories of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, signed at
the end of the Algiers process in 2015. Côte d’Ivoire
therefore reiterates its call on those involved in the
Malian crisis to translate the commitments undertaken
in the Peace Agreement into concrete actions. The
success of the Agreement is the cornerstone for the
restoration of lasting peace and stability in the Sahel.
The responses provided by the Joint Force in
terms of security must also be supported by strategies
aimed at eradicating regional vulnerabilities and
enhancing the resilience of States and local populations
to crises, including measures to counter poverty and
unemployment, and to improve access to basic social
services such as education and health. In that regard,
my country welcomes the launch, in July 2017, of
the Alliance for the Sahel mechanism to strengthen
coordination among donors for rapid-impact projects
targeting populations in the most vulnerable areas. It
is important to ensure the necessary complementarity
between the initiatives of the Alliance for the Sahel
and the Priority Investment Programme. With
better coordination, the two programmes will help
reduce poverty.
Côte d’Ivoire expresses its appreciation for the
financial support of bilateral and multilateral partners
to the Joint Force. However, my country remains
concerned about the long-term financial sustainability

18-1569811/25

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

of the Joint Force, given the scale of need and the delays
in the provision of the funds pledged.
My country also believes that, in addition to
sustainable financing, it is important to ensure proper
coordination of the Joint Force with regional security
initiatives in order to best manage resources.
The consequences of insecurity and instability,
exacerbated by the actions of numerous armed jihadist
groups and cross-border criminal networks, extend
far beyond the borders of the Sahel. They pose a
significant threat to the maintenance of international
peace and security, calling for urgent coordinated and
effective responses to provide for the stability and
development of the local populations. Côte d’Ivoire
urges all stakeholders, including the United Nations,
the European Union, the African Union and the States
of the G-5 for the-Sahel, to continue their cooperation
so as to operationalize the Joint Force sufficiently to
meet the security challenges in the Sahel.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks your delegation,
Madam President, for having organized this important
debate. We also express our appreciation for briefings
provided by Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Maman
Sidikou, Permanent Secretary of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel); Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; and Ambassador João Pedro Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
The situation in the Sahel presents major challenges
in the areas of security, governance and development.
The region continues to face a volatile and complex
environment, including asymmetrical threats from
armed and terrorist groups, as well as transnational
crime, including trafficking in drugs, human beings
and arms, among other things. Those factors not only
jeopardize the stability of the countries of the region,
but also represent a threat to political peace processes.
They also represent a threat to the civilian population,
who are worst affected.
Bolivia has insistently reiterated the need not only
to analyse but especially to identify the structural
causes of conflicts. In the specific case of the Sahel,
those causes have had a profound impact across the
region. There is no need to explain that the policies of
interventionism and regime change triggered, in the
12/25

23/05/2018

aftermath of the 2011 conflict in Libya, the collateral
destabilization of the Sahel, heralding chaos and
horrors that continue to this very day.
Unfortunately, in addition to the precarious security
situation, the Sahel presents other great challenges. The
humanitarian situation requires our attention in more
detail. According to data provided by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, eight countries
in the region are at risk of humanitarian crisis; out of
the 150 million inhabitants, some 24 million require
humanitarian assistance and 32 million are at risk
of food insecurity. Another 5 million people are
experiencing similar conditions, including refugees and
forcibly displaced persons — without even mentioning
the adverse effects produced by climate change that are
further deepening the crisis in the region.
In Mali, insecurity has intensified and clashes
between armed groups, asymmetrical attacks, crossborder influences and intercommunal violence have
led to mass displacement, further worsening the
humanitarian situation. Insecurity has spread from the
northern regions to its centre. It is worth mentioning
that 5.1 million people — who represent more than
27 per cent of the population of that country — live in
the affected areas.
Furthermore, there are some 59,000 internally
displaced persons, while almost one in five Malians
suffer from food insecurity. With that in mind, we
consider it essential to consolidate the political process
in Mali, which will ultimately contribute to the longterm stabilization of the region.
Despite the alarming panorama in the Sahel, we
wish to underscore the important efforts made by
the regional and subregional organizations led by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
We welcome and commend the efforts and laudable
political determination of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger in terms of cooperation
and operationalization of their forces on the ground.
The Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel is an exemplary
demonstration of the coordinated efforts between the
African Union and the United Nations, as well as of a
high level of solidarity among member countries of the
international community in general.
We consider it essential that the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, within the operational framework approved by
resolution 2359 (2017) and endorsed prior to that by
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

generate the necessary capacities for the full deployment
of military, police and civilian components. In that
regard, we highlight the fact that two thirds of troops
have already been deployed. We hope that the remaining
third will be deployed as soon as possible. To that end,
it is imperative that the countries that make up the Joint
Force receive technical cooperation and predictable and
sustainable financing. It is also essential to finalize the
Joint Force operational plan scheduled at the start of
this month.
Likewise, the pledges made at the high-level
conference on the Sahel of the European Union and
other countries held on 23 February in Brussels are an
encouraging sign for the strengthening of the capabilities
of the Joint Force contingents. All initiatives aimed at
achieving stability and lasting peace in the region are
vital. We are concerned that those pledges of financial
cooperation have not yet been fully met. We reiterate
once again that all initiatives in favour of achieving
stability and lasting peace in the region — within the
framework of respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity and independence of the countries that
comprise it — are fundamental.
We also believe that financial support for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) should continue.
We call on countries to promptly channel their
cooperation through the Organization. It is important
to operationalize the technical agreement among
the United Nations, the European Union and the G-5
Sahel countries in order to consolidate operational and
logistical support to the Joint Force.
Furthermore, it is essential to bolster the programmes
envisioned in the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, which provides a general framework aimed
at strengthening governance, resilience and security
in the countries of the region. Strengthening those
capacities and, above all, ensuring their ownership and
leadership by the countries of the region, on the ground
is fundamental. Cooperation among the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, MINUSMA, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
African Union is crucial within this framework.
We also believe it is necessary to improve and
strengthen coordination among the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, Operation Barkhane and MINUSMA in order
to avoid duplication of tasks. We stress that each force
must have a clear mandate. Intelligence and information

S/PV. 8266*

exchange mechanisms must be consolidated in order
to achieve the full operation and deployment of the
Joint Force.
Finally, we believe humanitarian action in the
Sahel is critical: it has saved many lives, but millions
of people still urgently need it. We strongly urge and
encourage the international community to continue
contributing technical, economic and humanitarian
support to all initiatives that support the peoples of the
region in the interest of achieving stability and peace.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Allow me to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Keita and Permanent
Secretary Sidikou for their important briefings to the
Security Council today. I also thank the Permanent
Observer of the African Union (AU), Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, and the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union, Mr. João Vale de Almeida, for their
useful contributions to the discussion.
During the Council’s visit to the Sahel in October
last year, we witnessed at first-hand the strong
determination of the countries of the region to address
the security challenges they face. We commend them for
their efforts for peace and security in the Sahel, which
are being pursued under difficult circumstances. That
is evidenced by the tragic loss of lives — of civilians as
well as of security forces — in recent months. Let me
take this opportunity to extend our condolences to all
those affected.
We are encouraged by steps taken so far in the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), including the conclusion
of a technical agreement and the execution of two
operations by the force. It is now time for outstanding
elements of resolution 2391 (2017) to be implemented.
In particular, we call on the G-5 Sahel countries to
deploy the remainder of the troops committed to the
Joint Force and to ensure the transfer of authority of
their battalions to the Force Commander. That is crucial
for the full functioning and credibility of the force.
The implementation of the human rights and
conduct and discipline compliance framework to
prevent, investigate, address and publicly report
violations of human rights law and violations of
international humanitarian law is also critical for the
long-term success of the force. We welcome the seed
funding for the compliance framework provided by
the Peacebuilding Fund. We are preparing to provide

18-1569813/25

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

further support through the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The functioning of the Joint Force and the
compliance framework will be dependent on a functional
civilian and police component. For that reason, we
welcome the decision taken by the G-5 Sahel Defence
and Security Committee last week in Ouagadougou to
continue to deepen collaboration between the police
forces of the G-5 Sahel countries. We also welcome the
support being provided by the United Nations Office
for Drugs and Crime in this area.
We encourage all parties to actively explore how
the concrete contribution and perspectives of women
can be ensured and integrated in the implementation
of the compliance framework and the operational
planning of the force, as well as in the police and
civilian components.
We welcome funding pledges made so far in support
of the G-5 Sahel, including at the Brussels conference
in February. We call on all donors to swiftly disburse
funds to allow for the operationalization of the force.
We hope that donors will earmark funds for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali to provide engineering support for the
camps of the Joint Force in line with resolution 2391
(2017). That is urgently needed, not least in the light of
the continuously deteriorating security situation.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s strong
engagement with the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The options
for further United Nations support to the Joint Force
laid out in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/432)
must be seriously considered. As we move forward,
predictable and reliable funding is vital for the Joint
Force to be able to carry out planning and operations
in an effective, predictable and sustainable manner.
It is also essential if the Council is to ensure that our
repeated calls for regional ownership, demands for
accountability and expectations of force output are
matched with adequate resources and support.
The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is one of many
instruments that make up an integrated, sustainable
and regional approach to the situation in the Sahel. The
primacy of politics should guide that work, and we agree
with the Secretary-General that the Joint Force should
be embedded within a larger political and institutional
framework as part of a broader and more comprehensive
strategy for the region. The establishment of the support
group and coordination with regional structures and
14/25

23/05/2018

organizations are important elements in that regard. We
also encourage a continued and deepened cooperation
and dialogue among the United Nations, the AU and the
G-5 Sahel.
Sustainable peace and prosperity in the Sahel
region can be achieved only through political solutions,
respect for human rights, an equal distribution of
social and economic opportunities to the population
and a restored and expanded State presence across the
region. The situation in Mali is key to that aim. It is
therefore important to ensure that the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
proceeds more rapidly and that peaceful, fair and
transparent elections are held in July.
The challenges facing the Sahel are many and
interlinked. They have implications not only for the
millions of people facing insecurity and hunger but
also for the wider region and, indeed, the world. The
collective efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries to address
those challenges, step up development efforts and move
towards the full operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force are essential and deserve our full support.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Maman Sidikou,
Permanent Secretary of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), for their extensive and detailed briefings
on the activities of the Group and the general situation
in the region. We also thank Ambassador Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, and Ambassador Joáo Vale de
Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.
We align ourselves with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the African Union.
My country’s Government is following the situation
in the Sahel region closely. We are concerned about
the continuing deterioration of the security situation
in the region, particularly as a result of the escalatimg
terrorist attacks in northern and central Mali, as well as
in the border regions of Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger.
We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate our
firm condemnation of terrorist attacks on the civilian
population, the defence and security forces of the
countries of the region and the international forces
present in Mali, particularly those of the United Nations
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and France’s Operation Barkhane.
As the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union expressed in its statement of 23 March, we
believe that the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel is currently the best long-term alternative where
the security of the region is concerned. Equatorial
Guinea pays tribute to the leaders of the member
States of the Group — Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania,
the Niger and Chad — for their determination and
sacrifices in promoting peace, security and stability
in the Sahel through an increasingly effective fight
against terrorism, violent extremism and transnational
organized crime. However, as the Secretary-General
highlighted in his report (S/2018/432) of 8 May, the
implementation of resolution 2391 (2017) means that
the full operationalization of the Force and securing
international financing are currently the main problems
and challenges facing us. Progress in making the Joint
Force a fully operational structure and securing its
international funding has so far been slow and difficult.
It is therefore vital to underline the importance
of sustainable and safe support for the efforts of the
countries of the region. In that regard, we express our
gratitude to bilateral and multilateral partners for their
multifaceted assistance to the countries of the SahelSaharan region, and we welcome the announcements of
the contributions made at the international high-level
conference on the Sahel held in Brussels on 23 February
with the aim of securing permanent financing and
sustainable resources to assist in operationalizing the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It is crucial that all States and
organizations fulfil that commitment as soon as possible
in order to help the Joint Force fulfil its mandate. In that
context, it is also essential that Africans themselves
spearhead efforts to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. The Rwandan Government’s financial
contribution in support of its sister countries of the G-5
Sahel is a step in the right direction. We reaffirm the
importance of the Nouakchott Process for promoting
peace and security in the region and intensifying its
activities to unify all stabilization and development
efforts in the Sahel.
Despite the clear will and commitment of partners
and the international community to help the region, we
believe that the factors that foster Islamist extremism
in the Sahel must be considered. The impact of terrorist
activities, including those perpetrated by groups that
benefit from transnational organized crime, cannot

S/PV. 8266*

be resolved by security-focused interventions alone.
My Government believes that the solution to violent
extremism in the Sahel is a comprehensive approach.
The growing insecurity in the region demands that we
do more than contain violence. We must build a resilient
society and institutions that safeguard human security.
We also need a broad strategy that attacks the threat’s
capacity to regenerate itself and that is not limited to
merely defending local borders. Military forces can
defeat terrorist forces, but it is social and development
policies that will prevent their re-emergence through
broader strategies.
Finally, legitimate, socially oriented action by
the G-5 Sahel is crucial to gaining local and regional
legitimacy. That is why it must protect humanitarian law,
respond with justice and undertake to protect violated
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
express our deep appreciation to our four briefers today
for their briefings, leadership and action.
Recent attacks have demonstrated the increasingly
precarious security situation in the Sahel. We commend
the decision of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) to join forces to counter terrorism, transnational
crime and the smuggling of drugs, weapons and human
beings. That decision demonstrates the willingness of
the G-5 Sahel countries to take ownership of their own
security and deserves the full support of the Council
and that of the wider membership of the United Nations.
We therefore pay tribute to the important efforts of the
United Nations, the European Union and the African
Union to support the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel.
We fully recognize that it is not an easy task to set
up a regional force in the complex security and political
environment the Group is dealing with. We therefore
warmly welcome the significant steps already taken by
the G-5 Sahel and its member States. However, it is also
clear from the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/432)
that some important challenges remain. In that context,
I will focus on three elements that we believe will define
the Joint Force’s future and determine its chances of
success: first, the need for an integrated approach;
secondly, adherence to human rights and the rule of
law; and thirdly, adequate financial resources.
First, on the need for an integrated approach, as
the Secretary-General emphasized in his report, the
Joint Force’s success is directly linked to progress on

18-1569815/25

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

the peace process in Mali, a point also just made by
our colleague from Sweden. The parties involved must
take the necessary steps to ensure enduring peace in
Mali. As I said, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is an essential
means for countering terrorism, transnational crime and
human smuggling. However, we must realize that those
are only symptoms. The underlying root causes must
also be addressed to bring lasting peace and stability.
In that regard, we welcome the G-5 Sahel’s development
agenda and the initiative by France and Germany to
increase international coordination and cooperation
with the launch of the Alliance for the Sahel.
That brings me to my second point, on the
importance of human rights, the rule of law and the
police component. The Joint Force can be effective only
if it enjoys the trust of the population. The worrying
news of human rights violations in Mali shows the vital
importance of rigorous monitoring and accountability
mechanisms. We welcome the commitment of the
G-5 Sahel and the Joint Force to the African Union’s
Compliance Framework on Human Rights, Conduct and
Discipline and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and to
ensuring proper legal follow-up, which they made very
clear at the Sahel conference in Brussels in February.
The follow-up meetings held in the region are
important first steps, but further progress in the coming
months will be essential. To ensure adequate follow-up,
we encourage the G-5 Sahel to speed up the establishment
of its police component, which should include an
adequately trained and equipped investigation team.
A strong police component is vital to taking effective
action against terrorism, transnational crime and the
smuggling of migrants, threats that not only undermine
the stability of the Sahel but also pose a serious security
concern to Europe. Sufficient resources should be made
available to step up these efforts. The same applies
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) Justice and
Corrections Section, which plays an important role and
should be strengthened. As a proud troop-contributing
country to MINUSMA, we will continue to offer our
support for efforts to curb such threats.
That brings me to my third point, on the importance
of adequate financial resources. We fully recognize
that sustainable and predictable long-term financing
will further contribute to the Joint Force’s legitimacy
and effectiveness. I would like to point out here that in
addition to our contribution via the European Union,
as Ambassador Vale de Almeida just highlighted, the
16/25

23/05/2018

Netherlands has committed an additional €5 million on
a bilateral basis. We look forward to further tangible
progress on the Force’s operationalization as soon as
possible, something that will be especially needed for
the human rights framework and police component
in the next few months. We stand ready to discuss a
more sustainable way of financing in due course. We
recognize the importance of MINUSMA’s support
in further operationalizing the Force, but we want
to reiterate that this cannot come to the detriment of
MINUSMA core tasks.
In conclusion, the coming months will be crucial in
deciding the future of the Joint Force. Let us turn funds
into equipment, commitments into training and words
into action, and let us work together to achieve concrete
progress on the ground.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We commend the
presidency of Poland for this opportunity to discuss the
activities of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
and the ways in which the international community
can support the Group’s Joint Force. We would
also like to express our appreciation to Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations and Mr. João Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union, for their
comprehensive briefings. We congratulate Mr. Sidikou
on his new appointment and wish him every success in
the discharge of his office, for which he can count on
our full support.
Generally speaking, our delegation welcomes the
progress that has been made in mobilizing resources
for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
We also commend the improved cooperation of the G-5
Sahel member States with the United Nations, African
Union and European Union, which has resulted in the
conclusion of the technical agreement. We believe that
making the G-5 Sahel Joint Force fully operational
will positively reinforce the joint efforts of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the Malian national
security forces and other mechanisms to bring peace
and stability to the region.
However, the security situation in the Sahel
continues to deteriorate due to increased violence
by terrorist and extremist groups and their further
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

expansion to central Mali and northern Burkina
Faso. That insecurity is further aggravated by such
groups’ alliances with others involved in transnational
organized crime, drug and human trafficking and arms
trading out of neighbouring Libya. We therefore support
the recommendations in the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2018/432) and would like to highlight some
observations for the Council’s consideration.
First, the Joint Force has the potential to be a bright
example of an African solution to African problems.
However, to succeed, the Sahel countries need the
unanimous political support of the Council, the
technical expertise of Member States and predictable
and long-term sustainable funding from the donor
community. In turn, the G-5 Sahel States must speed up
the process of making the Joint Force fully functional
by resolving its command-and-control issues.
Secondly, we must ensure complementarity and
strengthened coordination between the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force with all the security forces in the region,
including MINUSMA, Operation Barkhane and the
various regional frameworks, particularly the African
Union-led Nouakchott Process. The Joint Force should
find its place within the larger political and institutional
framework and strategy that we are planning for the
subregion, and that also calls for better coherence
between the Sahel countries themselves.
Thirdly, a military approach alone will not address
the instability in the region that has resulted from the
accumulation of problems, of which violent extremism
is only the most recent layer. The Joint Force’s counterterrorism activities must therefore go hand in hand with
addressing the root causes of conflict and instability,
which can be resolved or minimized to a greater or
lesser degree by strengthening local governance,
reducing poverty and tribal rivalries, providing basic
services and improving job creation. Mitigating the
impact of climate change should be another priority.
Meeting these objectives will therefore require better
linkages between the Joint Force and the G-5 Sahel
Permanent Secretariat, whose capacities must be
reinforced in order to achieve a performance capable of
meeting these enormous challenges.
Fourthly, the situation on the ground requires
innovative policies for preventing and addressing
violent conflicts and scourge of terrorism. My country
therefore proposes using a three-pronged strategy
to resolve regional conflicts by strengthening the

S/PV. 8266*

security-development nexus, as Mr. Sidikou underlined
today, along with revamping the regional approach
and streamlining the United Nations system to
deliver as one. Such a comprehensive overall strategy
should be a very effective and sustainable tool for
addressing the common threats facing the Sahel and
neighbouring countries.
Finally, we strongly support the United Nations
peacebuilding programmes in the region in this regard
and call on the Organization to finalize its integrated
strategy for the Sahel. We also welcome subregional
efforts aimed at building resilience in human and
environmental systems and increasing peace and
prosperity in the region. We particularly commend the
initiative of the Alliance for the Sahel, which is expected
to bring in a total of €6 billion to finance development
projects for the next five years, such as the creation
of 1 million jobs and support for rural areas through
improved infrastructure and services. In joining the
multilateral action in this area, Kazakhstan remains
committed to helping the countries of the Sahel to fulfil
their vision for peace, progress and prosperity.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita
and Permanent Secretary Sidikou for their excellent
briefings. We are encouraged to hear that the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) continues
to make progress towards full operationalization. We
also thank Ambassadors Mohammed and Almeida for
their briefings and insights from the perspectives of
the African Union (AU) and the European Union (EU).
The engagement of the AU and the EU is invaluable as
we work together to improve the prospects for peace,
security and opportunity in the Sahel region.
The G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force continue to be a
priority for the United States. We support the holistic
and African-led approach of the G-5 Sahel as the best
way to achieve long-term security and development in
the Sahel, and we are committed to engaging bilaterally
with the G-5 Sahel member States. While much of the
Council’s focus, as well as that of the international
community, has been on the modalities of support to
the Joint Force, it is important to note that security
solutions alone will not solve the underlying political
and economic issues. As many here have noted, security,
governance and development are closely linked and
countries cannot achieve long-term security without
good governance, economic development and respect
for human rights. The United States looks forward to

18-1569817/25

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

seeing the G-5 Sahel member States build on their good
foundations and the G-5 Sahel’s priority investment
projects. We should therefore not lose sight of the peace
process in Mali or the importance of addressing the
root causes of the conflict. The Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process remains the best tool that we have for beginning
to resolve the situation in northern Mali, and we urge
the parties to implement what they agreed to as part
of the Agreement. The Council should consider using
all of its available mechanisms, including the sanctions
regime adopted under resolution 2374 (2017), in order
to foster better political outcomes. There is simply
too much at stake for Mali and the region to continue
waiting for substantive results.
We are encouraged by the Joint Force’s
operationalization, but we all recognize that there
is a long way to go. We urge all of the donors who
made generous pledges at the February conference in
Brussels to disburse those funds as soon as possible.
We also encourage them to contribute to the European
Union Emergency Trust Fund for logistical support
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), as outlined
in the technical agreement, in order to expedite
engineering projects for the Joint Force.
We are all deeply concerned about the likelihood
of violent extremist efforts undermining the security
situation in the region. Nevertheless, as the Joint Force’s
operationalization continues, respect for international
human rights and international humanitarian law
will be paramount. To that end, we salute the EU
and the Peacebuilding Fund’s contributions towards
the establishment and implementation of the human
rights compliance framework included in the technical
agreement. However, we were very concerned to hear
reports of an incident in Boulékéssi, Burkina Faso, last
weekend, where what may have been a violent extremist
attack on a Malian soldier under G-5 Sahel command
was followed by the deaths of more than a dozen others.
We anxiously await the results of the MINUSMA, G-5
Sahel and Government investigations into those deaths,
and we call for additional investigations, as appropriate.
Although we all agree that the purpose of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force is an important one, the
implementation of the technical agreement should not
overstretch MINUSMA. We remain concerned that the
Mission does not have the capacity to take on additional
tasks as it struggles simultaneously to protect itself and
18/25

23/05/2018

fulfil its mandate. We look to its excellent leadership
to make the best determination of when and how to
support the Joint Force in the face of the myriad and
unpredictable security challenges that MINUSMA
faces on a daily basis.
The United States believes that a combination of
bilateral and regional support by the Sahel countries
and international stakeholders can best address the
ongoing financial and logistical needs of the Joint
Force. As Ambassador Haley stated in December (see
S/PV.8129), the technical agreement represents the
full extent of any support role that the United Nations
should play beyond continued coordination and
technical assistance on a voluntary basis. In February,
the parties signed the technical agreement in Brussels
and hundreds of millions of dollars were pledged to
support the G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force. We would
like to reiterate our principled position in that regard,
which is our objection to authorization of the use of
United Nations assessed funds for the Joint Force under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, a
Security Council mandate. The United States will not
accept any proposal to move such an authorization
forward in the Security Council.
The United States has contributed significant
resources to the G-5 Sahel member States, providing
more than $822 million in security assistance since 2012,
and last October we pledged an additional $60 million
directly to the Joint Force’s successful deployment and
operationalization. We are working closely with the EU
coordination mechanism to optimize that contribution,
and we encourage other donors to do likewise. The
United States believe that that is the best way to increase
the G-5 Sahel members’ capacity to fight the terrorist
and security challenges that they face, and we intend to
look for additional ways to support the Joint Force in
the near future.
Stability in the Sahel is a multilayered challenge
of security, politics, development and humanitarian
causes. The attention that those causes have received
from the region and its dedicated partners is already
leading to better outcomes. Continued international
engagement will be one component of that process,
but enduring success in the region will ultimately be
determined by the G-5 Sahel member States themselves.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to begin by thanking Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Operations, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, and Мr. João Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations for their valuable briefings.
To start with, we are pleased with the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/432) on the latest developments
around the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel), in accordance with resolution 2391
(2017). We welcome the technical agreement signed in
February by the G-5 Sahel States, the United Nations
and the European Union, in line with the provisions
of the resolution, and we commend their efforts. We
followed with great interest the international highlevel conference on the Sahel held in Brussels on
23 February, which raised funding to cover the Joint
Force’s operations for its first year. We welcome the
preliminary steps taken to operationalize the Joint
Force, and we wish it every success in its efforts to
confront the common dangers facing the States of the
region. We fully support it in its aim to prevent the
proliferation of the terrorist and extremist activity that
has significantly damaged the region. In that regard, we
would like to recall the engagement of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in supporting the Joint
Force in its efforts, which resulted in OIC resolution
45/51-POL on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, adopted
during the annual conference of its Council of Foreign
Ministers in Dhaka at the beginning of this month.
The recent developments mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report have further contributed
to strengthening the Joint Force’s capacity to achieve
its goals. We appreciate the efforts of the various
United Nations bodies in providing technical support
and training and helping to set up the Joint Force in
various areas, including logistics and human rights.
The international community and the United Nations
must continue their efforts to bolster the capacities of
the Force. We call on the G-5 Sahel States to accelerate
the deployment of Joint Force contingents, ensure the
continuity of military operations and further back
up the progress that has been made in combating the
terrorist groups operating in the region.
The Joint Force is operating in a deteriorating
security situation in the Sahel. It has to deal with a range
of threats, including cross-border and international
crime and the trafficking of weapons and drugs in
the region, especially around border areas, where the

S/PV. 8266*

States have very little control, which enables such
items to be smuggled from one country to another. We
should step up our efforts to control such activities
through cooperation between the Joint Force and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
We support UNODC’s training seminars, which play
an important role in strengthening local authorities’
capacities to prevent the flow of weapons and drugs and
trafficking in human beings.
In addition to the very difficult security situation,
the Joint Force is also operating within the framework
of a peace operation that is making limited progress,
which in turn has a negative impact on the Force’s
ability to combat terrorism in Mali. We must promote
that peace process and remain committed to the recently
signed road map, which will have positive impact on the
work of the Joint Force. Nor should we underestimate
the importance of development in promoting stability
in the region. We are pleased with the implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
and we welcome the continued cooperation among the
States of the region and the United Nations to strengthen
their capacity in the areas of the rule of law, governance
and law enforcement, which will have a direct effect on
stability and will help create an environment conducive
to supporting the work of the Joint Force. On that point,
we would like to highlight the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation’s request to the Islamic Development
Bank for funding to be provided to social and economic
projects in the G-5 Sahel countries, particularly those
aimed at promoting the role of young people and the
empowerment of women.
We would like to reiterate our support for the efforts
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force to prevent the spread of
threats in the region. It would not be able to achieve its
goals without the support of the United Nations, and
Kuwait is ready to work with all the members of the
Security Council to chart the Joint Force’s future plans.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to express my
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General Keita
for her briefing. We are indeed very pleased to see
Mr. Maman Sidikou in his new capacity and we thank
him for sharing the perspective of the States members
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We
are also grateful to Ambassador Fatima Mohammed,
whose statement we align ourselves with, and Mr. Vale
de Almeida for their very useful remarks.

18-1569819/25

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

The Sahel region continues to face growing threats
from terrorists and other international organized
criminals. Coupled with the lack of progress in the
Malian peace process, this is exacerbating the situation.
The scale and sophistication of the recent terrorist
attacks, including yesterday’s incidents, as Ms. Keita
mentioned, is unprecedented. It once again underscores
how important it is that we continue fighting this menace
in a coordinated manner by supporting the efforts of
the countries in the region, and we want to reinforce
what Ambassador Fatima said earlier in that regard.
The role of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel remains essential, and we appreciate the
military operations it has conducted in the tri-border
area between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. We note
the progress made towards its full operationalization,
including through the creation of a dedicated trust fund,
the establishment of a coordination and liaison office
for its headquarters in Sévaré and the setting up of the
G-5 Sahel’s Permanent Secretariat in Nouakchott.
Nevertheless, we also recognize the enormous
challenges that must still be addressed to accelerate
the Joint Force’s full operationalization, as highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/432) and
indicated in today’s briefing. In particular, we
understand the Joint Force’s urgent need for air
assets for intelligence gathering, transportation and
communication equipment. In the absence of transport
assets, communication between the sector headquarters
and command posts, as well as the battalion camps, no
doubt presents a serious challenge. Constructing the
camp infrastructure and enhancing the Joint Force’s
headquarters should also be a matter of priority so as
to expedite its full deployment and operationalization.
We note the series of high-level meetings that have
taken place over the past couple of months to mobilize
international support for the Joint Force. We appreciate
the financial pledges made by bilateral and multilateral
partners, including at the high-level international
conference on the Sahel held in February in Brussels.
I would be remiss if I failed to commend Rwanda in
particular for its demonstration of African solidarity by
contributing $1 million in support of the Joint Force’s
operationalization. We hope that all the recent financial
pledges will be redeemed. In the light of the serious
difficulties on the ground, as we heard in the briefing
today and as was also underscored in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the urgency of this matter cannot
be overemphasized.
20/25

23/05/2018

We welcome the signing of the technical arrangement
between the G-5 Sahel countries — Burkina Faso,
Chad, Mauritania, Mali and the Niger — and the United
Nations and the European Commission for the provision
of operational and logistical support to the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, in line with resolution 2391 (2017). We note
the two options proposed by the Secretary-General in
his report for more extensive and comprehensive United
Nations support to the Joint Force, using assessed
contributions to ensure sustainable and predictable
long-term financing and support. We hope the Council
will seriously consider them and make an appropriate
decision in due course.
The development of a compliance framework, in
consultation with the G-5 Sahel States and the relevant
United Nations offices and departments, designed
to prevent and address possible adverse effects of
the Joint Force’s operations on local communities,
is also encouraging. We welcome the memorandum
of understanding signed between the G-5 Sahel and
the African Union Commission for the provision of
equipment, as well as technical and financial support,
towards the operationalization of the Joint Force.
We also welcome the decision last month by the
African Union Peace and Security Council to extend
the deployment of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force for an
additional 12 months.
The complex and difficult challenges facing the
Sahel region cannot be effectively addressed without
tackling the root causes of instability. That is why we
agree with the Secretary-General that the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force is only one part of the broader response.
Implementing a comprehensive and holistic strategy
on the basis of ownership and partnership with the
countries of the Sahel region is the best way forward.
In that connection, we note the work that is being done
to recalibrate the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel and welcome the appointment of a
special adviser for the Sahel. We also note the strategic
consultative meeting on the Sahel recently organized
by the African Union in Nouakchott with the aim of
aligning the efforts of the African Union, the United
Nations and other international partners in support of
the security and development efforts of countries in the
region. The region certainly needs the enhanced and
sustained engagement of the international community,
and it will continue to be crucial to ensure greater
synergy and coherence in the efforts of the African
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8266*

Union, the United Nations and other international
partners in support of the countries of the region.

mechanisms among those actors to ensure that efforts
are not duplicated.

It is now all the more apparent that the security and
development of the Sahel has broader implications for
global stability, and we hope the Council will continue
to support the efforts of the countries of the region to
combat terrorism and transnational organized crime.

In addition to those regional activities, it is important
that individual countries continue to take action at the
national level. In Mali, we welcome the recent progress
that has been made on the peace process, and we hope
that this momentum will continue up to and beyond
July’s presidential elections. Political efforts must
be redoubled if we are to genuinely implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We,
as the Security Council, should not hesitate to use all
the tools available, including sanctions against any who
obstruct that process, if necessary. We particularly urge
the full participation of women in the implementation
and monitoring of the Peace Agreement.

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers
from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the African
Union and the European Union (EU). I think that the
briefings by all these representatives together are a
perfect illustration of the partnership approach taken
so far and which we need to continue.
The United Kingdom fully supports the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. Its growing
transborder capability, coupled with its regional
expertise and knowledge, are crucial to tackling the
cross-border threat posed by terrorist organizations and
instability in the Sahel.
Since we visited as a Council last year, a lot has
been done to build on the existing work that we saw
on that trip. However, those efforts must be redoubled
if full operationalization across all sectors is to be
achieved in the coming months and the cross-border
threat addressed. As set out in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/432), mobilizing funding is a key
issue affecting the Joint Force. Despite many donors’
generosity while pledging, the majority of those pledges
have still not been disbursed, disrupting operations and
long-term planning. In addition to our development and
humanitarian funding of $380 million over the past three
years and our contributions through the EU funds, the
United Kingdom has pledged an additional $2.7 million
for infrastructure support to the element of the Niger
component of the Joint Force and for helicopter-borne
medical-evacuation support. We intend to make that
funding accessible next month and we strongly urge all
partners to make good on the financial commitments
they have made to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force as soon
as possible.
The United Kingdom recognizes the contribution
of the regional actors working for stability in the
Sahel, including the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Operation Barkhane and various EU missions,
among them the EU Training Mission in Mali. We
strongly encourage strengthening the coordination

Military operations, including by the Joint Force,
will succeed only if they are based firmly within a
larger framework of improved security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian protection.
In that regard, we urge the G-5 Sahel States to take
forward the establishment of the support group in order
to address the challenges facing the Sahel in a holistic
and comprehensive manner. Development assistance
must address the drivers of conflict, for example by
tackling marginalization or helping to promote more
accountable governance, and development work must
be linked to the G-5 Sahel and, indeed, to MINUSMA’s
operations. It is important to ensure that military
operations go hand in hand with the provision of services
for the population. We therefore look forward to seeing
the details of a revamped integrated strategy for the
Sahel, which must have a holistic, cross-United Nations
and cross-border approach to conflict prevention at its
heart. This is where the sustaining peace concept will
be tested. Let us hope that we will not have to relearn
the lessons that we have learned in many other theatres.
Any military action must of course be conducted
in full compliance with human rights law and
international humanitarian law. We welcome the
endorsement of the human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework, as part of the
technical agreement among the EU, the G-5 Sahel and
the United Nations, and the G-5 Sahel’s commitment
to implementing it with the support of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and MINUSMA. Failure to protect civilians
will feed extremist recruitment and put future funding
contributions at risk. In that regard, I support the

18-1569821/25

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

comments made by my American colleague about the
recent incident.
A solution that addresses the underlying causes
of instability is the only way to ensure long-term
security in the region. The ultimate solution will be a
political one, with development assistance and military
support. It must be inclusive and ensure the full and
equal participation of the whole of society, including
women, if it is to succeed. It must provide economic
opportunities and present an attractive alternative to
extremism. That is the best way to improve the lives
of those who live in the Sahel, and it is the best way to
improve our collective peace and security.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of today’s meeting
and the briefings by Ms. Bintou Keita, Mr. Maman
Sidikou and Ambassadors Fatima Kyari Mohammed
and João Vale de Almeida.
Peru has been following the difficult humanitarian
situation and the continuing deterioration of security
in the Sahel region with concern. We condemn the
latest terrorist attacks and the violent extremism that
is especially prevalent in the border areas shared by
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. Today we would like
to highlight three points that we consider fundamental
to achieving lasting peace and stability in the Sahel.
My first point is about coordinating responses. The
various efforts, initiatives and mechanisms deployed
in the field must maintain political and operational
coherence, reflecting and responding to the needs and
priorities of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
countries, as well as the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. In that regard, we welcome
the signing of a technical agreement by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the European Union
and the members of the G-5 Sahel, in accordance with
resolution 2391 (2017).
We underscore the importance of the operational
link that has been established between the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force and MINUSMA. We also want to highlight
the creation of the European Union Emergency Trust
Fund to channel complementary donations and the
decision of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union to extend the mandate of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force for another year. We believe that such
initiatives should serve to accelerate the required
strengthening of the operational capabilities of the Joint
22/25

23/05/2018

Force, especially when a lack of adequate financing
jeopardizes the technical cooperation that MINUSMA
is called on to provide. We emphasize that financing
must be foreseeable and sustainable.
My second point concerns the root causes of the
conflict. As has been said, responses to the critical
situation in the Sahel must go beyond the military
dimension. What is needed is a holistic approach that
addresses the root causes of the conflict, promoting the
development and relevance of human rights, together
with enhanced security. We consider it particularly
important to promote the rule of law and economic
growth, deal with the effects of climate change and
increase women and young people’s participation in
national processes, in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We believe that the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel provides
an adequate framework for working to strengthen
governance, security and development in the region,
and we stress the importance of providing it with
adequate resources.
My third point has to do with the peace process
in Mali. We note with concern its lack of progress
and the deteriorating security situation, which are
fostering further radicalization in various areas of
the region. We hope that the upcoming elections in
Mali can serve to strengthen institutional frameworks
and democratic governance and relaunch a political
dialogue. We emphasize the importance of promoting
extensive involvement on the part of citizens and a
greater awareness of the need to include and address
the needs of vulnerable groups and minorities. It is also
essential to pay special attention to the links between
cross-border organized crime and terrorist groups and
to strengthen the regional response to those scourges.
I would like to conclude by expressing our support
for the efforts of the G-5 Sahel member countries, as
well as those of MINUSMA, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel, the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
European Union, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, among the other
agencies and actors that are committed to achieving a
sustainable peace. We believe that the G-5 Sahel is a
clear example of how African countries are capable of
assuming greater responsibilities in the shared work of
promoting peace and security on the continent. However,
that requires the strong support of the international
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

community, including the Security Council and the
United Nations system as a whole.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for her very informative briefing. We listened to the
statement delivered by the Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, Мr. Joáo
Vale de Almeida, with interest.
The African view of the problems of the region
set out by Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), and
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, deserves
extremely serious attention from the member States
of the Security Council. We agree with their alarming
assessments that the level of the threats to security and
stability in that part of Africa is unprecedentedly high.
The forces of international terrorism in the Sahel are
stronger, unfortunately. They have ramped up their
activity and are seeking to expand geographically. New
radical groups and leaders are appearing. We know
the reasons for this. One of the most important is the
collapse of Libya as a State, which came about as a
result of foreign interference in its internal affairs. We
believe that if the situation there is not normalized, it
will be difficult to stabilize the Sahel sustainably.
We welcome the 2017 initiative of the States of the
G-5 for the Sahel to create the Joint Force to combat
terrorism and organized crime. A lot has been achieved
during the past year on the practical front. Two
successful military operations have been conducted.
The completion of staffing capacity at headquarters
is in its final stages and mechanisms for financing it
are in place. We expect concrete plans for continuing
joint operations against the militias to be announced
very soon.
At the same time, we were disturbed to hear that
the process of forming the G-5 Sahel units has slowed
down recently. Progress has not been made in setting
up military bases and providing them with adequate
quantities of weapons, which will have a serious impact
on the forces’ readiness to counter the current threats.
Those issues will not be resolved without ensuring
stable and predictable funding for the Sahel States’
joint military structures that are being put in place in
the region. In that regard, we call on the external donors
that have made respective pledges, the United Nations

S/PV. 8266*

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, in the framework of its mandate, and the G-5 Sahel
countries to resolve these issues as quickly as possible.
We believe firmly in the importance of further
coordinated steps on the part of both African States
and the international community for combating
extremism in the Sahel-Sahara region. Clearly this evil
cannot be eradicated through purely military means.
It will be important to work effectively to counter the
expansion of extremist ideology, deal effectively with
the acute socioeconomic problems of the countries of
the region and strengthen their State institutions. In
that connection, we note the key role that the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel will play in
tackling those tasks.
Russia is considering the possibility of establishing
effective cooperation with the G-5 Sahel States in
addressing their core regional problems. We are already
providing military and technical assistance to a number
of States in the region and helping to train military and
police personnel. We will continue to contribute to
strengthening the military potential of the G-5 Sahel
military forces so that their Joint Force can become
an effective instrument for restoring and maintaining
peace in West Africa.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s meeting. We also thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel; Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations; and Мr. Joáo Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, for their briefings.
In December 2017, the Council adopted resolution
2391 (2017) on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Since its adoption, progress has
been made in the Joint Force’s deployment and support,
which China welcomes. At the same time, however, the
Sahel region is facing multifaceted challenges, including
a fragile security situation, spreading terrorism and
increasingly serious transnational organized crime.
We call on the international community to increase its
involvement and to take an integrated approach to those
challenges. I would like to make the following points.
First, we need to step up support for the Joint
Force, which represents an important contribution to

18-1569823/25

S/PV.8266*

Peace and security in Africa

peace and security in Africa and the world at large.
The international community should fully respect and
maximize Africa’s leadership in seeking solutions to
African problems, and should support the countries of
the region and regional organizations in their efforts
to safeguard peace and security in the Sahel region.
The G-5 Sahel States, the European Union and the
United Nations held a successful pledging conference
for the Joint Force and signed the technical agreement
requested in resolution 2391 (2017). The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) is ready to provide its support, and
China expresses its appreciation for that. We hope that
MINUSMA will actively provide the support needed
once necessary conditions such as funding are in place,
and will evaluate its experience in practice. China
commends the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/432)
for submitting proposals on support, which we will
study with other Member States.
Secondly, the political settlement of the relevant
regional hotspot issues should be prioritized. On a
basis of respect for the sovereignty of the countries
concerned, the international community should
actively support the countries of the region in taking
forward the peace process, promoting national
reconciliation and continuing to work to calm and
resolve the relevant hotspot issues, thereby helping
to create conditions conducive to lasting peace and
stability in the Sahel region. Right now, support should
be given to all the relevant parties in Mali in order
to expedite the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and seriously address
the spillover effect on the Sahel of issues outside the
region, such as the Libyan crisis, in order to minimize
their negative impact.
Thirdly, support for counter-terrorism efforts in
the Sahel region should be increased, given the gravity
of the situation. The international community should
ramp up its support and help the relevant United
Nations counter-terrorism agencies play an active role
in that regard. Terrorism is the common enemy of
all humankind. We must crack down on it resolutely,
whenever and wherever it appears. All countries should
adhere to unified standards and act with resolve to
eradicate all the terrorist organizations listed by the
Security Council. The international counter-terrorism
operations should ensure the leading role of the
United Nations, including the Security Council, while
upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter of
24/25

23/05/2018

the United Nations and the other universally recognized
basic norms governing international relations, and
strengthening coordination.
Fourthly, we should appreciate and make the
best possible use of the role of regional mechanisms.
China values the positive role that African countries
and organizations such as the G-5 Sahel, the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States have been playing in seeking solutions to the
issues in the Sahel. The international community
should strengthen its communication and coordination
with the countries of the region and with regional and
subregional organizations, and work to organically
align the individual strategies of the countries and
the region with the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, maximizing their relative advantages to
create synergies. The United Nations is revising its
integrated strategy, and China hopes that the those
efforts will take serious account of the views of the
countries in the region and meet the real needs of the
countries concerned.
China supports African countries in seeking
African solutions to African problems. We also support
Africa’s regional and subregional organizations,
including the G-5 Sahel, in their efforts to address
the problems of peace and security in Africa. We are
ready to work with the members of the Council and the
international community to make positive contributions
to the security and development of the Sahel region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
To start with, let me thank today’s briefers — Ms. Bintou
Keita, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed
and Mr. Joáo Vale de Almeida — for their very informative
statements on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and recent developments in the region.
The root causes of conflict in the region, which have
created challenges in the areas of good governance and
development, are similar in nature and interdependent.
The problems and challenges faced are cross-border in
nature. In that context, cooperation among neighbouring
countries and within regional organizations is crucial
for achieving tangible and long-lasting progress. The
G-5 Sahel, together with its Joint Force, is an example
of such comprehensive cooperation.
We express our full support for the mandate of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force and hope that, with the support of
18-15698

23/05/2018

Peace and security in Africa

the international community, it will soon achieve full
operationalization. Furthermore, the operations of the
Joint Force must be conducted in full compliance with
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
Poland supports the G-5 Sahel Joint Force with
in-kind assistance. We have provided the contingent
of Chadian troops operating within the force with
considerable material support. Moreover, we recently
decided to provide additional support to the G-5
Sahel Joint Force through Polish training capacities.
Responding to the request made by the G-5 Sahel
countries, Poland announced its readiness to conduct

S/PV. 8266*

training sessions in the area of countering improvised
explosive devices.
Lastly, Poland would like to fully express its
support for the actions taken by the United Nations, the
European Union, the African Union and the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, as well as to underscore our recognition
of the key role played by regional partners in military
operations in the Sahel.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

18-1569825/25
