II.

35/120.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Dissemination of information on decolonization

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question of publicity for the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization,"
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization, including in particular General Assembly
resolution 34/95 of 13 December 1979,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the aims and purposes of the
Declaration and mindful of the continuing pressing need
for taking all possible steps to acquaint world public
opinion with all aspects of the problems of decolonization with a view to assisting effectively the peoples of the
colonial Territories to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence,
A ware of the increasingly important role being played
in the widespread dissemination of relevant information by a number of non-governmental organizations
having a special interest in decolonization,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the question of publicity for the work of the United
Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. Reaffirms the importance of effecting the widest
possible dissemination of information on the evils and
dangers of colonialism, on the determined efforts of the
colonial peoples to achieve self-determination, freedom
and independence and on the assistance being provided
by the international community towards the elimination
of the remaining vestiges of colonialism in all its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard to
the suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue to
take concrete measures through all the media at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to
give widespread and continuous publicity to the work of
the United Nations in the field of decolonization and.
inter a/ia:
(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special
Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic
material, studies and articles relating to the problems of
decolonization and, in particular, to continue to publish the periodical Objective: Justice and other publications, special articles and studies, including the Decolonization series, and to select from them appropriate
material for wider dissemination by means of reprints in
various languages;
(b) To seek the full co-operation of the administering Powers concerned in the discharge of the tasks referred to above:
(c) To intensify the activities of all information centres, particularly those located in Western Europe;
(d) To mantain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant information with that organization:
"Ibid., chap. 111.

25

(e) To enlist the support of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization in
the dissemination of the relevant information;
(/) To ensure the availability of the necessary facilities and services in this regard;
(g) To report to the Special Committee on the measures taken in implementation of the present resolution;
4. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system and
non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization to undertake or intensify, in cooperation with the Secretary-General and within their
respective spheres of competence, the large-scale dissemination of the information referred to in paragraph 2
above:
5. Requests the Special Committee to follow the
implementation of the present resolution and report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980

35/159.

Non-interference in the internal affairs of
States

The General Assembly,
Recalling, especially, paragraph 2 of its resolution
34/101 of 14 December 1979 and previous resolutions
on non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General,3 6
containing the views of Member States on ways by
which greater respect for the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States can be assured,
Reaffirming that a declaration on non-interference in
the internal affairs of States would be an important contribution to the further elaboration of the principles for
strengthening equitable co-operation and friendly relations among States, based on sovereign equality and
mutual respect,
Noting that a number of Member States have expressed support for the preparation of such a declaration,
Taking note of the report of the Chairman of the Ad
Hoe Working Group of the First Committee on the
Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and
Interference in the Internal Affairs of States, 37
Considering that the Ad Hoe Working Group was unable to conclude negotiations for the adoption of such a
declaration at the thirty-fifth session.
I. Requests the Ad Hoe Working Group of the First
Committee on the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of
Intervention and Interference in the Internal Affairs of
States to continue its discussions and negotiations at the
thirty-sixth session, with a view to finalizing the elaboration of a declaration on the inadmissibility of intervention and interference in the internal affairs of States
and adopting it at that session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide, within the context of the facilities allotted for
meetings of the First Committee, facilities for the Ad
"'A/J4/ 192 and Add. I and 2. A 134,! I93 and Add.1 and 2,
Al.1~/505 and Add.1-3.

"Ojjicial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty~fifth Session. First
Commillee, 52nd meeting, pp. 116-118.
