A/RES/69/8

United Nations

Distr.: General
18 November 2014

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 123 (f)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 11 November 2014
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/69/L.8 and Add.1)]

69/8.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Central
European Initiative

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/111 of 9 December 2011, by which it granted
observer status to the Central European Initiative,
Recalling also its resolution 67/7 of 19 November 2012, in which it invited the
specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes of the United Nations
system to cooperate with the Initiative in order to continue joint activities for the
achievement of common objectives,
Recalling further the Articles of the Charter of the United Nations that
encourage activities through regional cooperation to promote the goals and
objectives of the United Nations,
Appreciating the efforts made by the Initiative to strengthen its relations with
the United Nations system and relevant international and regional organizations
with the ultimate goal of achieving a concrete positive impact on the political and
socioeconomic development of the region through the implementation of projects
and programmes in all priority areas,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
resolution 67/7,1
1.
Notes the celebration, in November 2014, of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the founding of the Central European Initiative, initially known as the
Quadragonale, the establishment of which coincided with the end of the cold war,
which led to complex transition processes in Central and Eastern Europe;
2.
Values the continuing contribution of the Initiative to the political
dialogue and its project management support, providing its member States with a
flexible and pragmatic platform for regional cooperation;
3.
Welcomes the Central European Initiative Plan of Action 2014–2016
aimed at strengthening regional cooperation in fields such as transport, energy, with

_______________
1

See A/69/228-S/2014/560, sect. II.

14-64518 (E)

*1464518*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/8

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Central European Initiative

a focus on energy efficiency and renewable energy sources, environment, small and
medium-sized enterprises, business development, research, education, the
information society, culture and media;
4.
Notes the efforts of the Initiative to support, elaborate and realize
concrete joint regional projects in strategic areas;
5.
Acknowledges, in this context, the fruitful cooperation between the
Initiative and the European Union, as one of the main co-funders of such projects,
and supports the efforts of the Initiative to take concrete steps for the establishment
of other mutual beneficial partnerships with the European Union;
6.
Welcomes the financing of projects by the Central European Initiative
Trust Fund at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, financed
entirely by Italy, which provides mainly grant-type assistance for specific
components of technical cooperation projects, linked to large operations of the Bank
in Initiative member States not part of the European Union, in a number of areas,
including agriculture, transport, energy, assistance to small and medium-sized
enterprises, municipal infrastructure and services, banking, insurance, institutionbuilding and capacity-building;
7.
Also welcomes the financing of small-scale multilateral projects in the
priority areas by the Central European Initiative Cooperation Fund, to which all
member States contribute, and of projects related to capacity-building and the
sharing of good practices with Initiative member States not part of the European
Union through the Know-how Exchange Programme, financed by Austria and Italy;
8.
Notes the contributions made by the Parliamentary and Business
Dimensions of the Initiative to strengthening multifaceted regional cooperation;
9.
Appeals for greater cooperation between the Initiative and international
organizations and international financial institutions in co-financing important
projects in the region;
10. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Initiative and other
regional organizations and initiatives;
11. Also welcomes the commitment of the Initiative to promoting fruitful
cooperation with the United Nations, the specialized agencies and other
organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, in particular mutual
participation in events and meetings of common interest, and to developing practical
and results-oriented joint projects;
12. Further welcomes the cooperation between the Initiative and the
Economic Commission for Europe in the area of enterprise development, with the
United Nations Environment Programme in the area of the environment, with the
World Tourism Organization in the area of tourism, with the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations in the area of agriculture, with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the area of culture and
with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in the areas of science
and technology;
13. Notes the enhanced cooperation between the Initiative and the Economic
Commission for Europe, within the framework of the memorandum of
understanding signed in 1998, through the more recent participation of the Initiative
in activities of the Commission in Geneva;

2/3

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Central European Initiative

A/RES/69/8

14. Also notes the commitment of the Initiative to contributing to the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals at the regional and global levels;
15. Acknowledges the interest of the Initiative in the adoption by the General
Assembly of a comprehensive post-2015 development agenda at its seventieth
session;
16. Invites the Secretary-General to strengthen dialogue with the Initiative
with a view to promoting cooperation and coordination between the secretariats;
17. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes
of the United Nations system to continue to cooperate with the Initiative in order to
continue joint activities for the achievement of common objectives;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-first session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session,
under the item entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
other organizations”, the sub-item entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Central European Initiative”.
48th plenary meeting
11 November 2014

3/3
