S/2006/507

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 July 2006
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
1.
In efforts to enhance the efficiency and transparency of the Council’s work, as
well as interaction and dialogue with non-Council members, the members of the
Security Council are committed to implementing the measures described in the
annex to the present note.
2.
The annex is intended to be a concise and user-friendly list of the recent
practices and newly agreed measures, which will serve as guidance for the Council’s
work. In this regard, some existing measures are recollected herein for the
convenience of users, which are so indicated throughout the annex.
3.
The present note enriches and further develops notes and statements by the
President of the Security Council relating to documentation and procedure listed in
the note by the President of the Security Council of 7 February 2006 (S/2006/78),
by supplementing and in some cases superseding them. Working methods regarding
sanctions committees and troop-contributing countries will continue to be governed
by the notes and statements by the President of the Security Council listed in the
above-mentioned note unless otherwise addressed in the present note.
4.
The members of the Council will continue their consideration of the Council’s
documentation and other procedural questions in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and other subsidiary bodies of the
Council. The present note covers only the work done by the above-mentioned
Working Group.

06-43544 (E) 190706

*0643544*

S/2006/507

Annex

Contents
I.

Agenda* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

II.

Briefings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

III.

Documentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

IV.

Informal consultations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

V.

Meetings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

VI.

Programme of work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

VII.

Resolutions and presidential statements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

VIII.

Subsidiary bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

IX.

Matters of which the Council is seized* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

X.

Communication with the Secretariat and outside . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

XI.

Annual report* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

XII.

Newly elected members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

* Recollected from previous note(s) by the President of the Security Council. Most of the
provisions under the other headings are newly agreed by the Security Council.

2

06-43544

S/2006/507

I. Agenda*
1.
The provisional agenda for formal meetings of the Council should be included
in the Journal of the United Nations provided that it has been approved in informal
consultations.
2.
The members of the Council recall the desirability, whenever possible, of
using descriptive formulations of agenda items at the time of their initial adoption to
avoid having a number of separate agenda items on the same subject. When such a
descriptive formulation exists, consideration may be given to subsuming earlier
agenda items on the same subject under the descriptive formulation.

II. Briefings
3.
The members of the Security Council agree that the President of the Council or
his or her designate should provide substantive and detailed briefings to Member
States in a timely manner. Such briefings should take place shortly after informal
consultations of the whole. The members of the Security Council encourage the
President of the Council to provide the attending Member States with copies of
statements that he or she makes to the media following the informal consultations, if
appropriate.
4.
The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council
to hold an informal briefing on the programme of work open to all Member States,
after its adoption by the Council.
5.
The members of the Security Council invite Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council or their designates to give, on a regular basis, informal
briefings, when appropriate, on their activities to interested Member States. The
members of the Security Council agree that the time and place of such briefings
should be published in the Journal of the United Nations.
6.
The members of the Security Council intend to continue to consider requesting
the Secretariat to give an ad hoc briefing at Security Council meetings in cases in
which an emergent situation which justifies a briefing arises.
7.
The members of the Security Council intend to request the Secretariat to give
ad hoc briefings at informal consultations on a daily basis, if necessary, when a
situation justifies such briefings.
8.
The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat to continue its
practice of circulating the briefing texts at “Briefings”.
9.
The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat, as a general rule,
to provide a printed fact sheet, presentation materials and/or any other relevant
reference materials, whenever possible, to Council members on the day prior to the
consultations, when briefings in the Security Council consultations room are not
given on the basis of a written report.

* Recollected from previous note(s) by the President of the Security Council.

06-43544

3

S/2006/507

III. Documentation
10. The members of the Security Council intend to intensify their efforts to
publicize decisions and other relevant information of the Council and its subsidiary
bodies to the Member States and other organizations through correspondence,
websites, outreach activities and other means, when appropriate. The members of
the Security Council intend to continue to examine ways to enhance its activities in
this regard. The members of the Security Council encourage subsidiary bodies of the
Council to continue to review periodically policies concerning access to their
documents, as appropriate.
11. The members of the Security Council agree that reports of the
Secretary-General should be circulated to Council members and made available in
all official languages of the United Nations at least four working days before the
Council is scheduled to consider them. The members of the Security Council also
agree that the same rule should apply to making such reports available to relevant
participants in Council meetings in which those reports are discussed, including the
distribution of the reports on peacekeeping missions to all participants in meetings
of troop-contributing countries.
12. The members of the Security Council agree to consider setting a six-month
interval as the standard reporting period, unless the situation provides reason for
shorter or longer intervals. The members of the Security Council also agree to
define reporting intervals as clearly as possible when adopting resolutions. The
members of the Security Council further agree to request oral reporting, which does
not require submission of a written report, if the members of the Council consider
that it would serve the purpose satisfactorily, and to indicate that request as clearly
as possible.
13. The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretary-General to
include a section in his reports where all recommendations are listed, when
presenting recommendations to the Council regarding the mandate of a United
Nations mission.
14. The members of the Security Council encourage the Secretary-General to
make reports as concise as possible, particularly for shorter reporting periods.
15. The members of the Security Council intend to request the Secretary-General
to include policy recommendations on long-term strategy in his reports, if
appropriate.
16. Reports of the Secretary-General will specify the date on which the document
is physically and electronically distributed in addition to the date of signature by the
Secretary-General.*
17. The Security Council agrees to cooperate with other organs of the United
Nations in synchronizing reporting obligations of the Secretariat on the same
subject, if appropriate, while putting priority on the effective work of the Council.
18. The members of the Security Council request the Secretariat to update the
Council towards the end of each month on the progress in the preparation of the
reports of the Secretary-General to be issued the following month. The members of
* Recollected from previous note(s) by the President of the Security Council.

4

06-43544

S/2006/507

the Security Council also request the Secretariat to communicate with the Council
immediately if it expects reports to be delayed beyond their deadlines or if reports
that have not been requested by the Council are expected to be issued.
19. The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat to send all
information currently sent to Council members by fax also by e-mail.

IV. Informal consultations
20. The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council
to suggest, through consultations with interested members and/or the Secretariat, as
appropriate, a few areas for Council members and the Secretariat to focus on at the
Council’s next informal consultations, without the intention of prescribing the scope
of discussion, at least one day before the consultations are to be held.
21. The members of the Security Council intend, where they agree with a previous
speaker, in part or in whole, to express that agreement without repeating the same
content.
22. The members of the Security Council agree that, as a general rule, the
President of the Council should adhere to the prescribed speakers’ list. The members
of the Security Council encourage the President to facilitate interaction by inviting
any participant in the consultations to speak at any time, irrespective of the order of
the prescribed speakers’ list, when the discussion requires it.
23. The members of the Security Council encourage speakers to direct their
questions not only to the Secretariat, but also to other members.
24. The members of the Security Council do not discourage each other from taking
the floor more than once, in the interest of making consultations more interactive.
25. The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat to continue its
practice of circulating all press statements issued by the Secretary-General or by the
Secretary-General’s spokesperson in connection with matters of concern to the
Security Council, both in informal consultations and by e-mail.

V. Meetings
Conduct of meetings
26. In order to increase the transparency of its work, the Security Council
reaffirms its commitment to increase recourse to open meetings, particularly at the
early stage in its consideration of a matter.
27. The Security Council encourages, as a general rule, all participants, both
members and non-members of the Council, in Council meetings to deliver their
statements in five minutes or less. The Security Council also encourages each
briefer to limit initial remarks to 15 minutes, unless otherwise decided by the
Council.
28. The Security Council encourages participants in Council meetings to express
agreement without repeating the same content, if they agree, in part or in whole,
with the content of a previous statement.

06-43544

5

S/2006/507

29. The Security Council agrees that, when non-members are invited to speak to
the Council, those who have a direct interest in the outcome of the matter under
consideration may speak prior to Council members, if appropriate.
30. In line with paragraph 170 (a) of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) and Security Council resolution 1631 (2005), the
members of the Security Council agree to continue to expand consultation and
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations, including by inviting
relevant organizations to participate in the Council’s public and private meetings,
when appropriate.
31. In order to further encourage substantive discussions with troop-contributing
countries, in accordance with Security Council resolution 1353 (2001), the members
of the Security Council encourage the attendance of appropriate military and
political officers from each participating mission. The members of the Security
Council emphasize the importance of meeting with troop-contributing countries at
the early stages of consideration of a matter. The members of the Security Council
encourage the President of the Council to provide sufficient time for the meetings.
32. The President of the Security Council will in public meetings introduce agenda
items by specifying the agenda item/issue for consideration, unless otherwise agreed
in the Council’s prior consultations, and refer to all speakers at political and
ambassadorial level by name and title. These names will, however, not have to be
included in the official records or in advance in the briefing notes prepared by the
Secretariat for the Presidency.*
33. When non-members of the Security Council are invited to speak at its
meetings, they will be seated at the Council table on alternate sides of the President,
with the first speaker seated on the President’s right.*
Notification
34. The members of the Security Council invite the Secretariat to notify Member
States of unscheduled or emergency meetings not only by the telephone recorded
message service but also through the Council website.
Format
35. In an effort further to advance the resolution of a matter under consideration,
the members of the Security Council agree to use a range of meeting options from
which they can select the one best suited to facilitate specific discussions.
Recognizing that the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council and their
own practice provide them with considerable flexibility in choosing how best to
structure their meetings, members of the Council agree that meetings of the Council
could be structured according to, but not limited to, the following formats:
(a)

Public meetings

(i)

Functions
To take action and/or hold, inter alia, briefings and debates.

* Recollected from previous note(s) by the President of the Security Council.

6

06-43544

S/2006/507

(ii)

Presence and participation
The presence and participation of non-Council members in public meetings
should take place in accordance with the provisional rules of procedure. The
Council’s practice, as described below, is understood as being in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure, although it should not under any
circumstances be understood as replacing or substituting for the provisional
rules of procedure:
a.
Any Member of the United Nations that is not a member of the
Security Council may be present at its delegation’s designated seats in the
Council Chamber;
b.
On a case-by-case basis, any Member of the United Nations that is
not a member of the Security Council, members of the Secretariat and other
persons may be invited to participate in the discussion, including for the
purpose of giving briefings to the Council, in accordance with rule 37 or 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

(iii) Descriptions in the provisional monthly programme of work
The members of the Security Council intend to continue to include the
following formats for public meetings in the provisional monthly programme
of work (calendar) when they plan to adopt, in general, the corresponding
procedures:
a.
“Open debate”: briefings may or may not be conducted, and
Council members may deliver statements; non-Council members may also be
invited to participate in the discussion upon their request;
b.
“Debate”: briefings may be conducted, and Council members may
deliver statements; non-Council members that are directly concerned or
affected or have special interest in the matter under consideration may be
invited to participate in the discussion upon their request;
c.
“Briefing”: briefings are conducted, and only Council members
may deliver statements following briefings;
d.
“Adoption”: Council members may or may not deliver statements
before and/or after adopting, inter alia, resolutions and presidential statements;
non-Council members may or may not be invited to participate in the
discussion upon their request.
(b)

Private meetings

(i)

Functions
To conduct discussion and/or take actions, e.g., recommendation regarding the
appointment of the Secretary-General, without the attendance of the public or
the press.

(ii)

Presence and participation
The presence and participation of non-Council members in private meetings
should take place in accordance with the provisional rules of procedure. The
Council’s practice, as described below, is understood as being in accordance

06-43544

7

S/2006/507

with the provisional rules of procedure, although it should not under any
circumstances be understood as replacing or substituting for the provisional
rules of procedure:
a.
On a case-by-case basis, any Member of the United Nations which
is not a member of the Security Council, members of the Secretariat and other
persons may be invited to be present or to participate in the discussion,
including for the purpose of giving briefings to the Council, in accordance
with rule 37 or 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.
(iii) Descriptions in the provisional monthly programme of work
The members of the Security Council intend to continue to include the
following formats for private meetings in the provisional monthly programme
of work (calendar) when they plan to adopt, in general, the corresponding
procedures:
a.
“Private debate”: briefings may be conducted, and Council
members may deliver statements; any Member of the United Nations which is
not a member of the Security Council, members of the Secretariat and other
persons may be invited to be present or to participate in the discussion, upon
their request, in accordance with rule 37 or 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure;
b.
“TCC meeting”: briefings may be conducted, and Council members
may deliver statements; parties prescribed in resolution 1353 (2001) are
invited to participate in the discussion, in accordance with the resolution.
Distribution of statements
36. Texts of statements made in the meetings of the Security Council will, at the
request of the delegation making the statement, be distributed by the Secretariat
inside the Council Chamber to Council members and other Member States and
permanent observers to the United Nations present at the meeting. A delegation
requesting the distribution of its statement is encouraged to provide a sufficient
number (200) of copies to the Secretariat in advance of the statement. Where a
delegation does not provide to the Secretariat a sufficient number of copies of its
statement, those copies will be placed outside the Council Chamber at the end of the
meeting. Delegations are requested not to make statements otherwise available
during the meeting.

VI. Programme of work
37. The members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council
to publish a streamlined tentative monthly forecast of the programme of work on the
Council website as soon as it has been distributed to Council members.
38. The forecast should be made available in all official languages “for
information only/not an official document”, and there should be a footnote which
reads:
“This tentative forecast of the programme of work of the Security
Council has been prepared by the Secretariat for the President of the Council.

8

06-43544

S/2006/507

The forecast covers in particular those matters that may be taken up during the
month pursuant to earlier decisions of the Council. The fact that a matter is or
is not included in the forecast carries no implication that it will or will not be
taken up during the month: the actual programme of work will be determined
by developments and the views of members of the Council.”*
39. The members of the Council have agreed that the following reminder should
be placed in the Journal of the United Nations each month:
“The monthly tentative forecast has been made available at the website
of the Security Council, in accordance with the note by the President of the
Security Council dated 19 July 2006 (S/2006/507). Copies of the tentative
forecast have also been placed in the delegations’ boxes and may be collected
at the delegations’ pick-up areas as of [date].”
40. The members of the Security Council agree that the President of the Council
should update the provisional monthly programme of work (calendar) and make it
available to the public through the Council website each time it is revised and
distributed to Council members, with appropriate indication of the revised items.

VII. Resolutions and presidential statements
41. The members of the Security Council reaffirm that all members of the Security
Council should be allowed to participate fully in the preparation of, inter alia, the
resolutions, presidential statements and press statements of the Council. The
members of the Security Council also reaffirm that the drafting of all documents
such as resolutions and presidential statements as well as press statements should be
carried out in a manner that will allow adequate participation of all members of the
Council.
42. The members of the Security Council intend to continue to informally consult
with the broader United Nations membership, in particular interested Member
States, including countries directly involved or specifically affected, neighbouring
States and countries with particular contributions to make, as well as with regional
organizations and Groups of Friends, when drafting, inter alia, resolutions,
presidential statements and press statements, as appropriate.
43. The members of the Security Council agree to consider making draft
resolutions and presidential statements as well as other draft documents available as
appropriate to non-members of the Council as soon as such documents are
introduced within informal consultations of the whole, or earlier, if so authorized by
the authors of the draft document.
44. The President of the Security Council should, when so requested by the
Council members, and without prejudice to his/her responsibilities as President,
draw the attention of representative(s) of the Member State(s), regional
organizations and arrangements concerned to relevant statements to the press made
by the President on behalf of Council members or decisions of the Council. The
Secretariat should also continue to bring to the knowledge of those concerned,
including non-State actors, through the relevant Special Representatives,
Representatives and Envoys of the Secretary-General and United Nations Resident
* Recollected from previous note(s) by the President of the Security Council.

06-43544

9

S/2006/507

Coordinators, resolutions and presidential statements of the Security Council as well
as statements to the press made by the President of the Council on behalf of the
Council members, and ensure their promptest communication and widest possible
dissemination. The Secretariat should further issue, as United Nations press
releases, all statements to the press made by the President of the Security Council on
behalf of Council members, upon clearance by the President.*

VIII. Subsidiary bodies
45. The members of the Security Council encourage the Chairs of all subsidiary
bodies to continue to report to the Council on any outstanding issues, when
necessary and in any event on a regular basis, in order to receive strategic guidance
from the Council.
46. The members of the Security Council encourage subsidiary bodies of the
Council to seek the views of Member States with strong interest in their areas of
work. The members of the Security Council in particular encourage sanctions
committees to seek the views of Member States that are particularly affected by the
sanctions.
47. The members of the Security Council encourage Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies of the Council to make the schedules of meetings of subsidiary bodies
available to the public, when appropriate, through their websites and the Journal of
the United Nations.
48. The members of the Security Council welcome the participation in the
meetings of the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations by
the Secretariat, troop-contributing countries and other major stakeholders, and
encourage this practice in order to foster closer cooperation between the Council
and those actors.

IX. Matters of which the Council is seized*
49. The Security Council agrees to continue to delete, with the prior consent of the
Member States concerned, matters which have not been considered by the Council
in the preceding five years from the list of matters of which the Council is seized, in
accordance with the following procedure:
(a) The annual summary statement issued in January of each year by the
Secretary-General on matters of which the Council is seized will identify the items
to be deleted from the list in the absence of any notification by a Member State by
the end of February of the year in question;
(b) If a Member State of the United Nations notifies the Secretary-General
that it wishes an item to remain on the list, that item will be retained;
(c) The notification will remain in effect for one year and can be renewed
annually.

* Recollected from previous note(s) by the President of the Security Council.

10

06-43544

S/2006/507

X. Communication with the Secretariat and outside
50. The members of the Security Council intend to seek the views of Member
States that are parties to a conflict and/or other interested and affected parties. For
that purpose, the Security Council may, inter alia, utilize private meetings when
public meetings are not appropriate, in which case invitations are also to be
extended in accordance with rules 37 and 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
51. The Security Council intends to continue to maintain regular communication
with the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council for better
coordination among the principal organs of the United Nations. To that end, the
members of the Security Council encourage the President of the Council to continue
holding meetings with the Presidents of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council on a regular basis.
52. The members of the Security Council intend to make the best use of all
mechanisms available, as appropriate, to convey policy guidance to the SecretaryGeneral, including dialogue, letters from the President, adoption of resolutions or
presidential statements, or any other means deemed appropriate.
53. The members of the Security Council, through the Secretary-General, invite
new Special Representatives of the Secretary-General to engage in dialogue with
members of the Council before assuming their duties under new mandates, including
in the field, in order to obtain Council members’ views on the objectives and the
mandates, whenever possible.
54. The members of the Security Council intend to utilize “Arria-formula”
meetings as a flexible and informal forum for enhancing their deliberations. To that
end, members of the Security Council may invite on an informal basis any Member
State, relevant organization or individual to participate in “Arria-formula” informal
meetings. The members of the Security Council agree to consider using such
meetings to enhance their contact with civil society and non-governmental
organizations, including local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) suggested by
United Nations field offices. The members of the Security Council encourage the
introduction of such measures as lengthening lead times, defining topics that
participants might address and permitting their participation by video
teleconference.
55. The members of the Security Council encourage Security Council missions to
continue to avoid restricting their meetings to those with governmental interlocutors
and interlocutors of conflict parties and to hold, as appropriate, meetings with local
civil society leaders, NGOs and other interested parties.

XI. Annual report*
56. The Security Council will take the necessary action to ensure the timely
submission of its report to the General Assembly. For that purpose:
(a) The Security Council will continue with the existing practice whereby
the annual report is submitted to the General Assembly in a single volume. The
* Recollected from previous note(s) by the President of the Security Council.

06-43544

11

S/2006/507

period of coverage for the reports shall be from 1 August of one year to 31 July of
the next;
(b) The Secretariat should continue to submit the draft report to the members
of the Council no later than 31 August, immediately following the period covered by
the report, so that it may be discussed and thereafter adopted by the Council in time
for consideration by the General Assembly during the main part of the regular
session of the General Assembly.
57.

The report shall contain the following parts, as described below:
(a)

An introduction;

(b) Part I shall contain a brief statistical description of the key activities of
the Security Council in relation to all subjects dealt with by the Council during the
period covered by the report, including a list of each of the following with symbol
numbers, as appropriate:
(i) All decisions, resolutions, presidential statements and assessment reports
issued by the individual monthly Presidencies of the Council on its work,
annual reports of all sanctions committees and other documents issued by the
Council;
(ii) Meetings of the Security Council, including key committees such as the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, sanctions committees, working groups and
meetings with troop-contributing countries;
(iii) Panels and monitoring mechanisms and their relevant reports;
(iv) Security Council missions undertaken and their reports;
(v)

Peacekeeping operations established, functioning or terminated;

(vi) Reports of the Secretary-General prepared for the Security Council;
(vii) All communications issued as official documents of the Security Council;
(viii) Citations to relevant United Nations documents relating to financial
expenditures in connection with Security Council activities during the period
covered by the report, if available;
(ix) References to the summary statements by the Secretary-General on
matters of which the Security Council was seized for the period covered by the
report;
(x) Notes by the President of the Security Council and other documents
issued by the Security Council for the further improvement of the work of the
Council;
(c) Pursuant to paragraph (b) (i) above, the Secretariat will take the
necessary steps to ensure the timely issuance by the month of September each year,
of the publication Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council under the
symbol S/INF/[year of the General Assembly], containing the full text of all
decisions, resolutions and presidential statements of the Council for the period
covered by the report;
(d) Part II shall contain, in relation to each subject dealt with by the Security
Council during the period covered by the report:

12

06-43544

S/2006/507

(i)

Factual data of the number of meetings and informal consultations;

(ii) A list of the decisions, resolutions, presidential statements and all
documents issued by the Council;
(iii) A list of the relevant panels, monitoring mechanisms and their reports, as
appropriate;
(iv) A list of the Security Council missions undertaken and their reports, as
appropriate;
(v) A list of the peacekeeping operations established, functioning or
terminated, as appropriate;
(vi) A list of the reports of the Secretary-General prepared for the Security
Council.
58. The report will continue to include an account of the other matters considered
by the Council, the work of the Military Staff Committee and of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council. The report shall also continue to include matters that
were brought to the attention of the Council but not discussed during the period
covered by the report.
59. In addition, the Secretariat should post the current annual report of the
Security Council on the United Nations website. The relevant web page should be
updated to provide the information as necessitated under future notes issued by the
President of the Security Council with respect to the annual report.
60. The report will continue to be adopted at a public meeting of the Security
Council where members of the Council who wish to do so could comment on the
work of the Council for the period covered by the report. The President of the
Council for the month in which the report is presented to the General Assembly will
also make reference to the verbatim record of the Council’s discussion prior to its
adoption of the annual report.

XII. Newly elected members
61. The Security Council invites the newly elected members of the Council to
attend all meetings of the Council and its subsidiary bodies and the informal
consultations of the whole, for a period of six weeks immediately preceding their
term of membership or as soon as they have been elected, if the election takes place
less than six weeks prior to the beginning of their terms. The Security Council also
invites the Secretariat to provide all relevant communications of the Council to the
newly elected members during the above-mentioned period.
62. The members of the Security Council also agree that, if an incoming member
will be assuming the Presidency of the Council in the first two months of its term on
the Council, it will be invited to attend the informal consultations of the whole for
the period of two months immediately preceding its term of membership (that is,
with effect from 1 November).*

* Recollected from previous note(s) by the President of the Security Council.

06-43544

13

S/2006/507

63. The Security Council invites the Secretariat to continue to take appropriate
measures to familiarize the newly elected members with the work of the Council
and its subsidiary bodies, including by providing briefing materials and holding
seminars before they begin to attend Council meetings.

14

06-43544
