VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Islands as will enable the people of the Territory to exercise freely and without interference their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), as well as all
other relevant resolutions of the Assembly;
6. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the
Cayman Islands themselves to determine their future
political status in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration
and reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness
among the people of the Territory of the possibilities open
to them in the exercise of their right to self-determination;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power for the economic and social development of the
Territory and urges it, in co-operation with the territorial
Government, to render continuing support, to the fullest
extent possible, to the development of programmes of economic diversification that will benefit the people of the
Territory;
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalienable
right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of
their natural resources by taking effective measures to
ensure their right to own and dispose of those resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future development and, in that connection, to continue its efforts to
persuade the Government of the United States of America
to relax its ban on the importation of turtle products from
the Cayman Islands;
9. Calls upon the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
continue to take all necessary measures to accelerate progress in the social and economic life of the Cayman Islands
and, in that respect, notes with appreciation the continued
contribution of the United Nations Development Programme to the development of the Territory;
10. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the Cayman Islands at an appropriate
time should be kept under review;
l l. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to the Cayman
Islands at an appropriate time and in consultation with the
administering Power, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/36. Question of Montserrat
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Montserrat,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 20
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
Montserrat, including in particular its resolution 38/46 of
7 December 1983,
20 Ibid., chaps. IV and XXIII.
21 See NAC.1091769, para 9.

243

Noting the statement of the representative of the administering Power relating to the Territory, 13 in which he said
that his Government would respect the wishes of the
people of Montserrat in determining the future political
status of the Territory,
Noting the statement of the Government of Montserrat
that independence was inevitable and desirable and that
the Government would work towards that end, 21
Reaffirming the responsibility of the administering Power for the economic and social development of the
Territory.
Noting with concern that during the period under review
the general slowdown in the world economy also affected
Montserrat, particularly in its vital sectors, such as
tourism, construction, agriculture and manufacturing,
Welcoming the establishment of a Civil Service Training
Centre by the Government of Montserrat and noting that
the review of the organization and training needs of the
civil service was expected to be completed in 1984,
Welcoming the contribution to the development of the
Territory by the United Nations Development Programme
and those specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system operating in Montserrat and
noting in particular the increase envisaged by the Programme for the period 1982-1986,
Aware of the special problems facing the Territory by
virtue of its isolation, small size. limited resources and
lack of infrastructure.
Recalling the dispatch. in I 97 5 and I 982. of United
Nations visiting missions to the Territory.
Mind/iii that visiting missions provide an effective
means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Montserrat; 22
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Montserrat to self-determination and independence in
conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), which fully applies to Montserrat;
4. Notes with appreciation the continued participation
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. as the administering Power. in the work of the Special Committee in regard to Montserrat, thereby enabling
it to conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of the situation in the Territory with a view to accelerating the process of decolonization for the purpose of the
full implementation of the Declaration;
5. Reaerates that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to create such conditions in Montserrat as
will enable its people to exercise freely and without interference. from a well-informed standpoint as to the available options, their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence in accordance with General Assembly
22 Offiua/ Record, or t/J(' (,"ene,·.i/ ISSl'lllhl,·, J'hirt1·- ninth Session. SuppleX\111

ml'tl/ \'o i•' (AJ:\9/2:i). chap.

244

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

resolution 15 I 4 (XV), as well as all other relevant resolutions of the Assembly;
6. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of
Montserrat themselves to determine their future political
status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration and
reiterates its call upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to launch programmes of political education so that the people of Montserrat win be fully informed of the options available to
them in the exercise of their right to self-determination
and independence;
7. Calls upon the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to continue to strengthen
the economy and to increase its assistance to programmes
of diversification in order to promote the economic and
financial viability of the Territory;
8. Urges the administering Power to take the necessary
measures, in co-operation with the territorial Government, to restore sustained and balanced growth to the
economy of the Territory and to intensify its assistance in
the development of an sectors thereof, which win benefit
the people of the Territory, and expresses the hope that
Montserrat's non-budgetary grant-in-aid status can be
maintained;
9. Also urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the territorial Government, to take effective measures
to safeguard, guarantee and ensure the rights of the people
of Montserrat to own and dispose of their natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
10. Further urges the administering Power, in co-operation with the territorial Government, to continue to provide the assistance necessary for the localization of the civil service at all levels, particularly the senior levels;
11. Takes note of the continued participation of the
Territory in the work of the Caribbean Group for Co-operation and Economic Development, as well as such regional
organizations as the Caribbean Community and the Caribbean Development Bank, and cans upon the organizations
of the United Nations system, as wen as donor Governments and regional organizations, to intensify their efforts
to accelerate progress in the economic and social life of the
Territory;
12. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to Montserrat at an appropriate time
should be kept under review;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to Montserrat at an appropriate time and in consultation with the
administering Power, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.

87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/37. Question of the Turks and Caicos Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Turks and Caicos
Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
23 Ibid., chaps. IV, V, VI and XXIV.
24 See A/ AC. l09/765, para. 21

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 23
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and an other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
the Turks and Caicos Islands, including in particular its
resolution 38/4 7 of 7 December 1983,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power relating to the Territory, 13 in
which he said that his Government would fully respect the
wishes of the people of the Turks and Caicos Islands in
determining the future constitutional status of the Territory, and bearing in mind the importance of fostering an
awareness among the people of the Territory of the possibilities open to them,
Conscious of the need to ensure the fun and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the
Territory,
Noting with appreciation the participation of the administering Power in the work of the Special Committee,
thereby enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of the situation in the Territory,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strengthening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability and to develop a wider economic base for the Territory,
Recalling its strong conviction that military bases and
instanations must not hinder the populations of the NonSelf-Governing Territories from exercising their right to
self-determination and independence in conformity with
the purposes and principles of the Charter and the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations,
Noting the statement of the administering Power that an
experimental farm has been set up on North Caicos to
study agricultural techniques, 24
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
l . Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Turks
and Caicos lslands; 25
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
Turks and Caicos Islands to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), which funy applies to the Turks and
Caicos Islands;
4. Reiterates that it is the obligation of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
2 5 Official Records of1he General Assembly, Thirly-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/39/23), chap. XXIV.
