UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/34
25 November 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3948th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 November 1998 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Georgia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of 29 October 1998
(S/1998/1012 and Add.1).
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned at the continuing tense
and unstable situation in the Gali and Zugdidi regions and at the threat of
resumption of serious hostilities. The Council demands that both sides
observe strictly all their obligations to refrain from the use of force and
to resolve disputed issues by peaceful means only.
"The Security Council welcomes the reinvigoration of the negotiations
within the United Nations-led peace process. It particularly welcomes the
meeting of both sides on confidence-building measures held in Athens on
16-18 October 1998, the largest and most representative meeting of the
parties since the military confrontation of 1993, and the increased
bilateral contacts between the two sides. The Council strongly urges the
two sides to build on this momentum to widen their commitment to the United
Nations-led peace process, to continue to intensify their discussion, in
particular within the Coordinating Council, and to expand their relations
at all levels. The Council also strongly encourages the parties to work
together in order to convene a meeting between the President of Georgia and
Mr. Ardzinba and to reach agreements, in particular on the return of
refugees and measures for the economic rehabilitation of Abkhazia, Georgia,
as a concrete step towards easing tensions and leading to improvement in
the security environment. The Council reiterates its call to both sides to
display without delay the necessary will to achieve substantial results on
the key issues of the negotiations, and calls upon them to implement
promptly and in good faith their undertakings, so that living conditions
for the population on both sides can be improved by practical confidencebuilding measures.

98-37131 (E)

251198

/...

S/PRST/1998/34
English
Page 2

"The Security Council strongly condemns the deliberate acts of
violence against the personnel of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) and of the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States, including the continued laying of mines
which also endangers the civilian population and impedes the work of the
humanitarian organizations. The Council demands that both sides take
determined and prompt measures to put a stop to such acts, which subvert
the peace process, and to ensure that the security environment of all
international personnel improves significantly.
"The Security Council welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General
aimed at improving the security of UNOMIG, approves his proposal to
increase the number of internationally recruited lightly-armed security
personnel and additional local security personnel to provide internal
security to the Mission’s installations, and requests the Secretary-General
to keep the security of UNOMIG under constant review taking into account
the observations contained in his report.
"The Security Council reminds both sides that the continued commitment
of the international community to assist them depends on their progress in
achieving peacefully a comprehensive political settlement."

-----
