UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

MEETING:

NEW

_ ., &.I t *n?,ny.:

3 AUGUST

1983

,’

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Yovisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2462)

Adoption

of the agenda

.. .... .. .. ... ... .. ... .. ... ... .. ... ..

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..i.......................

1
.l

Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15902) . .

1

-

S/PV.2462

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document,,
I.
. .r : ;. 2:
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~p~1etient.s of the Officiai Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is ,given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions,of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adonted before 1 January 1965. became fullv ooerative on that date.

2462nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 3 August 1983, at 1.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

de NANTEUIL

2 August from the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the President of the Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

4. The first speaker is the representative of Chad, on
whom I now call.
5. Mr. BARMA (Chad) Gnteroretation from French): It
is with a special feeling that I have askedio be allowed to
present our complaint at a time when my country, Chad,
is the object of open aggression by Libya.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2462)
1. Adoption
2.

6. Before doing so, however, I should like, on behalf of
my delegation, to express to you, Sir, our satisfaction at
seeing you occupying the presidency for August. There is
no need to emphasize the historic links between France
and Chad because they are common knowledge. France
has had special responsibilities to discharge with regard to
Chad. With that background and, above all, in the light
of the breadth of your experience as a statesman and
accomplished diplomat and your personal knowledge of
the subject under consideration, we are sure that the outcome of the Council’s deliberations will be a happy one
for the martyred people of Chad.

of the agenda

Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15902)
The meeting was called to order at 2.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

7. We should like also to take this opportunity to
express our great appreciation for the outstanding way in
which Mr. Ling Qing, representative of the People’s
Republic of China, conducted the Council’s business last
month. The excellent relations between China and Chad
were confirmed by the official visit paid to Beijing
recently by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Chad.

Letter dated 2 August 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15902)
I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Chad and
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

8. Finally, we are grateful to you and the other members
of the Council ,for having responded so promptly to the
appeal of the Government and people of Chad as a whole
at this critical time in our history.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
Council is meeting today in response to the request made
in a letter dated 2 August from the representative of Chad
to the President of the Security Council.

9. Since 31 July, the very day when the Chad National
Armed Forces retook the town of Faya-Largeau in the
north of Chad, the Libyan air force came into action,
cruelly stepping up Libya’s barbarous aggression against
Chad. Since that date that town has been the daily target,
right up to this moment, of systematic massive bombardments by Libyan MiG-21s and -23s, Tupolev-22s and Mirages. During the night between 1 and 2 August, the
planes bombarded the town for seven hours, thus causing
a great many casualties among the innocent civilian
population.

3. Members of the Council also have before them
document S/15903, containing the text of a letter dated

10. This is deliberate genocide against the martyred people of Chad, who ask only to live in peace and enlightened

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Barma (Chad) and
Mr. Burwin (Libyan Arab Jamahitiyaj took places at the
Council table.

1

understanding with all the brother and neighbouring
ples, including the people of Libya.

peo-

appeal and to those who expressed their political and
diplomatic support for the legitimate Government of the
Republic of Chad.

11. This situation undoubtedly endangers peace and
security in the region. That is why today Chad comes
before the Council, the main body charged, under the
Charter of the United Nations, to ensure the maintenance
of international peace and security, so that it should be
able to assume its responsibilities in this serious situation
that prevails between Chad and Libya-which
is the latter’s fault.

16. The liberation
of the strategic town of FayaLargeau, which became the political capital of the Libyan
occupation army and its mercenaries from all sides, was,
as may be imagined, a rude shock for Colonel Qaddati in
his satanic undertaking to invade and annex Chad. It is
easy to imagine the passion with which his air force indiscriminately struck the town of Faya-Largeau and its environs, causing enormous loss of human lie and material
damage.

12. Representatives will recall that last March [S/156433,
Chad made a complaint against Libya owing to its illegal
military occupation of part of Chad’s territory generally
known as the “Aouzou Strip”. Despite repeated denials
from Libya, discussions in the Council clearly established
the existence of a border conflict between the two countries. That is why, after those discussions, a major statement was unanimously adopted by members of the‘
Council [S/15688] which invited both parties to resolve
their dispute by peaceful means, particularly within the
framework of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
in accordance with the principles of respect for political
independence, national sovereignty and territorial integrity. But in particular the statement urged both parties to
refrain from any action that might exacerbate the
situation,

17. Libya’s covert intention, which runs counter to the
rules of international law because it is giving itself over to
acts of aggression against a neighbouring brother country, is to destabilize the regime in order to set up another
that- would be true to its own persuasion and thus to
perpetuate its illegal occupation of the Aouzou Strip,
annex the entire country and use it as a base for aggression against other neighbouring countries, which would
enable it to carry out its diabolical dream of creating the
famous “United States of the Sahel”.
18. As everyone knows, for about 20 years Chad has
been living through a real tragedy caused and maintained
from outside, mainly by Libya.

13. Blithely flouting that statement: the Libyan Government not only continued to extend its military occupation
over Chad territory but also undertook a real attempt to
destabilize Chad. Indeed, on 8 April-in
other words, two
days after the adoption of the Council’s statementLibyan planes began to fly over some parts of Chad, particularly the prefectures of Borkou-Ennedi-Tibesti
and
Kanem. That incident and others following it were
brought to the attention of members of the Council by the
Government of Chad in letters dated 8 and 19 April
[S/l5693 and S/15709]. At the same time Libya threw its
hordes of mercenaries and its Islamic Legion into the conquest of the townships of Bardai, Wour, Zouar,
Ounianga-Kebir and Yebbi-bou. This Libyan expansionism reached its frenetic height with the occupation on 23
June last of Faya-Largeau, the main township in the
north of the country.

19. The various successive Governments of Chad at
N’Djamena, in particular that presided over by Mr. Hissein HabrC, have spared neither time nor effort to try to
bring about normalization
of relations between the two
countries. To give the latest example, negotiations were
undertaken at N’Djamena and then at Tripoli in 1983 to
find a solution to the dispute between Chad and Libya.
But the conditions set by the latter, which we made
known to the international community during the last
Council debate on the Chad complaint [2419th meeting,
para. 177J, were so arrogant that the delegation of Chad
rejected them in toto. Let us recall that for Chad those
conditions would mean, first, its becoming an Islamic
republic, when the country has definitely chosen to be a
lay country, which did not prevent it from being a founding member of the Organization of the Islamic Conference; secondly, its forming a strategic alliance with Libya
in order to destabilize neighbouring countries such as
Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria and the Sudan, which
Libya describes as reactionary regimes; thirdly, our country’s agreeing to consider only the historic boundaries
between the two countries, which would be tantamount to
Chad’s accepting an outright merger with Libya, which the
latter tried to bring about in January 1981, as with other
countries.

14. At that time the President of the Republic, Mr. Hissein Habre, personally informed the Council of that escalation of Libyan aggression in a message dated 23 June
[S/158431. Pursuing its expansionist action, the Libyan
Government unleashed its Islamic Legion and mercenaries
against the east of the country, successively occupying the
townships of Fada, Kalait, Oum-Chalouba, Arada, Biltine
and Ab&hC. But thanks to the energetic reaction of the
government forces, backed up by appreciable logistic
assistance and support from friendly countries, the enemy
was routed and the central authorities again took control
of the entire eastern part of the country.

20. Despite our rejection of those conditions, our
Government has always expressed its willingness to maintain talks with Libya in order to arrive at a peaceful settlement of the dispute. This emerges clearly from letters sent
by our country to the President of the Council and dated
27 July and 1 August 1983 [S/I5889 and S/15897].

15. We wish to pay a warm tribute to those friendly and
fraternal countries that responded positively to Chad’s
2

expressed our appreciation and gratitude to the representative of China for his excellent conduct of the work of the
Council last month.

21. It is therefore very hard to understand why the Tripoli regime would frenetically and at all costs strive to
subject Chad by force, with absolute contempt for all
international
rules. Taking as an example the Lagos
Accord [S/14378, annex 4, which for the Libyans would
be valid, though everyone knows it has been made a dead
letter, one of the main provisions of that Accord forbids
neighbouring countries to interfere in Chad’s internal
affairs, does it not? And yet Libyan aircraft savagely bombard townships in Chad, thus committing
veritable
genocide.

28. The position of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on the
events unfolding in Chad has been clarified in previous
statements to the Council and in several letters that have
been addressed to the Council, among which are those
contained in documents S/15844 of 27 June, S/15856 of 6
July and S/15903 of 2 August and the message we
addressed to the President of the Council this morning, 3
August [s/1590q.

22. Chad is today the victim of flagrant aggression by
Libya in blatant violation of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, the Charter of the Otganization of
African Unity and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. This is implicitly admitted by the Libyan Government itself, if its spokesmen are listened to.

29. Our participation in these deliberations is designed
primarily to help the Council acquaint itself with the reasons underlying the painful events to which the people of
Chad have been subjected for years and to explain Libya’s
point of view in that connection. My statement is not in
reply to those who claim to represent Chad, because the
current Government in that country is illegitimate and
made up of insurgents. I should like to begin by reiterating the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya’s categorical denial of all
the allegations contained in documents S/15897 and
S/15898 of 1 August and S/15902 of 2 August, as well as
in the statement that has just been made in the Council.
The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya does not intervene in the
affairs of Chad and has sent neither planes nor troops to
that country. We wish others would act in like manner; in
particular we wish the war planes from the aircraft carrier
of the American Sixth Fleet would cease their violations
of Libyan airspace and waters, along with their spying
activities over Libyan territory. The Jamahiriya has
declared its neutrality vis-ci-vis the current conflict in
Chad and has proposed to the OAU that it send a factfinding mission to Chad to verify it. In that connection, I
wish to read out the letter we addressed this morning to
the President of the Council. It reads as follows:

23. Libya is responsible for the loss of human life
among peaceable Chad populations. Libya is responsible
for the massive destruction of Chad’s patrimony. Libya is
responsible for blocking Chad’s socio-economic develop
ment; indeed, we now head the list of the poorest countries in the world. Libya has always been and remains a
major obstacle to the work of national reconciliation
among the people of Chad.
24. Chad urges the Council fully to assume the responsibilities incumbent on it under the Charter of the United
Nations by firmly condemning Libya for its untoward
bombardments of Chad townships by its air force and
immediately ordering it to end such bombardments and
without delay to withdraw its occupation forces from
Chad.
25. Despite the criminal action of Libya against my
country, Chad remains ready to engage in talks to arrive
at a peaceful settlement of the conflict. As was stressed by
the President of the Republic in a message addressed to
the President of the Council on 17 March:

[The speaker read out the letter contained in document
S/15906.]

30. I wish to assert that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
firmly believes in the principles of the United Nations, the
OAU and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and
that it adheres to respect for the principles of political
independence, the territorial integrity of all States, nonintervention in the internal affairs of other States and
good-neighbourliness.

“Chad must exist as any other sovereign State, and
the territorial integrity which it acquired at the time of
its independence on 11 August 1960 must be preserved
in accordance with the principle of inviolability
of
frontiers inherited from the colonial era to which the
African countries, including the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, solemnly subscribed in 1964 at Cairo. The people
of Chad claim the right to live in peace within the
frontiers which were inherited from the colonial era
and which enjoy international
recognition*’
[see

31. The people of the Jamahiriya and the people of
Chad are bound together by spiritual, cultural, geographic and historic ties. They share a common history of
struggle against colonialism. When they were under colonial domination earlier in this century they fought side by
side. The Libyans fought against French colonialism on
the territory of Chad and the people of Chad fought on
Libyan soil against Italian Fascist colonialism. Moreover,
thousands of Libyans found refuge in Chad during the
Libyan liberation struggle against Fascist colonialism,
while thousands of Chadians currently live in the Jamahiriya, where they work and are treated as brothers.

S/15644].
26. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, on whom I now call.

27. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): Mr. President, I have already had
occasion to extend my thanks to you on your assumption
of the presidency for this month, and I have also
3

?.

32. The volatile situation and civil war in Chad are.
nothing new. Rather, they are results of colonialism.
Chad acceded to independence in the early 196Os, and the
disturbances there began in 1963; civil war broke out in
1965 and has continued up to the present time.

unleashed a long war against the capital which claimed
the lives of thousands of innocents.
37. Libya at the time was not responsible for what happened in Chad. The neighbouring States initiated collective efforts to solve the problem. These led to the
convening of the first Kano Conference, held from 8 to 15
March 1979, and the signing of the 15 March agreement
which led to the resignation of President Felix Malloum
and Hissein Habrt from their respective posts and the
formation of a provisional Council of State under Goukouni Weddey to conduct the country’s affairs pending the
formation of a Transitional National Union Government
including all factions in Chad.

33. The conflict in Chad is one among factions in that
country and has been fomented by religious, tribal and
ethnic factors, and power struggles instigated by
colonialism.
34. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has taken care to preserve the fraternal and good-neighbourly
relations that
bind the Libyan and Chadian people and has consistently
sought to realize the unity of the people of Chad, as well
as their security and stability. Libya was the first State
that attempted to effect a national reconciliation in Chad
and to put an end to the tragedy that has afllicted the
Chadian people since the early 1960s. Among the results
of the conflict in Chad are the adverse effects this conflict
has had on the Jamahiriya. We now find foreign forcesa France-American colonialist military presence-on our
southern borders. From the early 1960s until the first
national reconciliation conference at Sebha in the Jamahiriya in February of 1978, the Jamahiriya has been instrumental in helping to break down the psychological barrier
between FROLINAT
fjkwzt de libtfration nationale du
Tchadj and the Government of Chad and to bring about
mutual recognition between the two parties in the meetings
held at Sebha and Benghazi that ended on 27 March 1978.
The Jamahiriya also participated in all the conferences
subsequently held at Lagos, with a view to achieving
national reconciliation in Chad, conferences that led to the
Lagos Accord and the Transitional
National Union
Government, in which all the Chad factions were included
under the leadership of Goukouni Weddey, a Government
that was recognized by the OAU.

38. Hissein Habre continued his sinister manoeuvres
and deceived Goukouni Weddey into forming a Govemment including their two factions only and excluding the
other factions. This led to the continuation of the civil war
and necessitated further efforts by the neighbouring countries to achieve peace and national reconciliation. As a
result the first Lagos Conference, which was boycotted by
Hissein Habre, was convened from 25 to 27 May 1979. It
issued a statement on 27 May emphasizing that the
Government constituted at that time was a violation of
the Kano Agreement and that its formation was an unacceptable act. The Conference called upon that alleged
Government to resign immediately and to agree with the
other factions to form a Transitional National Union
Government. But Hissein HabrC approved of dismantling
the Government only when he ascertained that the OAU
rejected that Government and that Goukouni Weddey
would abandon him because he started doubting Hissein
Habrcs intentions.
39. Thus the second Lagos Conference was convened
from 13 to 21 August 1979. It was attended by 11 Chad
factions, including that of the Armed Forces of the North,
led by Hissein Habrt? All these factions signed the agreement which resulted in the formation of a Transitional
National Union Government on 10 November 1979
under Goukouni Weddey, including all the conflicting factions in Chad.

35. The Chad problem is one of the complex problems
before the OAU. It has needed intense efforts by the Presidents of the neighbouring States throughout the past five
years to restore peace to that fraternal country. However,
those efforts have always come up against manoeuvres
and conspiracies by colonialism and its power-hungry
lackeys, who would not like to see peace and security in
the country. Thus we saw one of the lackeys of coloniaiism, Hissein Habre, violating every agreement reached
between the various conflicting factions. Those who follow the history of this person know full well who he is and
what he wants. In a nutshell, he is an adventurer, whose
only concern is to assume the presidency of the country
by any means. Hissein Habre has consistently sought to
fan the flames of civil war so as to be able, with the help of
certain States, to eliminate all the other factions in Chad
and achieve power on the corpses of the people of Chad.

40. Hissein Habre assumed the post of Minister of
Defence, where he once more showed his hunger for
power, using his post to consolidate his forces and to sow
discord among the people of Chad. His forces waged
aggression against the remaining forces, starting on 21
March 1980. This prompted the Government of National
Union to dismiss him as an insurgent who had violated
the Lagos Accord. The Government mobilized its forces to
quell his rebellion, which it did in December 1980.
41. Libya, at the request of the legitimate Government
and in accordance with an agreement between the two
countries, acted to put an end to that rebellion. For the
first time since 1965 Chad enjoyed peace. But Hissein
Habre did not despair, since he was embraced by some
African States and by the United States, which provided
him with large amounts of arms and a large number of
military advisers and mercenaries. He seized the opportu-

36. The proof of this is very clear. After signing with the
Government of General Felix Malloum an agreement
which enabled him to reach the capital of Chad and to
assume the post of Prime Minister on 31 August 1978, he
did not like that post, and started manoeuvring to seize
the presidency. He violated the Khartoum Agreement and
4

nity of the Libyan withdrawal from Chad to wage civil
war again, and was able, through the collusion of some
African States with forces in Chad, part of the OAU contingent, to return to the capital and expel the legitimate
Government, the Government resulting from the Lagos
Accord and recognized by the OAU. That Government
moved to northern Chad and made Bardai its capital.
Hissein Habre took advantage of the difficulties facing
the legitimate Government and started contacting other
States in an attempt to strip the Transitional National
Union Government of legitimacy.

46. The cause of the deterioration in the situation in
Chad, which, to an extent, is jeopardizing peace and security in the area, is foreign intervention, especially the
direct intervention by the United States and France.
Those countries have begun an air-lift to provide the
rebellious forces of Hissein Habre with equipment and
military advisers. Zaire has sent more than 2,000 troops to
fight on the side of the forces of Hissein HabrC, and mercenaries have in addition been recruited from France and
Belgium.
47. Today’s newsnapers tell us that French assistance has
reached $40 million and that this assistance is unlimited
and could well increase. As for declared American assistance, it has reached $10 million, and a further $10 million
has been allocated for Redeye anti-aircraft missiles. American military advisers are now on their way to N’Djamena
or are there already. America is pressuring France to use
its aeroplanes or its air .force; it is exerting this pressure
through promises of material aid. A “committee” has been
formed under the chairmanship of the President of the
United States to plan intervention in the affairs of Chad
and of Libya.

42. In this regard we should also like to mention that the
message addressed to the President of the Council was
addressed to him from outside Chad. Where were the
forces of Zaire, which were among the African contingent
at the time? Where was the conscience of the American
Administration
and of other colonialist Powers when the
forces of Habr6 started their attack on the legitimate
Government of the country? The United States intervened
there, and there is a declared, official intervention by the
United States, by France and by Zairian forces. However,
it seems that this intervention and the presence of these
Governments does not bother the conscience of the American Administration,
and that these forces are in Chad to
protect a legitimate, elected Government that respects
human rights.

48. I regret mentioning France while that country’s representative is presiding over the Council, but these are
facts which cannot be escaped.

43. We also recall that Hissein Habr6 once arrested
archaeologists,
including
Mrs. Claustre, a French
archaeologist. France is well aware of that. Habr6 also
murdered the French emissary who went to negotiate
with him. After negotiations, and with assistance from
Libya, it was possible to release Mrs. Claustre.

49. This continued intervention will only aggravate the
situation and will not restore peace in Chad. The Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya condemns these acts of intervention and
calls for their immediate termination. It calls for the withdrawal of Zairian and other forces and of American and
French military advisers and for the termination of arms
shipments. This would help the Chad people to put its
house in order and to restore security in Chad.

44. They say that the Government of Habr6 is a legitimate, elected Government,
respecting human rights,
those criteria adhered to by the United States in dealing
with foreign Governments. All of this is baseless and spurious. The United States Administration
is concerned not
with human rights or elections but with those who protect
its interests by imposing dictatorial r&imes. It is concerned with those who are willing to be its lackeys and not
its friends, not people with self-respect, but people who in
return for a handful of dollars given through the United
States Central Intelligence Agency, will exercise dictatorship and domination over the destinies of peoples.

50. What is happening in Chad is an internal ,issue
which concerns the people of Chad only. A solution of the
problem must be found within the framework of the.
OAU and in accordance with the Lagos Accord [S/14378,
annex 4, which was endorsed by the OAU. In this connection, we should like to recall the statement issued last
month by the Bureau of the OAU. In the fourth paragraph of that statement, the Bureau

45. Recently, when the legitimate Government under
Goukouni Weddey was able to organize its forces and
achieve several victories against the rebellious forces of
Hissein Habr6, the imperialist forces and some lackey
States raised their voices, complaining of a Libyan intervention in Chad. Where were those voices when Hissein
Habrt rebelled against the legitimate Government in
March 1980? Why did not those Powers move and pro
vide the government forces with weapons and troops, as
they are doing now for the Government of Habr6, if they
were really interested in peace in Chad? Why did they not
object to the direct intervention of Zaire in Chad and call
upon it to withdraw-its forces from Chad, as it did with
Libya in 1980?

51. The OAU is considering the problem of Chad. Contacts are now being made. We believe that the Charter of
the United Nations itself calls for and encourages
regional initiatives and solutions and bilateral negotiations. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is ready to settle any
problems with the legitimate
Government
of Chad
under Goukouni Weddey, and to do so at any time and
in any place.

“reauests the current Chairman of the OAU to undertake any action, including the convening of the Standing Committee on Chad, aimed at bringing about
lasting peace in Chad.‘**

* Quoted

5

in English

by the speaker.

52. If there is a genuine desire to restore peace in
Chad, action must be taken immediately to convene a
conference on national reconciliation under the auspices
of the OAU, to be attended by all the Chad factions
which signed the Lagos Accord. Furthermore, an end
must be put to foreign intervention in the internal affairs
of Chad and to the flow of weapons to the rebellious
forces of Hissein Habrt.

I should nevertheless like to take this opportunity to
express my particular pleasure at seeing you in the Chair.
Not only does your country maintain excellent relations
with my own, but I note that your delegation and mine
enjoy excellent relations, too. I have no doubt whatsoever
that your competence and experience, which you have so
often in the past placed at the service of the Council, will
be of invaluable assistance to us again.

53. The Jamahiriya is always ready to work with its
sister States of Africa to help achieve peace and security
in Chad.

61. I also take this same opportunity to associate in this
tribute the representative of China, who presided over the
Council last month with so much competence.

54. A question was raised: who is responsible for what
is taking place in Chad? I should like to state that those
responsible for the murders and massacres in Chad are
the rebels, the imperialist forces, and the current intervention in Chad, particularly by France and the United
States.

62. Returning to the subject under discussion, I shall be
brief. In my dialect we say, “When you want to stop a
naked madman, you must be dressed yourself’, because if
you adopt the same fashion as his, people will wonder
which one is the madman.
63. Having said that, reference was made just now to
President Habre as an adventurer. It is not up to me to
respond to that; I hope that the representative of Chad
will have occasion to respond to that kind of calumny.
Obviously what is at issue here is the Government. But
what was the regime of the present Libyan Government at
the beginning? Did it overthrow a king? Does it owe its
present legitimacy to that? I do not think so.

55. Even the mass media say that it is difficult-or
rather that they have not been able-to ascertain the
veracity of the allegations of the Habre regime concerning
the raids by Libyan war-planes on Faya-Largeau. The
reason is that the illegitimate Government of Habr6 has
forbidden journalists to visit that town.
56. Permit me, Mr. President, to refer to the statement
issued by the representative of Chad, or rather the illegitimate Government of Chad, and I reiterate that the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is not occupying any part of
Chad and has no designs on the territory of other States.
Libyan forces were in Chad legitimately and, had Libya
wished to impose its will on Chad, it could have done so
then. Moreover, the allegations of the imperialist Powers
and their lackeys concerning the so-called Islamic Libyan
legion are a baseless fabrication of the mass media and of
the lackeys of imperialism in the region.

64. But since the representative of Libya has raised the
question of where the Zairian forces were when Weddey
was in power, I should just like to refresh his memory by
saying that the forces of Zaire were in fact in Chad at the
request of the OAU, as, indeed, was the case with other
forces under the command of the OAU, and their instruo
tions were not to intervene in a civil war. It was at that
time that the forces of Zaire were in Chad, at the request
of a Government which the whole OAU considered to be
the legal Government of Chad. It was not because one or
two States were challenging its legitimacy that the
Government of Chad suddenly became non-legitimate.

57. Especially from the Libyan point of view, the problem of Chad is a pretext, in particular, for the American
Administration
to satisfy its hunger for dominating peoples in the world. What is happening to Libya is also happening to Nicaragua in Central America, and in SouthEast Asia. The United States does not want national
Governments: the United States Administration wants to
return to Libya after having been expelled, so that it can
exploit our oil and our airspace and build military bases
with the intention of intervening in neighbouring States, of
spying on Arab and African States, of supporting the
expansionist Zionist entity in the Middle East region, and
of smothering any voice raised against its immoral policies,
especially concerning the Middle East question.

65. The forces of Zaire are in Chad; let us not attempt to
conceal the fact. We are not hypocrites. They were
requested by the Government of Hissein Habre and will
remain there as long as the Government of Hissein Habre
so wishes.
66. If the forces of Zaire are involved, it is because external forces committed aggression against what the OAU
considers to be a legitimate Government.
67. In June the nineteenth session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the OAU was held at
Addis Ababa. At that same time there was a country
which thought that the real Government was that of Goukouni Weddey. The head of State of that country had to
leave the meeting. Why? Because he was clearly in the
minority and not supported by anyone.

58. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): As
President I am obliged to. point out that the letter
addressed by the representative of Chad was on behalf of
the Government of Chad.
59. I shall now call on the representative of Zaire who
wishes to speak in exercise of the right of reply.

68. I am astonished by the claim just made here in the
Council-where
this is considered a serious matter-that
the legal Government is that of Mr. Goukouni Weddey.
That is certainly not the understanding among Africans.

60. Mr. UMBA di LUTETE (Zaire) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, despite the gravity of the situation
6

69. Reference has also been made here to the communique from the OAU Bureau, but the previous speaker
who quoted that has forgotten that that communique was
first addressed to his country. It was because his country
had intervened in Chad that that communiquC was made
public so as not to make the situation worse.

requested the OAU to send a commission of inquiry to see
what was happening in Chad. As far as I am aware, the
Chad rebels have no aircraft. Who, then, is bombing the
city of Faya-Largeau, if not Libyan aircraft? His own
spokesmen have admitted that Libyan aircraft are overflying Chad territory and that their bombing of that territory
was continuing.

70. He also said that his country is not an enemy of
Chad%. Well, yesterday I think everybody had an opportunity to read the press reports. The press agency of his
own country yesterday announced the death of President
Habre. Unfortunately for him, President Habre is still
alive. The town was savagely bombed, in an obvious
attempt to kill President Habre. But unfortunately for
them this did not happen. There can be no doubt as to
who bombed the town, since the other side does not have
an air force.
71. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Chad.

77. As for what he called “foreign intervention in
Chad,” I should like to say to him that, if there is any
foreign intervention in Chad, it is precisely Libyan intervention. There is overt aggression by Libya against the
Chad people, which is a tragedy for that people. If
friendly countries-which
he named-have
been kind
enough to respond to the appeal made to them, they did
so on the appeal of a legitimate Government, a Government that is recognized by the international communityeven if that does not please the Libyan representative.
Hence, if there is foreign intervention in Chad, if there is
aggression against Chad, it is precisely on the part of
Libya and no other country.

I shall now call on the representa-

72. Mr. BARMA (Chad) (interpretation from French):
The Libyan representative, who is seated across the room
from me here, claimed not to be exercising the right of
reply in response to the statement made by my delegation
on behalf of the Chad Government and indulged in describing the background to the situation in Chad as if he
were a leader of the country. He even dares to make a
judgement about the legitimacy of a Government, as if his
own Government were legitimate.

79. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has asked
to speak, and I now call on him.

73. As the representative of Zaire has rightly just
recalled, we know how Colonel Qaddafi came to power.
It was by a coup d&at. ‘He overthrew the king. Does he
have some sort of certificate of legitimacy delivered by an
international body7 I think not.

80. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): At its eighteenth session, held at Nairobi in June 1981, the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the OAU adopted a resolution on Chad,
one of whose paragraphs reads as follows:

74. The representative of Libya has just shown the international community how far his country clearly interferes
in the internal affairs of state in Chad. By what right can
he make value judgements about the person of the President of Chad?

“Reaffirms its support to the Transitional National
Union Government - and requests that all Member
states of the OAU support this Government in its
efforts to maintain peace and security in the country.
and abstain from interfering in the internal affairs of
the country.“’

78. I shall confine myself to this statement for the time
being, but I reserve the right to make an appropriate reply
after I read the verbatim record of the statement made by
the representative of Libya.

75. I will not descend to the level of the representative of
Libya because I am well-brought up and I speak on behalf
of a State. I shall therefore not give myself over to the sort
of silly nonsense and pettifoggery that we have just heard
about my Head of State, and I shall not dignify it with a
reply. It is not he who is going to set up any rbgime in
Chad, although we all know that for 20 years that is what
Libya has sought to do. Chad has not been at peace
because Libya has wanted exactly what I have described,
despite the fact that the Libyan representative claims that
his country seeks national reconciliation. But we know
otherwise: it is Libya that is the major obstacle to national
reconciliation. It wants at all cost to have puppets in
Chad, so that it can do what it wants in Chad. But it will
not succeed in that goal because of the great determination of our people. We know that they have been an
obstacle to our development, as I said in my statement.

81. I stated that there were Libvan forces in Chad; and
had Libya wanted to impose a president on Chad, it
would have done so. But those Libyan forces went to
Chad at the request of the legitimate Government of
Chad and withdrew at the request of that Government.
82. Libya takes a neutral position
Chad among Chad factions.

on the conflict in

83. If it is alleged that there is a legitimate Government
and security and stability in Chad, then why should we go
to the trouble of discussing the deteriorating situation in
Chad and why are Zairian forces and military advisers
from the United States and other countries there, as well
as mercenaries, as reported by Japanese journalists?
84. Is Goukouni Weddey a Chad national or not? Are
those fighting with him not also Chad nationals? Who
occupied Al&he and Oum-Chalouba? Were they Libyan

76. The Libyan representative said that his country was
neutral concerning current events in Chad and that it had
7

forces? Who destroyed N’Djamena
and murdered worshippers in a mosque? Was it not Hissein Habrh? Who
abducted the French archaeologist? Wnc it nnt T-T;QQG~
Habrk?

create problems, for the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. As I
said, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya stands ready to seek
gnuine national reconciliation
in Chad, including all
Chad factions.

85. With regard to the statement from the OAU, it was
addressed to all African States-and
that is why it was
rejected by Hissein Habri. It is also addressed to nonAfrican States intervening in Chad.

The meeting rose at 3.25 p.m

NOTE

86. I stated that the deteriorating situation in Chad certainly had adverse effects on my country and that it would

’ A/36/534, annex II, resolution AHGlRes.102 (XVIIIyRev.1.

8

,
.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
Ihe
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

USIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unirs.
Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IlOJIYYMTb

M3LIAHMFI

OPF-AHM3AUMM

OE-bEAMHEHHbIX

HAUM$l

Msnannn
Oprann3autin
06%ennnennblx
Hauetl MOXHO xynnrb
B xnnxnbtx
stara3miax
n arenrcrnax
no ncex paRonax hnipa. Hasonnre
cnpanxw 06 n3nannnx
B BarneXt KHIIxHO\I
k4ara3nne
nnn rimmiTe no anpecy: Oprann3ausn
06aenenennbix
Haunn,
Cerunn
no
nponame
HsnannZL, Hbm-Mopr
nnn xenesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Venras.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-60205-July

1991-2,050
