XV. RESOLUTIONS ADOPl'ED 0N THE REPORT OF THE

PERMANENT HEADQUARTERS COMMITTEE
17, paragraphs 1 and 2, and Article 18, paragraph 2, of the Charter.

25(1). QUESTION OF THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE
UNITED NATIONS

11.

Th~ General Assembly resolves that:
l. PERMANENT HEADQ.UARTERS
(a) The pennanent headquarters of the
United Nations shall be established in Westchester (New York) and/or Fairfield (Conn.)
counties, i.e. near to New York City.
( b) A Headquarters Commission shall proceed as soon as possible to the region mentioned
in (a) above, with a view to carrying out an
exhaustive study thereof and making recommendations to the General Assembly at the second
part of its first session regarding the e.xact location to be selectcd within the aforementioned
general region.
(e) The Headquarters Commission shall draw
up plans based on the assumption that the
United Nations will acquire approximately:
(i) 2 square miles
(ii) 5 square miles
( iii) 10 square miles
(iv) 20 square miles
(v) 40 square miles
with details in each case of the approximate cost
of acquiring the land and buildings within these
areas.
(d) The Headquarters Commissioil shall ascertain what measures the federal, state and
county authorities in the United States of America are prepared to take in order to control development in the territory adjacent to the zone.
(e) On the basis of the infonnation thus provided, the General Assembly at the second part
of its first session shall make a finaj decision as
to:
(i) The exact area required;
(ii) The exact location of the pennanent
headquarters within the aforementioned Westchester-Fairfield region.
(/) This resolution does not imply any finan.
cial commitments of the United Nations (other
than the expenses of the Headquarters Commission) and does not impose any financia! obligations on its Members, and the General Assembly
remains free to decide these questions at the
second part of its first session according to Article

lNTERIM IIEADQUAllTEllS

The interim headquarters of the United Natiom
shall be located in New York City.

III. HEADQUARTBRS Co1ni11ss10N
(a) A Headquarters Commission composed of
representatives of Australia, Uruguay, China,
France, Iraq, Netherlands, United Kingdom,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Yugoslavia shall be set up to carry out the tasks ientrusted to it under the fint part af this resolution
regarding the permanent headquarters.
( b) The Headquarters Commission may be
assisted by experts including planning engineers,
lawyers, real estate experts, financial advisen and
other appropriate experts who, at the request of
the Secretary-General, shall be designated by the
Govemment of the U nited Stat.es of America.
(e) The Secretary-General shall consult with
the Headquarten Commission or the experts assisting it, as he may deem necessary or appropriate, on problems which may arise in connection with the temporary installation of the various organs of the United Nations in the United
States of America, the material arrangements for
the holding of the second part of the fint session of the General Assembly in September 1946,
and the housing of the delegates, secretariat and
other personnel who may be required to reside
for longer or shorter periods near the temporary
headquarters of the Organization.
( d) The Secretary-General is authorized to
pay the expenses of the members of and to compensate the e~rts attached to the Headquarten
Commission on such basis and in such fonn as
may appear to him most appropriate.
(e) Toe Headquarters Commission shall submit its final report on all matters referred to it
to the General Assembly at the second p&(t of
its first session.
(f) The General Assembly, during the coune
of the second part of its fint seMion, shall give
consideration to the appointment of a Planning
Commission of e~perts as recommended, in
chapter X, section 3, in the Report of the Preparatory Commission.
Thirty-third plenary meeting, 14 February 1946.

37
