S/2005/203

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 March 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 24 March 2005 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the report of the Mission of Inquiry into
the Circumstances, Causes and Consequences of the 14 February Beirut Bombing,
which was prepared pursuant to the statement by the President of the Security
Council (S/PRST/2005/4) of 15 February 2005.
This independently conducted fact-finding report presented to the Council
today raises some very serious and troubling allegations. The Mission concludes
that an independent international investigation is needed.
I endorse the Mission’s recommendation that such an investigation be
established. The aim would be to reach conclusions as complete as possible about
who was responsible for the assassination of Mr. Hariri and the deaths of 19 others.
I wish to thank Mr. Peter FitzGerald, head of the Mission, and the members of
his team, for producing the report.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Council. Meanwhile, I am also transmitting the report to the
Government of Lebanon.
Lebanon is passing through a difficult and sensitive period. It is imperative
that all concerned should behave with the utmost restraint. The future of Lebanon
should be decided strictly through peaceful means.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-28396 (E) 290305

*0528396*

S/2005/203

Report of the Fact-finding Mission to Lebanon inquiring
into the causes, circumstances and consequences of the
assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
(25 February-24 March 2005)

Executive summary
On 14 February 2005, an explosion in downtown Beirut killed 20 persons,
among them the former Prime Minister, Rafik Hariri. The United Nations SecretaryGeneral dispatched a Fact-finding Mission to Beirut to inquire into the causes, the
circumstances and the consequences of this assassination. Following its arrival in
Beirut on 25 February, the Mission met with a large number of Lebanese officials
and representatives of different political groups, performed a thorough review of the
Lebanese investigation and legal proceedings, examined the crime scene and the
evidence collected by the local police, collected and analysed samples from the
crime scene, and interviewed some witnesses in relation to the crime.
The specific “causes” of the assassination of Mr. Hariri cannot be reliably
asserted until after the perpetrators of this crime are brought to justice. However, it
is clear that the assassination took place in a political and security context marked
by acute polarization around the Syrian influence in Lebanon and the failure of the
Lebanese State to provide adequate protection for its citizens.
Regarding the circumstances, the Mission is of the view that the explosion was
caused by a trinitrotoluene (TNT) charge of about 1,000 kilograms placed most
likely above the ground. The review of the investigation indicates that there was a
distinct lack of commitment on the part of the Lebanese authorities to investigating
the crime effectively, and that this investigation was not carried out in accordance
with acceptable international standards. The Mission is also of the view that the
Lebanese investigation lacks the confidence of the population necessary for its
results to be accepted.
The consequences of the assassination could be far-reaching. It seems to have
unlocked the gates of political upheavals that were simmering throughout the last
year. Accusations and counter-accusations are rife and aggravate the ongoing
political polarization. Some accuse the Syrian security services and leadership of
assassinating Mr. Hariri because he became an insurmountable obstacle to their
influence in Lebanon. Syrian supporters maintain that he was assassinated by “the
enemies of Syria”; those who wanted to create international pressure on the Syrian
leadership in order to accelerate the demise of its influence in Lebanon and/or start a
chain of reactions that would eventually force a “regime change” inside the Syrian
Arab Republic itself. Lebanese politicians from different backgrounds expressed to
the Mission their fear that Lebanon could be caught in a possible showdown
between the Syrian Arab Republic and the international community, with
devastating consequences for Lebanese peace and security.
After gathering the available facts, the Mission concluded that the Lebanese
security services and the Syrian Military Intelligence bear the primary responsibility
for the lack of security, protection, and law and order in Lebanon. The Lebanese
security services have demonstrated serious and systematic negligence in carrying
out the duties usually performed by a professional national security apparatus. In

2

S/2005/203

doing so, they have severely failed to provide the citizens of Lebanon with an
acceptable level of security and have therefore contributed to the propagation of a
culture of intimidation and impunity. The Syrian Military Intelligence shares this
responsibility to the extent of its involvement in running the security services in
Lebanon.
It is also the Mission’s conclusion that the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic bears primary responsibility for the political tension that preceded the
assassination of the former Prime Minister, Mr. Hariri. The Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic clearly exerted influence that went beyond the reasonable
exercise of cooperative or neighbourly relations. It interfered with the details of
governance in Lebanon in a heavy-handed and inflexible manner that was the
primary reason for the political polarization that ensued. Without prejudice to the
results of the investigation, it is obvious that this atmosphere provided the backdrop
for the assassination of Mr. Hariri.
It became clear to the Mission that the Lebanese investigation process suffers
from serious flaws and has neither the capacity nor the commitment to reach a
satisfactory and credible conclusion. To uncover the truth, it would be necessary to
entrust the investigation to an international independent commission, comprising the
different fields of expertise that are usually involved in carrying out similarly large
investigations in national systems, with the necessary executive authority to carry
out interrogations, searches and other relevant tasks. Furthermore, it is more than
doubtful that such an international commission could carry out its tasks
satisfactorily — and receive the necessary active cooperation from local
authorities — while the current leadership of the Lebanese security services remains
in office.
It is the Mission’s conclusion that the restoration of the integrity and
credibility of the Lebanese security apparatus is of vital importance to the security
and stability of the country. A sustained effort to restructure, reform and retrain the
Lebanese security services will be necessary to achieve this end, and will certainly
require assistance and active engagement on the part of the international community.
Finally, it is the Mission’s view that international and regional political support
will be necessary to safeguard Lebanon’s national unity and to shield its fragile
polity from unwarranted pressure. Improving the prospects of peace and security in
the region would offer a more solid ground for restoring normalcy in Lebanon.

3

S/2005/203

I. Introduction
1.
On 14 February 2005, an explosion in downtown Beirut killed 20 persons,
among them the former Prime Minister, Rafik Bahaa-Edine Hariri. Also killed in the
explosion were Yahya Mustafa Al-Arab, Mohammad Ben Saad-Eddine Darwish,
Talal Nabeeh Nasser, Ziad Mohammad Tarraf, Omar Ahmad Al-Masri, Mohammad
Riad Hussein Ghalayeeni, Mazen Adnan Al-Dahabi, Yamama Kamel Dhamen,
Haitham Khaled Osman, Alaa Hasan Osfur, Zahi Haleem Abu Rujayli, Joseph Emile
Aoun, Rima Mohammad Ra’ef Bezi, Ruad Hussein Haidar, Sobhi Mohammad AlKhedhr, Abdu Tawfik Bu Farah, Abdel-Hameed Mohammad Ghalayeeni, Mahmud
Saleh Al-Khalaf and Mohammad Saleh Al-Hamad Al-Mohammad. In addition to
those killed, there is one person, Farhan Ahmad Al-Isa, who is still missing and
believed to be among the victims. Another 220 persons were injured.
2.
On 15 February, the President of the Security Council had issued a statement
on behalf of the Council requesting the Secretary-General “to follow closely the
situation in Lebanon and to report urgently on the circumstances, causes and
consequences of this terrorist act”. The Secretary-General announced on
18 February that he was sending a Fact-finding Mission to Beirut to gather such
information as was necessary for him to report to the Council in a timely manner.
After an exchange of letters between the Secretary-General and the President of
Lebanon, a mission comprising Peter FitzGerald, a Deputy Commissioner of the
Irish Police, Garda Siochána, and two police investigators, a legal adviser and a
political adviser was sent to Lebanon to gather facts about the causes, circumstances
and consequences of the assassination. The Mission was headed by Mr. FitzGerald.
Additional experts in explosives, ballistics, DNA and crime scene examination were
brought in on 6 March, in agreement with the Lebanese authorities, to examine the
crime scene and the samples collected from it.
3.
Following its arrival in Beirut on 25 February, the members of the Fact-finding
Mission (hereinafter referred to as “the Mission”) met with a large number of
Lebanese officials and representatives of different political groups, performed a
thorough review of the Lebanese investigation and legal proceedings, examined the
crime scene and the evidence collected by the local police, collected and analysed
samples from the crime scene, and interviewed some witnesses in relation to the
crime. Since some of the persons interviewed by the Mission requested anonymity,
the present report does not include a full list of the interviewees. The Mission
concluded its inquiry in Lebanon on 16 March 2005. This report includes its
findings and recommendations.

II. Findings
4.
The findings of the Mission fall within three categories as defined by the
Security Council: causes, circumstances and consequences.

A.

Causes
5.
The specific “causes” for the assassination of Mr. Hariri cannot be reliably
asserted until after the perpetrators of this crime are brought to justice. However, it
is clear that the assassination took place in a political and security context marked

4

S/2005/203

by acute polarization around the Syrian influence in Lebanon and the failure of the
Lebanese State to provide adequate protection for its citizens.
The political context
6.
Lebanon has repeatedly served as a battleground for the parties to the ArabIsraeli conflict, with devastating impact on its national unity and independence, as
demonstrated by its tragic civil war (1975-1990) and by various military campaigns
on its soil. The Syrian Arab Republic had maintained a military presence in
Lebanon since May 1976 with the consent of the Lebanese Government. It also
exerted political influence in Lebanese affairs, an influence that has significantly
increased since 1990 and was sanctioned in 1991 by a treaty of “Brotherhood,
Cooperation and Coordination”.
7.
The Syrian presence in Lebanon remained generally unchallenged until Israel
withdrew its forces from South Lebanon in 2000. Political figures started to voice
their opposition to the continued Syrian influence and called for the implementation
of the remaining provisions of the Taif Agreement (of 1989), which, if implemented,
would have substantially reduced the Syrian presence in Lebanon to a possible
complete pull-out. Although Mr. Hariri carefully avoided this debate, his relations
with President Emil Lahoud, who is generally described as the favourite of the
Syrian Arab Republic, were strained. As a prominent security official close to the
Syrian Arab Republic put it to the Mission, the two men had had repeated conflicts
during Mr. Hariri’s term (2000-2004) to a point that required “external intervention
and mediation on a daily basis”. The conflict between Mr. Lahoud and Mr. Hariri
affected the latter’s ability to run the Government and to carry out his policies,
sometimes to the point of paralysis. Mr. Hariri’s difficulties with Mr. Lahoud were
widely interpreted as a sign of the Syrian Arab Republic’s mistrust of the former.
8.
Mr. Lahoud’s term in office should have ended in 2004, with no possibility of
renewal according to the Constitution. Mr. Hariri was clearly hoping that the end of
Mr. Lahoud’s term would enable him to regain control over his Government.
However, during 2004, certain voices in Lebanon suggested amending the
Constitution in order to extend the term of Mr. Lahoud. This possibility became part
of the debate over the Syrian presence in Lebanon and fuelled it further. Given the
distribution of seats in the Parliament, a constitutional amendment required the
support of Mr. Hariri’s bloc, a support he was unprepared to lend. Moreover, the
Mission was informed by reliable sources that Mr. Hariri had managed to obtain a
commitment from the Syrian leadership not to extend Mr. Lahoud’s term.
9.
However, the Syrian leadership later decided to support an extension of the
presidential term, albeit for three instead of six years. The pressure for the extension
was considerable and divisive and had far-reaching consequences. As a Lebanese
official close to the Syrian leadership told the Mission, the Syrian decision had sent
a clear message to Mr. Hariri that he had to go: “There was no way the two of them
could work together.” Mr. Hariri met with President Bashar Assad in Damascus in a
last attempt to convince him not to support the extension. The Mission has received
accounts of this meeting from various sources inside and outside Lebanon, all of
which claim to have heard the account of the meeting from Mr. Hariri himself
shortly after the meeting took place. The Mission has no account of the meeting
from Mr. Assad’s side: the Syrian authorities declined the Mission’s request to meet
with him. The received testimonies corroborated each other almost verbatim.

5

S/2005/203

10. According to these testimonies, Mr. Hariri reminded Mr. Assad of his pledge
not to seek an extension for Mr. Lahoud’s term, and Mr. Assad replied that there had
been a policy shift and that the decision was already taken. He added that
Mr. Lahoud should be viewed as his personal representative in Lebanon and that
“opposing him is tantamount to opposing Assad himself”. He then added that he
(Mr. Assad) “would rather break Lebanon over the heads of (Mr.) Hariri and (Druze
leader Walid) Jumblatt than see his word in Lebanon broken”. According to the
testimonies, Mr. Assad then threatened both Mr. Hariri and Mr. Jumblatt with
physical harm if they opposed the extension for Mr. Lahoud. The meeting reportedly
lasted for 10 minutes, and was the last time Mr. Hariri met with Mr. Assad. After
that meeting, Mr. Hariri told his supporters that they had no other option but to
support the extension for Mr. Lahoud. The Mission has also received accounts of
further threats made to Mr. Hariri by security officials in case he abstained from
voting in favour of the extension or “even thought of leaving the country”.
11. On 2 September 2004, the Security Council had adopted its resolution 1559
(2004), which, among other provisions, called upon “all remaining foreign forces to
withdraw from Lebanon” and declared “its support for a free and fair electoral
process in Lebanon’s upcoming presidential elections conducted according to
Lebanese constitutional rules devised without foreign interference or influence”. It
is widely believed, inside and outside Lebanon, that Mr. Hariri lent active support to
this resolution. Numerous sources in Lebanon informed the Mission that the Syrian
leadership had held Mr. Hariri personally responsible for the adoption of the
resolution, and that this resolution marked the end of whatever trust existed between
the two sides. On 3 September, the vote on the extension was brought to the
Parliament. Mr. Hariri and his parliamentarian bloc voted in its favour. Three
ministers voted against it, among them Marwan Hemadeh, a close associate of both
Mr. Hariri and Mr. Jumblatt. The amendment was passed, and Mr. Lahoud’s term
was extended for three years. On 9 September, Mr. Hariri announced his resignation.
12. Political tension reached a new height with that resignation. Additional
numbers of political figures joined what later became labelled the “opposition”,
which mainly called for a review of Syrian-Lebanese relations. Some of the
opposition leaders preferred to review these relations in line with Security Council
resolution 1559 (2004), while others preferred to review them under the banner of
the Taif Agreement. The upcoming legislative elections were widely seen as a
turning point and it became apparent to all that the parties were preparing for a final
showdown. Until the extension for Mr. Lahoud, the opposition was mainly
composed of Christian politicians and groups. The decision by Mr. Jumblatt’s bloc
to join forces with them was a major development insofar as it expanded the
opposition coalition beyond the sectarian dividing lines, especially in light of
Mr. Jumblatt’s traditional alliance with the Syrian Arab Republic. Mr. Hariri’s
resignation added more strength to the opposition by bringing in the large and
influential Sunni community.
13. On 2 October, former Minister Marwan Hemadeh narrowly escaped death
when a bomb exploded next to his car. His guard was killed in the explosion. The
attempt on Mr. Hemadeh’s life sent shock waves throughout Lebanon and added to
the ongoing polarization. The perpetrators of the assassination attempt were not
identified, and a general feeling prevailed that they would not be. A loaded
atmosphere dominated the Lebanese scene in which “everyone was under threat”, as
many security officials told the Mission. A wide range of people, inside and outside

6

S/2005/203

Lebanon, told the Mission that Mr. Hariri and Mr. Jumblatt had feared for their lives
and saw the attempt on Mr. Hemadeh’s life as a part of the ongoing power struggle
with the Syrian leadership.
14. Amid the heightened tension, the consolidation of the opposition coalition
continued, as well as the preparations for the upcoming legislative elections.
Contacts and negotiations took place between Mr. Jumblatt and Mr. Hariri and with
the exiled Maronite leader Mr. Michel Aoun. By the end of January 2005, there was
a formidable power bloc emerging in Lebanon, bringing together, for the first time,
representatives of almost all political and religious communities, with the noted
exception of the Shi`ite groups Amal and Hizbollah. This power bloc was
independent from, if not hostile to, the Syrian influence and seemed confident of
winning a clear majority in the upcoming elections. It also enjoyed the support of
key players in the international community and seemed confident of its ability to
force the Syrian Arab Republic to implement its outstanding commitment under the
Taif Agreement and/or Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). At the centre of
this power bloc one man stood as its perceived architect: the former Prime Minister,
Rafik Hariri. On 14 February, he was assassinated.
15. Clearly, Mr. Hariri’s assassination took place against the backdrop of his
power struggle with the Syrian Arab Republic, regardless of who carried out the
assassination and with what aim. It is nonetheless important to keep in mind that
only a proper investigation — not political analysis — could lead to the
identification of those who had ordered, planned and carried out this heinous crime.
It would be a violation of the basic principles of justice to jump to conclusions
about the perpetrators of the assassination without proper investigation, convincing
evidence and a proper trial.
The security background
16. Mr. Hariri was unanimously described to the Mission as the “most important
figure in Lebanese public life”. His assassination, therefore, begs the question of the
level of protection provided to him by the Lebanese security apparatus. The
Lebanese security system is composed of multiple agencies. The Military
Intelligence occupies a primary position in this set-up: it covers areas of national
security, counter-espionage, counter-terrorism and a strike force. It also includes a
department for communications interception. “General Security” covers areas
related to foreigners, passports and borders, in addition to politically based security
issues. An “Internal Security Force” includes both a police force and an
information-gathering department. “State Security” is nominally responsible for
politically based security issues. The Republican Guard is mandated with protecting
the President, under the overall authority of the commander of the Army. The Syrian
Military Intelligence maintains a branch in Lebanon, with offices in various places
including Beirut. Contrary to the affirmations made to the Mission by its chief,
evidence and concurrent testimonies lead us to believe beyond reasonable doubt that
this branch played a key role in Lebanese political life and had an active
involvement in, if not direct supervision of, the management of security affairs in
Lebanon.
17. According to rules and regulations in place, these different agencies coordinate
with each other and are all members of a Central Security Council which meets once
a month under the Chairpersonship of the Minister of the Interior. However,

7

S/2005/203

numerous sources, including security officials, ministers and former Presidents, told
the Mission that the practice follows a different pattern. First, coordination among
agencies is almost non-existent: the said Council is more a formality than a
coordinating mechanism. Second, reporting lines follow personal and political
loyalties rather than constitutional arrangements. Heads of security agencies report
the substantive information to “those who appointed them, to whom they have
loyalty”, assigning only formalities and trivial issues to the Central Security
Council. In addition, there is a severe lack of oversight and/or judicial review of the
work of security agencies. For instance, the “communication interception”
department in Military Intelligence has “standing authorization” to intercept
whatever communication is deemed relevant by the department, with the sole
endorsement of the head of the agency, without any kind of external oversight or
review. Similarly, it is apparent that there is very little, if any, accountability other
than that based on informal and extra-constitutional loyalties.
18. This set-up partly explains the lack of trust the Lebanese people seem to have
in their security agencies. Almost without exception, all those who spoke to the
Mission, including some security officials, expressed doubts about the capacity
and/or the will of the security agencies to provide security to political figures under
threat. While some accused the security apparatus of outright involvement in
threatening politicians, others said that the dominant culture was one in which
politicians were expected to protect themselves by their own means or where, at
best, the security agencies did not have enough clout to protect the threatened. Many
pointed to the fact that Lebanon had witnessed a great number of political
assassinations over the previous 30 years and that most of them remained unsolved
to date.
19. After discussions with many security officials, including the heads of Military
Intelligence, the “Special Forces and Counter-terrorism” department of Military
Intelligence, the communication interception department in Military Intelligence,
General Security, the Internal Security Forces, and the Republican Guard, the
Mission came to the conclusion that there had been a serious failure on the part of
the Lebanese security apparatus to predict and prevent the assassination of
Mr. Hariri. Despite widespread rumours of threats of physical harm against
Mr. Hariri and/or Mr. Jumblatt, including the possibility of attempts on their lives
and/or the life of members of their families, and despite the attempt on the life of
former Minister Marwan Hemadeh, none of the security services had taken
additional measure to protect any of them.
20. All of the security services denied having received information of a threat or a
possible threat to Mr. Hariri, Mr. Jumblatt or any members of their families.
However, everyone else outside the security services who talked to the Mission
seemed aware of those threats. In addition, despite the acknowledged heightened
tension, none of the security agencies had prepared an “assessment profile”
regarding the security of Mr. Hariri, “the most important political figure in
Lebanon”. None of the security agencies had suggested or advised that the level of
protection provided to Mr. Hariri be raised nor did they attempt this. Quite the
contrary: the close protection team provided to Mr. Hariri by the Internal Security
Forces was reduced from approximately 40 to 8 persons shortly after he had left
office. Although this reduction was in line with the regulations, it still constituted
stark negligence in respect of the special circumstances at hand. At the moment of

8

S/2005/203

his assassination, Mr. Hariri’s protection was ensured almost entirely by his private
security team.
21. When the Mission discussed this aspect with Lebanese security officials, many
of them argued that “prevention” was an alien concept to the security management
in Lebanon. This argument is inadmissible: prevention is an integral and important
part of any functioning security system. In addition, the argument is also untrue: the
Republican Guard informed us that they maintained periodic “assessment profiles”
regarding the security of the President, including evaluating the level of threat and
risk he was subject to based on their reading of the political situation, rumours and
the overall security situation. A functioning, credible and professional security
apparatus should have prepared, maintained and updated a similar assessment
profile in regard to the security of “the most important political figure in Lebanon”.
22. Based on the above, it is the view of the Mission that the Lebanese security
apparatus failed to provide proper protection for Mr. Hariri and therefore provided a
convenient context for his assassination.

B.

Circumstances
23. In gathering the facts related to the circumstances, the Mission identified the
last movements of Mr. Hariri immediately before the assassination took place,
determined the origin of the explosion and the type and weight of explosive used,
and reviewed the main avenues of the investigation undertaken by the Lebanese
authorities based on accepted international standards. The review of the
investigation included the critical areas of: the management of the crime scene; the
preservation of evidence; the investigation of the claim of responsibility for the
attack broadcast on the television network Al-Jazeera; the investigation of the
suspect bomber; the investigation of the suspect vehicle; and general remarks on the
investigation’s integrity.
The last movements of Mr. Hariri
24. On Monday, 14 February 2005, at approximately 1230 hours, Mr. Hariri left
the Parliament building in central Beirut and walked approximately 70 metres to a
cafe (Place de l’Étoile) in Nejmeh Square, where he met with a number of people.
At approximately 1250 hours he left the cafe accompanied by former Minister and
member of Parliament Bassil Fuleihan. His security convoy consisted of six
vehicles; first, a jeep with four local policemen (the lead vehicle); second, a black
Mercedes with three private security guards; third, a black armour-plated Mercedes
driven by Mr. Hariri accompanied by Mr. Fuleihan; fourth, a black Mercedes with
three private security guards; fifth, a black Mercedes with three private security
guards; and sixth, a black Jeep (an ambulance) bringing up the rear with three
private security guards. Three of the Mercedes were equipped with high-powered
signal jamming devices (four gigahertz), which were operating at the time of the
final journey. All of the vehicles were equipped with firearms and all of the security
detail were trained.
25. The chosen route was communicated to the lead car only as Mr. Hariri was
leaving the cafe. The convoy left Nejmeh Square and drove along Ahdab Street and
on to Fosh Street. At the junction of Fosh Street and Seaport Street, the convoy
turned left and took the coast road towards Ain M’reisa and the Hotel St Georges.

9

S/2005/203

26. At exactly 1256:26 hours, Mr. Hariri’s convoy was passing directly outside the
Hotel St Georges, along a route that it had taken only six times in the preceding
three months. A large explosion occurred and resulted in the death of Mr. Hariri, 7
of his security detail and 12 other civilians in the immediate vicinity. Mr. Hariri was
brought to the American University Hospital where his body was identified by his
personal physician and by the legal physician appointed by the Government.
Identification was made possible by body marks, X-ray and dental records. The
cause of death had been immediate brain injury resulting in cardiac arrest.
The explosion
27. The Mission examined, analysed and carried out tests at the scene of the
explosion over a seven-day period. Its view on the nature and type of the explosion
is based on its experts’ interpretation of four main elements: (a) the dispersion, size
and shape of fragments resulting from the explosion; (b) the size and shape of the
crater created by the explosion; (c) ballistics interpretations; and (d) interpretations
of the damage to the buildings in and around the area of the explosion.
28. The analysis of the fragments caused by the explosion and of the shape and
form of the crater gives indicators equally supportive of hypotheses of a surface and
a subterranean explosion. However, the analysis of the damage caused to the
buildings in and around the crime scene suggests a surface explosion. The evidence
of heat wash on several metal fragments is a clear indicator of a high-explosive
charge; the fact that the Mission’s experts found evidence of heat wash on fragments
of vehicles and on fragments of metal shield holders placed in front of the Hotel St
Georges supports the hypothesis of a surface explosion. Metal fragments found
sticking in the sides of cars indicate the explosion of a heavy vehicle and the
dispersion of such fragments in this direction.
29. Many of the indicators pointing to a subterranean explosion, such as the
fragments of, inter alia, the road asphalt and manholes, found in upper floors of the
Hotel St Georges, the impact on the vehicle roofs, and the damage to upper floors in
the adjacent buildings, are not inconsistent with a surface large explosion.
30. After having conducted all the analyses and the discussions of the samples
collected, the Mission’s experts came to the conclusion that it had most likely been
an explosion above ground, and that the explosive used was trinitrotoluene (TNT)
having an approximate weight of 1,000 kilograms.
The crime scene
31. The crime scene was located at Ain M’reisa, City of Beirut, outside the Hotel
St Georges. The immediate aftermath of the explosion was a scene of chaos, with
multi-agency emergency services, media personnel and hundreds of passers-by and
residents of Beirut arriving at the scene to help and observe. Removal of the
deceased and injured began almost immediately. Much of the initial service was
provided informally by persons who had arrived at the scene prior to the arrival of
the emergency services.
32. In the immediate aftermath of the explosion, on 14 February, the investigation
of the crime fell within the jurisdiction of the Military Court. Judge Rasheed Mezhar
of that Court undertook overall responsibility for the management and investigation
of the crime, including crime scene management and preservation and collection of

10

S/2005/203

evidence by the competent local authorities. As an act involving the security of the
State, the case was referred to the Judicial Council in implementation of the relevant
national legislation and on 21 February Judge Michel Abu Araj, Chief Judge of the
Criminal Court, was appointed as the investigating Judge, replacing Judge Mezhar.
33. Failure to carry out the most fundamental tasks associated with this
responsibility became evident from the very outset when the following was
revealed:
(a) The body of a person recovered on 15 February 2005 was deemed to
have survived for approximately 12 hours after the blast;
(b)

A body was located by accident and recovered on 22 February 2005;

(c)

A body was located by family members and recovered on 1 March 2005;

(d) One person has been reported missing and 15 believed to be still at the
scene of the explosion.
Preservation of evidence
34. Preservation of evidence, while vital to the success of any investigation, is
secondary to the preservation of life and to the recovery of bodies. In this case as in
any major emergency, the preservation of the scene was not the primary focus of
those emergency service personnel who arrived to render assistance. However, after
the initial chaos and the removal of the dead and injured, the security services under
the direction and control of the investigating Judge, Mr. Mezhar, should have
cleared the area of people and prevented any other unauthorized access to the site.
After a detailed search of the area had been completed to ensure that all the dead
and injured had been recovered, the site should have been sufficiently secured to
preserve all available evidence. The authorities in charge failed to do this.
35.

The Mission also identified the following shortcomings:

(a) On 14 February 2005, shortly before midnight, the six vehicles forming
Mr. Hariri’s convoy and one BMW (not connected with the convoy) were removed
from the scene of the explosion and taken to the Helou Police Barracks in the city of
Beirut. Although the vehicles were covered after they had been removed, they were
now absent from their respective resting places at the site of the explosion, thereby
preventing any ballistic analysis, explosive analysis and evidence-gathering at the
scene;
(b) Lebanese military, police and intelligence personnel, including
explosives experts, interfered with and removed items of possible evidential value
without properly documenting, reporting or collating their activities;
(c) Apart from the initial media access to the site in the immediate aftermath
of the explosion, the media were given official access to the site on 15 February by
Judge Mezhar after the scene had been secured by the security services;
(d) The seat of the explosion (the resulting crater) was flooded with water in
the days following the explosion after the local authorities/Police had failed to
prevent water from being turned on and released into the crater through the
fractured pipes at the scene, thereby damaging or even eliminating vital evidence;

11

S/2005/203

(e) Parts of a pickup truck were brought to the scene by members of the
security services, some time after the incident, and were placed in the crater and
subsequently photographed and labelled as evidence;
(f) Up until 6 March 2005, the Mission observed that there were large
numbers of uniformed personnel and persons in civilian attire wandering around the
scene, and that there was no record of persons entering or leaving the scene and no
control over removal or placing of items/samples at the scene;
(g) At a meeting with the local investigation’s senior management team on
8 March 2005, members of the Mission had requested a chronological report on
items relating to the crime scene, namely, access by personnel, evidence gathered,
exhibits taken, tests carried out and general crime scene management. On 15 March
2005, the Mission was informed that such a report did not exist and could not be
provided;
(h) There is strong evidence to suggest that the investigating judges were not
in control of the investigation;
(i) Intelligence/government agencies intruded on the site seemingly without
judicial authority and subsequently failed to coordinate findings.
36. It is therefore the Mission’s view that the crime scene was not properly
managed or preserved and that, as a result, important evidence was either removed
or destroyed without record. Those responsible for the mismanagement should be
held accountable.
Broadcast on the Al-Jazeera television network
37. At approximately 1330 hours on 14 February 2005, the director and senior
presenter at Al-Jazeera TV, Beirut, received a telephone call from a man whom he
described as having spoken, poor Arabic or as having just pretended to speak poor
Arabic. The caller stated that “the Nasra and Jihad Group in Greater Syria claims
responsibility for the execution of the agent Rafik Hariri, in the name of the
oppressed, the Nasra and the Jihad”. Al-Jazeera broadcast this statement at
approximately 1400 hours. At 1419:25 hours, another male person called Al-Jazeera
TV and speaking in “very good Arabic” said that a tape could be found in a tree near
the United Nations headquarters building in Beirut. A member of the Al-Jazeera
staff was instructed to go to the location but the staff member failed to retrieve the
videotape. A second Al-Jazeera staff member was sent to retrieve the videotape,
resulting in the videotape being retrieved and subsequently handed to the director.
At 1527:37 hours, a third call was made to Al-Jazeera TV at which time another
male voice asked why the tape had not been broadcast. The director informed the
caller that the tape could not be broadcast until a decision had been made at AlJazeera headquarters in Qatar. The caller, who was by this time shouting loudly
threatened the director stating that he would regret not showing the tape. At 1704:35
hours, a final call was made to Al-Jazeera TV at which time the same male voice,
very angry, asked the director whether the tape would be broadcast or not. The
director put the caller on hold; and it subsequently being determined that the
decision had been made to broadcast the tape, the caller was then told that he should
watch the television. The tape recording, which was broadcast by the Al-Jazeera
network, showed a young bearded man claiming responsibility for the killing of
Mr. Hariri on behalf of the Nasra and Jihad Group in Greater Syria. The person who

12

S/2005/203

appeared on the recording has been identified as Ahmad Abu Adas, a resident of
Beirut, age 22.
38. On the same date, 14 February 2005, at 1411:25 hours, a consultant with
Reuters news agency received a call from a male caller whom she described as not
having a Lebanese accent but “using a false Palestinian accent”. She stated that the
caller, who had been shouting in an authoritative voice, told her to “write down,
write down and don’t talk” and that “we are the Nasra and Jihad Group in Greater
Syria, on this day have we given due punishment to the infidel Rafik Hariri so that
he may be an example to others of his sort”. On the instruction of an employee
(Reuters), the contents of this call were not released because the call could not be
authenticated.
39. Of the five calls made to Al-Jazeera and Reuters, the location/origin has been
established for four. All locations identified by the police were public telephones in
the city of Beirut. The placing of the videotape by a person or persons associated
with the killing of Mr. Hariri provided the security forces with an important avenue
of investigation. However, the investigation authorities did little to investigate this
aspect. Closed circuit television (CCTV) in two critical locations established by
members of the Mission was never investigated, witnesses working in the area
identified by the Mission were not interviewed, and the most basic investigations
were not carried out. Those responsible for this element of the investigation
displayed gross negligence.
The suspect
40. Mr. Abu Adas, a male of Palestinian origin, was born in Jeddah (Saudi Arabia)
on 29 August 1982 and came to Lebanon with his family in 1991. He is the son of
Taysir Abu Adas and Nehad Moussa Nafeh. He has two sisters, both living in
Beirut, and one brother, who is currently residing in Germany. He was unemployed.
Investigations show that at approximately 0700 hours, on 16 January 2005, Mr. Abu
Adas left his home at Iskandarani Building 6, first floor, Arab University District, in
the city of Beirut, and was officially reported missing on 19 January 2005.
41. Enquiries carried out by the Mission established that approximately three years
before, Mr. Abu Adas had changed from being a carefree teenager and became a
religious fundamentalist. Approximately one month prior to being reported missing,
Mr. Abu Adas had informed his family that he had met a new friend at the Al-Huri
mosque, where he sometimes led the prayers. Information from the mother of
Mr. Abu Adas suggested that at approximately 2100 hours on 15 January 2005, the
“new friend” made a telephone call to the Abu Adas home and told Mr. Abu Adas
that he would be calling for him at 0700 hours on 16 January saying that he had a
surprise for Mr. Abu Adas. The mother claimed that at approximately 0700 hours on
16 January someone called for Mr. Abu Adas, alerting him by blowing on a car horn
outside the apartment; she further stated that Mr. Abu Adas, who had already been
up for prayer, called to ask her for some money and that he took only 2,000
Lebanese liras (approximately one dollar and 33 cents) and said that he would be
only a few hours. She also stated that Mr. Abu Adas had asked her to apologize to
another friend that he had made an appointment with on that date.
42. On 14 February 2005 the Abu Adas family were watching TV when Al-Jazeera
broadcast the videotape showing Mr. Abu Adas claiming responsibility for the
killing of Mr. Hariri on behalf of the group Nasra and Jihad in Greater Syria. At

13

S/2005/203

approximately 2030 hours, on 14 February, the father, mother and younger sister
surrendered themselves to the police, at which time all three were arrested. The
parents were detained for approximately seven days but the sister was released after
the second day. The investigation of Mr. Abu Adas included the arrest and
interviewing of the family, interviewing of friends, examination of telephone
records, and a search of the home of his parents where he had also lived.
Information from the investigation showed that Mr. Abu Adas had a computer at his
home, which was seized as part of the investigation. The seized items included 11
videotapes, 55 CDs, 1 floppy disk and a computer hard drive. Other than subversive
information/data allegedly found on the hard drive, there was very little indication
that Mr. Abu Adas had subversive or violent tendencies.
43.

The investigation into this aspect of the crime showed the following flaws:

(a) The officers leading the investigation assured the Mission that Mr. Abu
Adas had Internet access from his home and that the information contained on the
hard drive of the computer had been downloaded directly onto the computer at his
home. Enquiries carried out by the Mission have established that Mr. Abu Adas did
not have Internet access from his home and could not have accessed the suggested
sites from his personal computer. Enquiries carried out by the Mission indicate that
the investigating security forces did not canvass or carry out enquiries at local
cybercafes with a view to determining the origin of the alleged data located on the
computer of Mr. Abu Adas;
(b) There is little evidence to support the theory that Mr. Abu Adas had
militant/extremist tendencies;
(c) There is no evidence that Mr. Abu Adas had planned his departure or that
he would not be returning, at the time that he left home on 16 January 2005;
(d) There is no intelligence available on the existence of the group Nasra and
Jihad in Greater Syria before or after the explosion;
(e) This assassination would have required access to considerable finance,
military precision in its execution and substantial logistic support and would have
been beyond the capacity of any single individual or small terrorist group. There is
no evidence suggesting that Mr. Abu Adas could have had the capacity to plan and
execute this assassination on his own, nor did he have the financial capability.
The suspect vehicle
44. A branch of HSBC bank is located close to the scene of the explosion. The
bank operates its own CCTV security system which recorded the movements of the
Hariri convoy immediately prior to the explosion but did not record the events at the
scene of the explosion itself. Copies of the recordings of this CCTV system were
taken by a number of Lebanese security agencies some time after the investigation
had been initiated. On close scrutiny, the recorded footage showed a white pickup
truck entering the area of the explosion shortly before Mr. Hariri’s convoy. The
recording clearly showed that this white pickup truck had been moving
approximately six times slower than all other vehicles traversing the same stretch of
roadway. A time-series analysis showed that, for the 50-60 metres of road covered
by the camera, a normal car would take from three to four seconds to cover the
distance, while a large truck would take from five to six seconds to travel the
distance. The suspect white pickup truck took approximately 22 seconds to travel

14

S/2005/203

the distance and entered the area of the explosion 1 minute and 49 seconds before
the Hariri convoy. It is estimated that if the pickup truck had continued at the same
speed it would have been exactly at the centre of the explosion approximately 1
minute and 9 seconds before the Hariri convoy. It is estimated that if the pickup
truck had continued its journey at the same speed without stopping, it would still
have been affected by the force of the blast and would most probably have remained
at the scene after the explosion. In order to have avoided the explosion, this pickup
truck would have had to speed up considerably, immediately after going out of view
of the HSBC CCTV camera. There is no evidence to support this.
45. The Lebanese investigating officers have identified the existence of this
pickup truck and its suspicious behaviour as an issue that gives rise to a
major/critical avenue of investigation. They have identified the make and model of
the suspect vehicle as a Mitsubishi Canter pickup truck (possibly a 1995-1996
model). The investigations carried out by the Lebanese security forces have focused
predominantly on determining the actual ownership of the truck by attempting to
trace its ownership history through vehicle licensing records, border controls and
manufacturing or dealership records. During searches for evidence at the site of the
explosion, the security forces allegedly discovered parts of a pickup truck that
matched the suspect vehicle and that bore evidence of having been involved in an
explosion. The police allegedly discovered in excess of 21 parts of this suspect
vehicle in and around the area of the explosion. The main thrust of the security force
investigation is focused on this one avenue of investigation. The Mission has
determined that this truck, as viewed on the CCTV of the HSBC bank, actually
existed and had been at the scene as stated, immediately before the explosion that
claimed the life of Mr. Hariri. The Mission also accepts the theory of this truck
having been involved in the assassination as a credible one, requiring full and
extensive investigation. The Lebanese security forces have recovered small parts of
a Mitsubishi truck from the crater, and from the surrounding area of the explosion.
They have recovered parts of a Mitsubishi truck from the sea adjacent to the
explosion. The Mission recovered a piece of metal from the crater resembling metal
used in truck parts and bearing evidence that supports the theory of a
surface/overground explosion.
46. However, the investigation into this aspect of the case has not been fullfledged or extensive and, in the opinion of the Mission, has been critically and
fundamentally damaged owing to the actions and inactions of the security forces on
the ground, as follows:
(a) Up to approximately one month after the assassination, little or no
attempt had been made by the security forces to determine the movements of this
suspect truck immediately prior to, or immediately after, the explosion. This aspect
of the investigation could have uncovered vital evidence including: the possible
identity of the perpetrator or perpetrators, where the truck was parked immediately
before the explosion, and — of critical importance — whether the truck continued
on its journey and had no involvement in the assassination at all;
(b) The Mission determined that little or no effort had been made to
determine whether the suspect pickup truck continued its journey and that there was
little or no effort made to locate CCTV footage or witnesses on the route after the
explosion;

15

S/2005/203

(c) The Mission can say with certainty that parts of a truck were brought to
the scene of the explosion by a member of the security forces some time after the
assassination and were placed in the crater and subsequently photographed in the
crater by members of the security forces, thus creating serious suspicion and doubt
about the actual involvement of this truck in the assassination and seriously
damaging the credibility of the main line of investigation. This line of enquiry is
now fundamentally damaged, entailing credibility issues and scope for legal
challenge.
47. In sum, the manner in which this element of the investigation was carried out
displays, at least, gross negligence, possibly accompanied by criminal actions for
which those responsible should be made accountable.
General assessment of investigation
48. Apart from the deficiencies already indicated above, the Mission has noted the
following flaws in the Lebanese investigation process:
(a) There was a serious disconnect between the senior members of the local
security force investigation team;
(b) There was a lack of coordination between the security force investigation
team and the investigating Judges;
(c) There was a lack of focus and control by the senior management
responsible for the overall investigation of the crime;
(d) There was a lack of professionalism in the overall crime investigation
techniques employed;
(e) There was a total absence of intelligence information and little or no
exchange of information among the various agencies engaged in the investigation;
(f) There was an absence of both technical capability and equipment
necessary for such an investigation.
49. Based on all of the above, it is the Mission’s conclusion that there was a
distinct lack of commitment to investigating the crime effectively, and that the
investigation was not carried out in accordance with acceptable international
standards. The Mission is also of the view that the local investigation has neither the
capacity nor the commitment to succeed. It also lacks the confidence of the
population necessary for its results to be accepted.

C.

Consequences
50. The assassination of Mr. Hariri had an earthquake-like impact on Lebanon.
Shock, disbelief, and anxiety were the most common reactions among the people
with whom we spoke — shock at the thought that what many considered to have
been practices of the past seemed to be coming back; disbelief at the murder of a
man whom people regarded as a “larger than life” figure; and anxiety that Lebanon
might be sliding back towards chaos and civil strife as a result of that “earthquake”.
These feelings quickly fused into a strong and unified outcry for “the truth”. All
those who talked to the Mission indicated that uncovering the truth about the
assassination of Mr. Hariri had become their utmost priority and that peace and

16

S/2005/203

tranquillity in Lebanon could not be restored without bringing this crime to an
acceptable closure. Many reminded the Mission of previous political assassinations:
either they had not been investigated properly or the investigations had not led to
convincing results. All of our interlocutors emphasized that this assassination was
one too many, that what they described as “the culture of intimidation and brutal use
of force” had to come to an end, and that the Lebanese people and their political
leaders deserved to live free from fear, intimidation and the risk of physical harm.
51. The families of the victims were understandably still in shock when the
Mission met with them. Mr. Hariri’s family still could not believe that a man who
had devoted his life to the service of his country could be simply eliminated while
the truth about his murder hung on an investigation whose credibility was very
much in doubt. The families of the other victims — the guards, the workers at the
scene, the passers-by, and all those who lost their lives accidentally — were unable
to comprehend yet what had happened or why. For all these people the talk about
the capabilities of the security services, and the coordination among them, or the
political speculations of the populace only increased their pain. All they yearned for
now was the truth, for a way to bring this to closure and to allow them to mourn
their loved ones.
52. The families of the victims as well as political leaders from different political
and communal backgrounds, including officials and members of the Government,
have all indicated that the formation of an international and independent
investigation commission is the only way to uncover the truth about the
assassination of Mr. Hariri. Some of our interlocutors accused the Lebanese and
Syrian security services of involvement in the assassination — of wilfully derailing
the Lebanese investigation in order to cover up for the crime. Others, from the
Government side, indicated that an international investigation would be needed
specifically to prove the innocence of the Lebanese security services; but such a
result could not be achieved without external help, given the diminished credibility
of the Lebanese security services and investigators.
53. During our stay in Lebanon, ordinary people stopped us in the streets of Beirut
and thanked us for our efforts to find the truth, urged us not to leave this matter
unresolved, and reminded us of the importance of bringing the culprits to justice
“for the sake of Lebanon”. Posters in the streets of Beirut carry one word, in two
languages: the truth, al-haqiqa. Politicians, officials in the Government at all levels,
and even some security officials told us that finding the truth “this time” was crucial
for restoring civil peace in the country, reducing the tension and allowing Lebanon
to move towards normalcy.
54. In addition, the assassination of Mr. Hariri seems to have unlocked the gates of
political upheavals that were simmering throughout the last year. Accusations and
counter-accusations are rife and fuel a strongly polarized political debate. Some
accuse the Syrian security services and leadership of assassinating Mr. Hariri
because he became an insurmountable obstacle to their influence in Lebanon. They
argue that his removal became necessary in order for the Syrian Arab Republic to
retain control over the Lebanese political polity, especially if the Syrian Arab
Republic was forced to withdraw its forces. The adherents of this theory affirm that
the Syrian leadership would not mind being the “obvious suspect” and that it has
used similar tactics in the past with little or no concern about leaving traces.
According to these sources, this attitude is part of the Syrian Arab Republic’s

17

S/2005/203

pattern of coercive management of Lebanese affairs. Others claim that the Syrian
leadership did not anticipate such strong reactions from the Lebanese people and the
international community. In their view, the decision to eliminate Mr. Hariri was “a
strategic miscalculation”, not dissimilar to other miscalculations made by the Syrian
Government.
55. Syrian supporters counter by claiming that Mr. Hariri was assassinated by “the
enemies of Syria”; those who wanted to exert international pressure on the Syrian
leadership in order to accelerate the demise of Syrian influence in Lebanon and/or
start a chain of reactions that would eventually force a “regime change” inside the
Syrian Arab Republic itself. According to the adherents of this theory, the
assassination of Mr. Hariri would have been too gross a mistake for the Syrian
leadership to make. The Syrian Arab Republic would have been not only the
obvious suspect, but also the obvious loser. Those who maintain this theory
reminded the Mission that political assassinations are carried out not in revenge, but
in order to lead to certain consequences. The consequences of Mr. Hariri’s
assassination are, in their view, obviously unfavourable to the Syrian Arab Republic.
56. The assassination quickly widened the gap between the Lebanese political
factions and further polarized the political scene to a threatening level. Immediately
after the assassination, the political spectrum was divided between “opposition” and
“loyalty” camps, crystallizing around the position towards the current Lebanese
Government/President and the existing Syrian/Lebanese relationship. Two weeks
after the assassination, large numbers of Lebanese took to the streets to express a
combination of grief, anger, anxiety and political opposition to the Syrian
involvement in Lebanese affairs. The protesters and the opposition leaders accused
the Lebanese and Syrian security services of involvement in the assassination and
called for the Government to resign and for the Syrian troops and security assets to
leave Lebanon. Although Prime Minister Karami had a majority in the Parliament
and was confident of winning a confidence vote, he listened to the voice of the
street and announced his Government’s resignation while the demonstrators were
still gathered not far from the Parliament.
57. The protestors and opposition leaders continued their campaign, calling for the
dismissal of all the heads of security agencies, a Syrian withdrawal of its army and
security assets, the formation of a “neutral” government that would focus on
preparing the upcoming legislative elections, and the establishment of an
independent international investigation. The loyalty quickly responded by taking to
the streets on 8 March when at least half a million people demonstrated in support
of the Government and of the Syrian Arab Republic. Immediately afterwards, the
Syrian President declared his Government’s intention of withdrawing its forces to
the Beqa’a valley in implementation of the Taif Agreement of 1989, and as well as
of undertaking further withdrawals up to the Syrian border. However, this
announcement did not bring the debate over the Syrian presence to an end.
Opposition leaders continued to show scepticism regarding Syrian intentions and
required a timetable for the full pull-out, with some calling for its completion before
the legislative elections.
58. On 14 March, according to available estimates, more than 1 million people
gathered in the main square of Beirut and chanted for the “independence” of
Lebanon, the creation of an independent international investigation commission, the
removal of the heads of security agencies, and the formation of a neutral

18

S/2005/203

government to prepare for the upcoming elections. Fears of a constitutional void
were voiced to the Mission, as well as fears of the inability to vote in an electoral
law in time or to prepare adequately for the May legislative elections. Many
suggested that international supervision of the elections would be necessary to
ensure their fairness. They pointed out that a credible election would contribute to
stabilizing the political situation. There are also fears of civil strife, as the
opposition and loyalty divide is worryingly loaded with intercommunal significance.
These political upheavals carry threats to the peace and security of Lebanon, with
obvious implications for stability in the region as a whole.
59. Moreover, Lebanese politicians from different backgrounds and allegiances
expressed to the Mission their fears that Lebanon would become, once again, a
battleground for external forces. Many pointed to the long and tragic civil war as an
example of external powers struggling for power through Lebanese actors. They
underlined the fragility of the Lebanese polity and its limited ability to sustain
pressure. Many political figures emphasized their worry that Lebanon would be
caught in a possible showdown between the Syrian Arab Republic and the
international community, with possibly devastating consequences for Lebanese
peace and security. Lebanese political leaders across the board implored the Mission
to call upon the international community not to use Lebanon as a tool of pressure.
As one interlocutor told the Mission: “The tool is too fragile, and would easily
break.”

III. Concluding remarks and recommendations
60. It is the Mission’s view that the Lebanese security services and the Syrian
Military Intelligence bear the primary responsibility for the lack of security,
protection, and law and order in Lebanon. The Lebanese security services have
demonstrated serious and systematic negligence in carrying out the duties usually
performed by a professional national security apparatus. In doing so, they have
severely failed to provide the citizens of Lebanon with an acceptable level of
security and have therefore contributed to the propagation of a culture of
intimidation and impunity. The Syrian Military Intelligence shares this
responsibility to the extent of its involvement in running the security services in
Lebanon.
61. Second, it is also the Mission’s view that the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic bears primary responsibility for the political tension that preceded the
assassination of former Prime Minister, Mr. Hariri. The Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic clearly exerted influence that went beyond the reasonable exercise of
cooperative or neighbourly relations. It interfered with the details of governance in
Lebanon in a heavy-handed and inflexible manner that was the primary reason for
the political polarization that ensued. Without prejudice to the results of the
investigation, it is obvious that this atmosphere provided the backdrop for the
assassination of Mr. Hariri.
62. Third, it became clear to the Mission that the Lebanese investigation process
suffered from serious flaws. Whether caused by lack of capabilities or commitment,
this process is unlikely to reach a satisfactory conclusion. In addition, the credibility
of the Lebanese authorities handling the investigation has been questioned by a
great number of Lebanese, in the opposition as well as in government. It is therefore

19

S/2005/203

the Mission’s view that an international independent investigation would be
necessary to uncover the truth. To carry out such an investigation, there would be
need for a self-sufficient team, comprising the different fields of expertise that are
usually involved in carrying out similarly large investigations in national systems,
with the necessary support staff and resources, and knowledge of the legal and other
systems involved. Such a team would need an executive authority to carry out
interrogations, searches and other relevant tasks. The team could be assisted and
advised by Lebanese legal resources without prejudice to its independence. It is,
however, more than doubtful that such an investigation team could carry out its
tasks satisfactorily — and receive the necessary active cooperation from local
authorities — while the current leadership of the Lebanese security services remains
in office.
63. Fourth, it is the Mission’s conclusion that the restoration of the integrity and
credibility of the Lebanese security apparatus is of vital importance to the security
and stability of the country. A sustained effort to restructure, reform and retrain the
Lebanese security services will be necessary to achieve this end, and will certainly
require assistance and active engagement on the part of the international community.
Based on the Mission’s review of the current set-up of the Lebanese security
apparatus, six main areas have been identified as priorities for security reform:
(a) decoupling security from politics and establishing a professional service;
(b) nationalizing the security apparatus by disentangling it from external influence
and by raising it above sectarianism; (c) establishing a democratic police service,
with special attention to the rule of law and human rights; (d) establishing clear
lines of reporting; (e) capacity-building; and (f) introducing clear mechanisms for
accountability and judicial oversight.
64. Finally, it is also the Mission’s view that international and regional political
support will be necessary to safeguard Lebanon’s national unity and to shield its
fragile polity from unwarranted pressure. Improving the prospects for peace and
security in the region would offer a more solid ground for restoring normalcy in
Lebanon.
Peter FitzGerald
Head of the United Nations Fact-finding Mission in Lebanon
New York
24 March 2005

20
