2

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

mediate withdrawal of the South African administration from Namibia;
10. Further calls upon all States to provide the
necessary moral and material assistance to the N amibian people in their legitimate struggle for independence
and to assist the United Nations Council for Namibia
in the discharge of its mandate;
11. Considers that the continued foreign occupation
of Namibia hv South Africa in defiance of the relevant
1;nited Nati;ms resolutions and of the Territory's
established international status constitutes a grave
threat to international peace and security:
12. Reiterates its demand that the Government of
Sr)ttth Afric'l withdraw from Namibia, immediately
and unconditionally, all its military and police forces
and its administration;
13. Rermnmends the Security Council urgently to
take all appropriate steps to secure the implementation
of the present resolution and to take effective measures
in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations to ensure the immediate removal
of the South African presence from Namibia and to
secure for Namibia its independence in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) ;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide all possible assistance to enable the United
Nations Council for Namibia to perform its duties :
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly and to the Security Council on
the implementation of the present resolution.
1671st plenary meeting,
12 June 1968.

3. Decides that the United Nations Council for
South West Africa shall be called "United Nations
Council for Namibia" and that the United Nations
Commissioner for South West Africa shall he called
"United Nations Commissioner for Namibia";
4. Decides that, taking into account the provisions
of General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V). the
United Nations Council for Namibia shall perform, as
a matter of priority, the following functions:
(a) In consultation and co-operation with the specialized agencies and other appropriate organs of the
United Nations, which under section III, paragraph 2,
of resolution 2248 (S-V) were requested to render
technical and financial assistance to N amihia, the
Council shall assume responsibility for establishing a
co-ordinated emergency programme for rendering such
assistance, in order to meet the exigencies of the
present situation;
( b) The Council shall organize a training programme for Namibians, in consultation with those
Governments which indicate their interest and concern,
so that a cadre of civil servants and of technical and
professional personnel may be developed who would
be in a position to undertake the public administration
and the social, political and economic development of
the State;
( c) The Council shall continue with a sense of
urgency its consultations on the question of issuing to
Namibians travel documents enabling them to travel
abroad;
5. Reaffirm.s the inalienable right of the Namibian
people to freedom and independence and the legitimacy
of their struggle against foreign occupation :
6. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its persistent refusal to comply with the resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council, its
refusal to withdraw from Namibia and its obstruction
of the efforts of the United Nations Council for
Namibia to proceed to Namibia;
7. Condemns the action of the Government of South
Africa designed to consolidate its illegal control over
Namibia and to destroy the unity of the people anrl
the territorial integrity of Namibia ;
8. Condem,ns the actions of those States which hy
their continued political, military and economic collaboration with the Government of South Africa have
encouraged that Government to defy the authority of
the United Nations and to obstruct the attainment
of independence by N amihia ;
9. Calls upon all States to desist from those dealings
with the Government of South Africa which would
have the effect of perpetuating South Africa's illegal
occupation of Namibia and to take effective economic
and other measures with a view to securing the im-

*

2374 (XXII). Credentials of representatives to
the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly

The General Assembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee.4
1672nd plenary meeting,
12 June 1968.
2375 (XXII). Credentials of representatives to
the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly

The General Assembly
Appmves the third report of the Credentials Committee.5
1673rd plenary meeting,
23 Septembrr 1968.
4 Ibid.,
5 Ibid.,

Add.2.

*

*

addendu_m to agenda item 3, document A/6990/ Add.1.
addendum 2 to agenda item 3, document A/6990/
