II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

---------~

Unity in the relevant work of the United Nations bodies
concerned, including in particular the positive role
played by the Administrative Secretary-General and the
General Secretariat of the Organization of African
Unity;
3. Welcomes the efforts of the Organization of
African Unity to find African solutions to some of the
issues of vital importance to the international community;
4. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to find a solution to the
present grave situation in southern Africa;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation
at the political, economic, cultural and administrative
levels between the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, particularly with regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa, and, in
this connexion, draws attention to the Assistance Fund
for the Struggle against Colonialism and Apartheid
established by the Organization of African Unity;
6. Draws once again the attention of United Nations bodies, in particular the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council, the Special Committee
against Apartheid, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and the United Nations Council
for Namibia, to the continued need to take effective
measures to associate closely the Organization of African Unity regularly with all their work concerning
Africa;
7. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the United Nations system to
continue and intensify their co-operation with the Organization of African Unity;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution and
on the development of co-operation between the Organization of African Unity and the organizations concerned within the United Nations system.

67th plenary meeting
16 November 1976
31/16. Credentials of representatives to the
thirty-first session of the General Assembly
A

The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee. 35
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1976
35 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/31/308.

21

B
The General A.1sembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee.313
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/20.

Question of Palestine

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, 37
Deeply concerned that no just solution to the problem of Palestine has been achieved and that this problem therefore continues to aggravate the Middle East
conflict, of which it is the core, and to endanger international peace and security,
Reaffirming that a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East cannot be established without the achievement, inter alia, of a just solution of the problem of
Palestine on the basis of the attainment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right
of return and the right to national independence and
sovereignty in Palestine, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned
to it by the General Assembly;
2. Takes note of the report of the Committee and
endorses the recommendations contained therein, as a
basis for the solution of the question of Palestine;
3. Decides to circulate the report to all the competent bodies of the United Nations and urges them to
take necessary action, as appropriate, in accordance
with the Committee's programme of implementation;
4. Urges the Security Council to consider once
again as soon as possible the recommendations contained in the report, taking fully into account the observations made thereon during the debate in the General Assembly at its thirty-first session, in order to take
the necessary measures to implement the above-mentioned recommendations of the Committee so as to
achieve early progress towards a solution of the problem of Palestine and the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East;
5. A uthorizcs the Committee to exert all efforts to
promote the implementation of its recommendations
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session;
6. Requests the Committee to promote the greatest
possible dissemination of information on its programme
of implementation through non-governmental organizations and other appropriate means;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to give the widest
possible publicity to the Committee's work and to
86 Ibid., document A/31/308/ Add, 1.
37 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement

No. 35 (A/31135).
