S/2020/836

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 August 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 26 August 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of briefings provided by Mr.
Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism; and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director, Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, as well as the statements delivered by the
representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France,
Germany, Indonesia, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
South Africa, Tunisia, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection
with the video-teleconference on “Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts” convened on Monday, 24 August 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter from the President of
the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of
the Security Council dated 2 April 2020 (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Dian Triansyah Djani
President of the Security Council

20-11181 (E) 010920 300920

*2011181*

S/2020/836

Annex I
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, Vladimir Voronkov
Let me begin by expressing my profound condolences to Afghanistan, Chad,
France, Nigeria, Somalia, the United Kingdom and all Member States that recently
suffered terrorist attacks. My heartfelt thoughts and sympathy go to the survivors
and families of the victims.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council
on the eleventh report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/774) on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh) to international
peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat, as mandated by resolution 2368 (2017).
The report was prepared by the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team of the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, led by Mr. FittonBrown, and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), led
by Ms. Coninsx, in close collaboration with my Office and with contributions from
other United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities.
This report covers a period like no other, marked by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, affecting virtually all Member States. This pandemic
environment raises several strategic and practical challenges for counter-terrorism,
which we discussed during the Virtual Counter-Terrorism Week organized by my
Office last month.
Our discussions during the Virtual Counter-Terrorism Week showed that
States need to stay attuned to how the ISIL threat evolves during and after the
pandemic. They also emphasized the need to sustain the focus and resources required
to address the persistent threat posed by ISIL and the continuing challenges posed by
foreign terrorist fighters.
Since the start of the year, we have seen contrasting regional disparities in the
threat trajectory. In conflict zones, the threat has increased, as evidenced by ISIL’s
regrouping and increasing activity in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic and among
some of its regional affiliates. However, in non-conflict zones, the threat appears to
have decreased in the short term. Measures to minimize the spread of COVID-19,
such as lockdowns and restrictions on movement, seem to have reduced the risk
of terrorist attacks in many countries. Yet there is a continued trend of attacks by
individuals inspired online and acting alone or in small groups, which could be
fuelled by ISIL’s opportunistic propaganda efforts during the COVID-19 crisis.
The pandemic’s impact on recruitment and fundraising activities remains
unclear, as its socioeconomic fallout could exacerbate conditions conducive to
terrorism and increase the medium- to long-term threat, both within and outside
conflict zones. Meanwhile, there is no clear indication of a change in ISIL’s strategic
direction under its new leader. Command and control arrangements between the ISIL
core and its remote “provinces” have continued to loosen, thereby strengthening
regional affiliates. I would like to highlight some developments in different regions.
In the Middle East, the ISIL core has continued to consolidate its position
in some areas previously under its control, operating increasingly confidently and
openly. More than 10,000 ISIL fighters are estimated to remain active in Iraq and
Syria, moving freely in small cells between the two countries. There has been a
significant increase in ISIL attacks in both countries in 2020 as compared with 2019.

2/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

The COVID-19 crisis has further complicated the already dire and
unsustainable situation of thousands of individuals with suspected links to ISIL who
are stranded in the conf lict zone, especially women and children. The repatriation,
prosecution, rehabilitation, reintegration and protection of the vulnerable have
become ever more urgent. While some States have repatriated and continue
to repatriate children, we have seen only limited progress in overcoming legal,
political and practical hurdles to repatriation.
The global threat from ISIL is likely to increase if the international community
fails to meet this challenge. Decisive action is required from Member States on
humanitarian, human rights and security grounds. The Secretary-General reiterates
his call on Member States to meet their obligations under international law and
repatriate their nationals — women, men and children. The United Nations system
stands ready to support their efforts in that regard.
Turning to Africa, the Islamic State West Africa Province (ISWAP) remains
a major focus of ISIL global propaganda, and its total membership of approximately
3,500 makes it one of the largest of the remote “provinces”. ISWAP has continued to
reinforce links with the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, which remains the most
dangerous group in the tri-border area of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger.
Although ISIL has only a few hundred fighters in Libya, it has been exploiting
local tensions between ethnic groups. It represents a potent threat capable of broader
regional impact. The risk of escalation of the conflict in Libya could allow ISIL to
expand its activity.
Another worrisome development is the attacks staged by the Islamic State
Central Africa Province in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Mozambique,
including complex attacks and brief takeovers of villages.
In Europe, the threat continues to come mainly from Internet-driven, homegrown terrorist radicalization. Three ISIL-inspired attacks occurred in France and
two in the United Kingdom during the reporting period, while other attacks by lone
actors against soft public targets were thankfully foiled. Acute concerns persist
about radicalization and failed rehabilitation in prisons, and the imminent release of
dangerous inmates with a terrorism background or connections.
Several Member States in Europe report a growing terrorist threat from
right-wing violent extremism, which requires intelligence services to shift their
operational and analytical priorities away from a focus on ISIL.
In Asia, ISIL’s affiliate in Afghanistan remains capable of high-profile attacks
in various parts of the country, including Kabul, despite continued territorial losses
and the arrest of its leaders. The group seeks to use Afghan territory to spread its
influence across the region, similar to the approach of ISIL’s core. It also aims to
attract fighters who oppose, inter alia, the peace agreement reached between the
Taliban and the United States.
In other parts of Asia, ISIL claimed its first attack in the Maldives in April.
Concern remains over the recruitment of ISIL fighters in the country and the
looming challenge of managing returnees from the core conflict zone. In South-East
Asia, attacks on security forces occur regularly, but Government authorities have
maintained pressure on ISIL activities through counter-terrorism operations.
The report of the Secretary-General also highlights how the United Nations
system has continued to actively support Member States over the past six months
despite the pandemic. After the COVID-19 outbreak, United Nations entities swiftly
adjusted their operations to ensure business continuity. Collaboration under the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact continued with
20-111813/33

S/2020/836

regular virtual meetings and joint projects. At the end of March, my Office launched
the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Platform to further facilitate this process
and engagement with Member States. I have already reported to the Security Council
on the outcomes of the successful Counter-Terrorism Week in July (see S/2020/791).
My Office has worked closely with CTED and other Compact partners to
incorporate flexible approaches in our capacity-building support to Member States,
including by using online platforms and developing remote needs-assessment
methodologies. I would like to draw the Council’s attention to a few key activities
of my Office.
First, we led the development of a multi-agency framework to provide
coordinated United Nations support to requesting Member States on the protection,
repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of third-country nationals
returning from Iraq and Syria. The framework, coordinated by my Office and
UNICEF, aims to ensure that this support is human rights-compliant and gendersensitive and takes into account the best interests of the child.
Secondly, we continued prioritizing our work on victims of terrorism, including
encouraging Member States to identify specific actions to uphold their rights in
national counter-terrorism strategies. The commemoration of the International Day
of Remembrance of and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism last week reminded us
that we need to do more to support victims. In particular, more needs to be done
to address sexual violence committed by ISIL, both in terms of accountability and
support to victims.
Thirdly, countering the financing of terrorism remains a key priority. The
pandemic increases the potential risk of cybercrime by terrorists to raise and
move funds. In June, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre in my Office,
together with CTED, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Office
of Information and Communications Technology, launched a new, global capacitybuilding programme for the prevention and suppression of the financing of terrorism,
in line with resolution 2462 (2019).
Fourthly, my Office has continued to partner with a broad range of entities to
support Member States in law enforcement and border security. The United Nations
Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, led by my Office to support Member States
in implementing resolutions 2178 (2014), 2396 (2017) and 2482 (2019), currently
has 36 confirmed beneficiaries in different regions. The programme adapted to
the COVID-19 crisis by developing, together with CTED, an online assessment
methodology that was first used in June in Côte d’Ivoire.
Lastly, during the high-level open debate convened by the Indonesian
presidency earlier this month on addressing the issue of linkages between terrorism
and organized crime (see S/2020/791), we discussed the need to tackle the illicit
supply of small arms and light weapons to terrorist groups. The United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, UNODC, CTED and the Office for Disarmament
Affairs launched a joint project in February focused on Central Asia to address
this phenomenon.
The COVID-19 crisis has highlighted the challenges we face in eliminating
the threat of terrorism. ISIL and other terrorist groups seek to exploit the far-reaching
disruption and negative socioeconomic and political impacts of the pandemic. As
emphasized during the Virtual Counter-Terrorism Week, strengthening collective
action and international counter-terrorism cooperation must remain a priority
during and after the pandemic. As Member States continue their efforts to develop
comprehensive responses to the threat posed by ISIL and terrorism, they can count

4/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

on the full support of my Office and the United Nations system through the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact.

20-111815/33

S/2020/836

Annex II
Statement by the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, Michèle Coninsx
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council
on the eleventh report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/774) on the threat posed
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the continued efforts of the
United Nations and Member States to counter the threat.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his overview
of the report and to commend both the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT) and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to
resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, for their invaluable contributions to
the report.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is one of the greatest
challenges faced by the United Nations in its 75-year history. The resulting period of
global uncertainty has exposed existing economic fault lines and social instabilities,
and its impact has also been felt across the global security apparatus. As we have
heard, the rapidly evolving and deeply uncertain nature of the pandemic makes it
difficult to assess its overall impact on ISIL’s activities.
The dire situation faced by thousands of ISIL-associated women and children
in the detention camps of north-eastern Syria remains a major challenge for the
international community. The COVID-19 pandemic risks exacerbating an already
untenable humanitarian, human rights and security situation. Indefinite detention
is legally unjustifiable and has significant security and moral implications. The
detained children remain the most vulnerable group. Every additional day that
they spend in the camps will increase the risk that they will suffer irreparable
psychosocial damage.
Last month, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) published an analytical brief on the prosecution of ISIL-associated women,
highlighting the gender-specific challenges encountered by States in the investigation
and prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration (PRR) of women returnees. Women
remain the group with the lowest rate of return from the conflict zone. We cannot
allow these women to become the forgotten demographic.
There is an urgent need to institutionalize comprehensive, tailored and gendersensitive prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies and to provide
States with the required technical assistance. There have been signs of progress.
Some States have repatriated their citizens despite the additional challenges posed
by COVID-19. Some States are also making progress in prosecuting ISIL returnees
for terrorism-related offences, sometimes cumulatively with war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. This may help provide justice to the victims of ISIL.
States should continue to improve the collection and sharing of admissible,
terrorism-related information and evidence by the military, in compliance with
international human rights law and international humanitarian law.
CTED is working in partnership with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and UNOCT, under the Global PRR Initiative, to explore approaches to
rehabilitation and reintegration in various settings. Pandemic-related restrictions,
including social isolation measures, curtailed religious and cultural activities and
lack of employment opportunities, may exacerbate existing grievances, particularly
in societies facing endemic conflicts.
6/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

With people spending more time online, ISIL and its affiliates are taking the
opportunity to accelerate the spread of their toxic propaganda via digital platforms,
including gaming platforms. Member States must ensure that policies adopted to
curtail the spread of terrorist narratives and misinformation are human rightscompliant and gender-sensitive.
A whole-of-society approach, based on consultations with relevant
stakeholders, including civil society organizations, academia, think tanks, religious
actors and community leaders, is more crucial than ever. Within the framework of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, CTED continues to engage with
States, including in partnership with the Government of Iraq, on their development
of comprehensive and integrated counter-terrorism strategies that engage a wide
range of stakeholders.
States should introduce innovative and practical counter-terrorism measures,
strengthen existing partnerships and ensure that victims’ rights are respected.
I welcome the adoption, in March, of the Interfaith Statement on the Victims
of ISIL by the leadership of religious authorities in Iraq, which aims to secure justice
and accountability and protect the rights of victims and survivors of ISIL.
Despite its significant loss of territory, ISIL continues to pose a threat, not
only in the Middle East but also in the newer battlegrounds of South and SouthEast Asia, the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel. We are closely following the current
political crisis in Mali and hoping for the restoration of the rule of law in order for the
country to continue its fight against the rise of the terrorist threat. Our response to
this enduring transnational challenge must be a multilateral one, rooted in enhanced
information-sharing and international cooperation.
CTED has innovated its working methods in response to the COVID-19
pandemic and maintained business continuity, despite the challenging circumstances.
Acting on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, we have enhanced our deskbased stocktaking of Member States’ activities and assisted the Committee in
adopting an updated country visit framework, as well as the annual list of briefings
and meetings for the Committee and the wider membership.
Under the United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, CTED
and its partners have conducted virtual deep-dive missions for Botswana and
Côte d’Ivoire and developed Advance Passenger Information and Passenger Name
Records implementation road maps for both States. CTED also led a virtual deepdive mission for Botswana with its partners on enhancing the capacity to counter
terrorism using National-Level Interagency Coordination Mechanism Fusion Cells.
CTED and UNOCT have held joint consultations with Member States and
experts on the use of biometric technologies for pandemic-related measures, aimed
at ensuring their compliance with international human rights law. We have deepened
our engagement with our partners on the ground, particularly the United Nations
resident coordinators and country teams in assessed Member States. This has helped
us integrate local, national and regional developments into our analysis of key trends
and our facilitation of technical assistance, which will in turn translate into more
effective and impactful counter-terrorism and counter-violent extremism outcomes.
We continue to share our insights through our regular stream of publications,
including our recent analysis of the potential short- and long-term impacts of
COVID-19 on terrorism and counter-terrorism.
In June, pursuant to resolution 2462 (2019), CTED and the Monitoring Team
produced a joint report on counter-financing of terrorism (S/2020/493, annex), based
on responses from 112 Member States. The report was followed by a closed briefing
20-111817/33

S/2020/836

of the Council. In July, we conducted a virtual global consultation with over 15
civil society organizations on counter-financing of terrorism and its implications for
human rights, in accordance with resolution 2462 (2019).
CTED is committed to continuing dialogue with civil society on issues
relating to counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism within a human
rights-compliant and gender-sensitive framework. The impact of the COVID-19
pandemic will undoubtedly make our already complex task even more difficult. But
the pandemic has also given us an opportunity to question the status quo. We should
continue to use this opportunity to review and strengthen our counter-terrorism and
counter-violent extremism approaches.
We must collectively uphold our shared principles of a rule of law-based
international order and develop human rights-compliant and gender-sensitive
policies, practices and whole-of-society approaches. Our determination to ensure
justice, equality and human dignity must continue to be the cornerstone of our
multilateral counter-terrorism efforts.

8/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations. Philippe Kridelka
I thank the Secretary-General for his report on the threats to international
peace and security posed by Da’esh (S/2020/774), as well as Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx for their presentations.
Thanks to the efforts of the Global Coalition against Da’esh, of which
Belgium is an active member, the Syrian and Iraqi territories were freed from the
control of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorist group. However,
the latter maintains its presence in the region, and other small groups driven by the
same ideology continue to spread in other parts of the world, notably in the Sahel,
West Africa and the Lake Chad region, thereby attempting to exploit a damaged
security situation.
The impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on the threat posed by ISIL
is multifaceted but not yet clear. Although the measures taken by Member States
to fight against the pandemic may have complicated the activities of the terrorist
group, we still see an increase in its activities in Iraq and Syria, especially in the
most fragile regions. In the coming months, it will be important to remain vigilant
and to continue to assess the situation in order to prevent any resurgence of this
organization in the region.
Furthermore, during the pandemic, the group’s offensive propaganda efforts,
mainly on online platforms, have benefited from a fragile, confined audience,
particularly among the most vulnerable groups in our societies who feel marginalized
and downgraded. Preventing and fighting against such hate speech must remain a
long-term priority, as they exacerbate radicalization leading to violent extremism
and terrorism.
As you stated, the threat posed by Da’esh and its followers is constantly
evolving, and therefore requires that all Member States remain vigilant and adapt in
a quick, flexible way. In this context, on 16 June, the Council of the European Union
updated its conclusions on European Union (EU) external action on preventing and
countering terrorism and violent extremism, which form the basis of the EU’s action
in this domain. Those new conclusions will allow the EU to continue its action while
adapting to the evolution of the Islamic threat and to the emergence of new ones,
including the rise of far-right terrorism.
Belgium condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. My country
is convinced that the fight against terrorism can succeed only if it fully complies
with human rights law and international humanitarian law, which must constitute a
leading principle in all four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. For this reason, together with its European partners, Belgium ensures
that measures taken to fight terrorism do not negatively impact human rights and
humanitarian activities on the ground, including in the Syrian camps.
The foreign terrorist fighters issue constitutes a major challenge for our common
security. Therefore, my country favourably welcomes the developments to prevent
travel for terrorist purposes, and underlines the importance of bringing terrorists to
justice, while continuing to fight against the root causes of radicalization leading
to extremism and terrorism. At the same time, developing specific rehabilitation
and reintegration programmes for men and women suspected of having committed
terrorism-related crimes is crucial. It is also essential to differentiate the status of
children from those of men and women, and to primarily consider them as victims
of terrorism.
20-111819/33

S/2020/836

Belgium considers that a successful fight against violent extremism and
terrorism requires a comprehensive approach. This comprehensive approach is
reflected at the military level with a contribution of four Belgian F-16s in support
of the Coalition’s operations from October onwards for a period of one year, as
well as at the stabilization level with a contribution of €4 million in 2020 in the
territories freed from Da’esh. We also promote an inclusive, whole-of-society
approach. Youth, women, the private sector, civil society and human rights
defenders and victims of terrorism all contribute to the development of efficient,
relevant and sustainable policies. Their voices must be heard and integrated into our
counter-terrorism strategies.
Finally, despite the fragmentation of our efforts caused by the current
pandemic, it is essential that our coordination and cooperation in countering
terrorism be reinforced, on the international and regional, but also national, levels.
In this framework, Belgium wishes to underline its appreciation of the flexibility of
all United Nations entities, which managed to continue to successfully fulfil their
mandates under the difficult circumstances of the past months. Together with all
our partners, Belgium will remain fully committed to eradicating the threat posed
by Da’esh.

10/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx
for their briefings. We welcome the eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) to international peace
and security (S/2020/774).
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has highlighted the profound
changes the world is undergoing and the severe challenges humankind is facing.
Inequalities within and among countries have been laid bare. The ignorance,
anxiety, stigma and politicization that come with the pandemic have led to hatred
and xenophobia, which have been aggravated and amplified by the popular use of
social media.
Although the pandemic appears to have temporarily reduced the risks of
terrorist attacks, the socioeconomic fallout from the crisis has the potential to
exacerbate conditions conducive to terrorism. It could feed into a vicious cycle of
destabilization and violence and increase the mid- to long-term threat, which ISIL
and other terrorist organizations are keen to explore and exploit.
According to the report of the Secretary-General, amid the COVID-19
pandemic, the world is witnessing a surge in activities by terrorist organizations,
such as ISIL, in Iraq and Syria to rebuild their global operation capability. Terrorists,
including ISIL, are also infiltrating into North Africa, in particular Libya, worsening
regional turbulence. ISIL has also announced that it may use the virus as a biological
weapon to launch terrorist attacks. Member States must remain highly vigilant
to all these dangerous developments. Facing the unprecedented challenges of the
COVID-19 pandemic and the common enemy of terrorism, we must bear in mind
that humankind is a community with a shared future, and we should strengthen
cooperation to jointly address the threat facing us.
First, international counter-terrorism cooperation should follow the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and continue to leverage the
central coordinating role of the United Nations and the Security Council with
unified standards. In fighting terrorism, we must respect the primary responsibility
of Member States and the sovereignty of the countries concerned. We should
comprehensively implement relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. During and
after the COVID-19 pandemic, we need to further promote multilateralism and
strengthen international cooperation in a joint effort to fight terrorism.
Secondly, we must adopt integrated policies to address the root causes as well
as the symptoms of terrorism to eradicate its breeding grounds. The international
community should push for political settlement of hot-spot issues, resolve differences
peacefully, assist Member States in poverty reduction and eradication and sustainable
development and encourage dialogue among civilizations and religions. We should
support regional organizations, such as the African Union, in playing an important
role. Assistance should be given to developing countries, especially African
countries, to help build capacity for counter-terrorism and deradicalization. There is
an urgent need for the international community to strengthen cooperation in fighting
and overcoming COVID-19 and reduce its impact as a potential terrorist threat.
Thirdly, it is important to enhance international judicial cooperation and adapt
it to the new trends and features of terrorism. We should focus on the key issues, such
as foreign terrorist fighters, the diversified means of terrorist financing, the misuse
20-1118111/33

S/2020/836

of the Internet and communication technologies by terrorists and the collusion of
terrorist organizations with organized crime. We should attach great importance to
the impact of COVID-19 on counter-terrorism and take timely measures to prevent
terrorists from exploiting loopholes caused by the pandemic.
Fourthly, mechanisms, such as the Office of Counter Terrorism, the CounterTerrorism Committee and the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
should increase coordination and fully leverage their strengths and expertise to form
greater synergy. United Nations counter-terrorism mechanisms should act in strict
accordance with the relevant resolutions and rules of procedure. They need to enhance
communication with Member States; strengthen coordination among themselves in
terrorist threat assessment, the capacity-building of Member States and the use of
sanctions; maintain the authority and effectiveness of the counter-terrorism and
sanctions regimes; and contribute more to international counter-terrorism efforts.
These mechanisms should readjust their working methods during the pandemic and
make better use of online platforms to carry out their work according to the needs
of Member States.
As an important player in the international fight against terrorism, China
resolutely implements all the relevant United Nations resolutions. We actively
participate in international and regional counter-terrorism cooperation through the
United Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and other forums. We work
closely with other Member States in sharing intelligence and combating terrorist
financing, transnational organized crime and cyberterrorism.
China will work with the international community to analyse in depth the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on global terrorist activities, and will continue
to have bilateral and multilateral exchanges and capacity-building cooperation with
other countries, especially developing countries, including those in Africa. We
will continue to provide political and financial support to United Nations counterterrorism efforts for the maintenance of international peace and security.
China firmly rejects the accusation against China by certain members of the
Council. It is baseless and absurd, as usual.
Terrorism is our common enemy. There is no such thing as good or bad
terrorists. China is firmly opposed to politicization and double standards in
counter-terrorism.
The situation in Xinjiang is totally part of China’s internal affairs. It is not
a religion issue or a human rights issue. Rather, it is about counter-terrorism and
anti-extremism.
Xinjiang has suffered deeply from terrorism and violent extremism in the past.
To address the threat, Xinjiang has taken a series of preventive counter-terrorism
and de-radicalization measures. This is consistent with Security Council resolutions,
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the United Nations Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. These measures are widely supported by
the people in Xinjiang and have yielded good results. Xinjiang has not seen a single
terror incident in the past three years. Facts speak louder than words. Anyone who is
fair-minded can tell right from wrong.
Since late 2018, more than 70 foreign delegations have visited Xinjiang.
They have seen first-hand a stable, thriving and developing Xinjiang, and agree
that counter-terrorism and de-radicalization efforts have made this possible.
However, it is regrettable that the United States chooses to ignore basic facts and
repeat its rhetoric and keep smearing and discrediting the counter-terrorism and
deradicalization efforts in Xinjiang. We urge the United States to listen to the
12/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

international community, admit the facts, give up bigotry and double standards and
stop using human rights as an excuse to interfere in China’s internal affairs.
If the United States truly cares about human rights, it should do its own job
first. Please protect the human rights of the American people. Please step up effort to
combat COVID-19 to safeguard lives and the health of the American people.
In addition, the United Kingdom followed the United States once again in
levelling unfounded charges against China in the Council. China is strongly opposed
to this. The baseless remarks of the United Kingdom represent sheer hypocrisy and
double standards. We urge the United Kingdom to fix its own problems and to stop
interfering in China’s internal affairs.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that China is determined to safeguard its
sovereignty, security and development interests. No interference against China will
succeed, and no one can stop China’s progress.

20-1118113/33

S/2020/836

Annex V
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
We thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov and Executive
Director Michèle Coninsx for briefing us today on the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh).
Of particular concern to us, having anticipated the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the subject (S/2020/774), is precisely the status of that threat as
a result of the devastating reality facing the world owing to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
We have witnessed and condemn the increase in the number of attacks and
actions by ISIL in places such as Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, where it is
consolidating its presence at this crucial moment when Governments are focusing
their actions and limited resources on saving lives and fighting to contain the spread
of the virus.
Despite the achievements made in the fight against ISIL, in particular at the
top of its core organization — and here we commend the various counter-terrorismstrategy operations taking place — its ability to mutate and adapt to new modalities
in the face of external events, as in the case of the pandemic, requires that we remain
on the offensive.
We also consider it important to pay due attention to the socioeconomic
impact of the crisis resulting from the pandemic as an element that could exacerbate
conditions conducive to terrorism in the medium to long term.
We also wish to stress our concern about the serious humanitarian situation
that people with alleged links to ISIL continue to face in camps and detention centres
in conflict zones, as they are exposed to deplorable conditions, particularly women
and children — many of whom are the victims of sexual violence — who, in the case
of Al-Hol camp, in Syria, make up the vast majority of its population.
COVID-19 has added an additional element of destabilization to the already
serious situation in those centres, exposing those admitted to a high risk of contagion,
to the detriment of efforts in the area of protection, repatriation, processing,
rehabilitation and reintegration, given the need to reallocate resources to combat
the pandemic.
Therefore, it is necessary to strengthen initiatives and programmes designed
to counter the risk of exploitation and radicalization in camps and detention centres,
with assistance from specialized United Nations agencies in the development
of internal strategies and protocols aimed at better addressing the humanitarian,
human rights and security situation, also counting on the important support of the
international community.
Given the mobility and confinement restrictions imposed by COVID-19,
which have considerably increased the time spent online, we urge the relevant
monitoring bodies to maintain the alert levels necessary to act against the increase
in cybercrime for financing and ISIL propaganda in the media aimed at inspiring
attacks by its affiliates and supporters.
Likewise, of concern is the threat posed by the numerous foreign terrorist
fighters and the return of many of them to their countries of origin, as they
continue to pose substantial political, legal, operational and security challenges to
Member States.
14/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

Let me conclude by recognizing the essential work, particularly during the
COVID-19 pandemic, of specialized United Nations agencies such as the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and UNICEF.

20-1118115/33

S/2020/836

Annex VI
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of Estonia to the United Nations,
Kristel Lõuk
We thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Coninsx for their comprehensive briefings, which introduced fresh findings
as contained in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/774) on the threat posed
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates.
Estonia notes that the command-and-control arrangements between the ISIL
core and its so-called provinces are loosening. Further, the ongoing pandemic has
resulted in travel restrictions, which, according to the report, have complicated
terrorist planning and operations, making it harder for terrorists to move, recruit
and raise funds.
In the light of those changes, it is encouraging to hear that at least temporarily,
the direct threat posed by terrorism appears to have decreased in various regions
across the globe. However, we must remain vigilant.
We appreciate the role played by the European Union Agency for Criminal
Justice Cooperation and the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation in combating all forms of terrorism in European Union and beyond, and
we welcome the increased cooperation of those agencies with the United Nations.
Despite the aforementioned positive developments, we remain concerned
about conflict-affected areas where ISIL continues to undermine regional security.
As such, we note that compared with last year, attacks have increased in ISIL core
areas, in both Syria and Iraq.
Estonia further recognizes the threat posed by the Islamic State in the Greater
Sahara. That organization continues to mount attacks on international security forces
as well as local communities in the tri-border area of Mali, Burkina Faso and the
Niger. In those areas, terrorism is closely interlinked with other forms of communal
violence. Therefore, in order to address extremism and terrorism, we need a holistic
approach that could build truly resilient communities.
Greater attention must be given to lowering intercommunal tensions and
nurturing political reconciliation. Such activities often start at the grass-roots level.
Finally, the question of accountability and denying impunity to the
perpetrators of crimes against civilians is an essential part of countering terrorism.
It is also vital to healing communities, restoring trust and creating the conditions for
sustainable peace.

16/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Political Coordinator of France to the
United Nations, Wadid Benaabou
[Original: English and French]
I would like at the outset to thank the briefers for their statements.
I wish to highlight four points.
First, I would like to reiterate France’s determination to pursue, along with
its international partners, the fight against Da’esh within the framework of the
international coalition. Da’esh lost its territorial foothold with the fall of Baghouz
in March 2019, but the group still has many supporters in the Levant and beyond. It
has shown its determination to exploit the opportunities created by the current health
context to step up its violent actions not only in Syria and Iraq but also, through its
affiliated groups, in Afghanistan, South-East Asia and Africa. The threat is far from
having disappeared.
We will continue our efforts, both militarily and politically, to address the root
causes of Da’esh’s emergence. In that regard, I would like to reiterate our conviction
that there will be no complete and lasting victory against Daesh without a political
solution to the Syrian crisis in accordance with the terms of resolution 2254 (2015).
France is continuing to work to that end in support of the work of the United Nations
Special Envoy. It is also contributing to the recovery of the Syrian territories and
populations that were liberated from Da’esh thanks to the action of the international
coalition and that are now facing a difficult humanitarian situation.
In Iraq, it is essential for the international community to stand resolutely by
the authorities to help the country strengthen its sovereignty and enable the economic
development of its entire territory.
It is also necessary to continue our efforts to effectively protect children
from recruitment and indoctrination, including by terrorist groups. As the Council
recognized five years ago in its resolution 2242 (2015), girls are particularly
vulnerable to such recruitment strategies. In the same vein, we must continue our
efforts in the area of humanitarian assistance to ensure dignified living conditions
for the thousands of refugees and vulnerable persons in regions affected by terrorism
and thus prevent them to the extent possible from joining the ranks of terrorist groups.
Secondly, I wish to recall the need to effectively combat the financing of
terrorism. Daesh’s financial capabilities remain at a high level. Those resources,
which are diversifying, must be dried up. This is a priority for France, which drafted
resolution 2462 (2019), adopted in March 2019. We call for its full implementation,
including with regard to States’ compliance with their obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Thirdly, I would like to stress the importance of combating the use of the
Internet for terrorist purposes. The Christchurch Call that we launched together
with New Zealand in May 2019 now brings together some 50 States and partners,
including major Internet companies. The participation of the latter is an essential
condition for ensuring the effectiveness of the fight against online terrorist content.
Because the coronavirus disease pandemic has led, during periods of containment,
to increased exposure to online terrorist propaganda, it is essential to regulate the
use of the Internet, which cannot be a lawless zone, while imperatively respecting
freedom of expression.

20-1118117/33

S/2020/836

This brings me to my fourth point. I would like to stress that the fight against
terrorism, radicalization and violent extremism must be conducted in accordance
with international humanitarian, refugee and human rights law. Similarly, that fight
cannot justify attacks against civilians or the targeting of humanitarian actors and
infrastructure. Respect for human rights and the rule of law, as well as education,
inclusion and social cohesion, are in the long term key factors in any strategy to
prevent and combat terrorism.
Finally, I would like to conclude with a mention of the victims of Da’esh and
their families. I am thinking in particular of the Yazidis in the Sinjar district of
Iraq, who, exactly six years ago, were victims of war crimes and abuses committed
by Da’esh. Friday’s tribute to the victims of terrorism recalled the importance of
placing victims at the heart of our collective action against terrorism. They have
a right to justice. In that regard, France supports the activities carried out in Iraq
by the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes
Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, as it supports initiatives
aimed at combating impunity by prosecuting the alleged perpetrators of crimes as
close as possible to where the crimes were committed.

18/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Günter Sautter
I would like to make three remarks. The first is on our approach to fighting
international terrorism and foreign terrorist fighters in particular. The second point
is on the continuing threat emanating from Da’esh. The third point is on why it is
important that we be serious about our values when it comes to fighting terrorism.
The issue of terrorism, including the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
will remain on our agenda for the foreseeable future. Our goal must indeed remain
the lasting defeat of Da’esh, Al-Qaida and all the other terrorist organizations and
their gruesome ideologies. We therefore need to find the right responses, here in the
Council, back home and in all the conflict-torn regions on which terrorists focus,
because they serve as a base of operation.
We believe that we have four tools at our disposal. The first tool that works
is respect. Disrespecting people and pushing them to the margins of society will
make the world less safe, step by step. Inequality and injustice fuel the propaganda
machinery of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and the like. If the
Members of the United Nations fail at providing everyone with opportunities for a
meaningful life, a life in dignity, we will all fail in our fight against terrorism.
The second tool is a second chance after adequate prosecution respecting the
principles of due process and fair trial. Rehabilitation and reintegration are not easy,
but there is no humane alternative.
The third tool that works is not trying to solve the problem alone but working
together. Here lies the true value of cooperation, be it internationally or within a
society. International, regional and subregional cooperation remains vital.
There is a fourth tool, in our view. Counter-terrorism works best with a strong
role for civil-society organizations. But even more important are the stories of those
who lost a brother, a mother, a friend to terror, the stories of those who have lost
their own lives. And let us also in the Council remember those who stand at the front
lines of this conflict, sometimes even, sadly, at the cost of their lives. Together, we
should honour the women and men in the field who do the actual work: members
of the armed forces and of law enforcement, social workers, religious leaders, those
working for urban and rural development — they all are the heroes of this struggle.
My second point is on the threat that Da’esh continues to pose. Bringing
Da’esh’s territorial control to an end was an enormous achievement. Its withdrawal
into the shadows, however, was not a reason to celebrate. As the Secretary-General
has reported, 2020 brought a surge in activity in Syria and Iraq. The coronavirus
disease may keep terrorists from travelling, but the terror continues wherever they
dwell. So we must continue our counter-Da’esh efforts tirelessly.
My third point is on why our values matter. It is also about double standards,
on which we have already seen quite a discussion this morning. Our values are key
to ensuring that our response remains credible and effective. As soon as we are
perceived as employing methods similar to those used by terrorists, we are losing
the battle for the hearts and minds. Among the most important lessons we have
learned in our struggle is that counter-terrorism measures must never serve as a
pretext for human rights violations. We all know examples of so-called counterterrorism measures that indiscriminately target ethnic minorities. That must not be
our approach. The exclusion of ethnic minorities only makes those marginalized
more prone to falling into the traps of violent extremism and terrorist networks. That
counteracts all our efforts in trying to prevent terrorism.
20-1118119/33

S/2020/836

Regarding Xinjiang, the internment of large parts of the population is, in our
view, unjustified. In the long run, it is likely not to reduce but, rather, to increase
the risk emanating from terrorist organizations. Counter-terrorism measures must
not hinder the delivery of humanitarian assistance by humanitarian actors consistent
with international humanitarian law and based on humanitarian principles.
These days we are celebrating the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), on women in armed conflict. Gender is and remains an important element
in countering the terrorist threat, in a number of ways. On the one hand, women are
often affected by violent conflict and terrorism even more than men. On the other
hand, women are not only victims. Within Da’esh, women have been among the
perpetrators as well. They have assumed important operative functions within the
organization. We should therefore include female radicalization in the priorities on
our agenda.
One word on the weakest of all — children. Children have suffered
dramatically under the so-called caliphate, and almost an entire generation may
be lost. With a view to continuing negotiations on a resolution in which where we
exhaustively consider the situation of children, our position is clear: children are
victims of terrorism and of their upbringing when they are born or brought into a
region of conflict. After a certain age, they become juveniles who are responsible
for their actions and must face the consequences. But before that, they are victims
first and foremost. To protect them and lead them back into society should therefore
be our most important goal when it comes to rehabilitation and reintegration. In
very concrete terms, we in Germany are considering humanitarian cases, especially
children who are German nationals, on a case-by-case basis. Each case is different
and needs to be assessed on its individual merits.

20/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
I shall now make a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx for their briefings. Let me also express my
gratitude to the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the other United Nations-related entities
for the report before us (S/2020/774).
In February, I had the pleasure of accompanying Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov, Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx and the Coordinator of the
Monitoring Team on the first ever joint high-level visit to Jakarta. I believe that visit
underlined Indonesia’s comprehensive and balanced approach to the fight against
terrorism, including the strategies in the Global Prosecution, Rehabilitation and
Reintegration Initiative.
The importance of developing a prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration
(PRR) strategy has also been highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report. Indonesia
is of the view that a PRR strategy is instrumental to counter-terrorism efforts as an
integral part of a comprehensive and tailored approach to addressing the threat posed
by terrorists. Providing clear guidance for Member States to develop and implement
comprehensive PRR strategies should therefore be one of the imminent priorities for
the Council. That also applies to the continuing humanitarian and security challenges
posed by foreign terrorist fighters and their accompanying family members.
We also note that the issues of relocation and returning foreign terrorist
fighters and their accompanying family members present significant challenges
for Member States. In that regard, we believe that an effective comprehensive PRR
strategy is appropriate. We must therefore set our differences aside and show our
unity once again in our collective efforts to fight the scourge of terrorism.
My delegation takes note of various salient points in the report, particularly
concerning how the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has impacted
counter-terrorism efforts and amplified threats through media propaganda. With
that in mind, allow me to make three brief points.
The first point relates to the terrorism that continues to threaten other parts
of the globe, carried out by affiliates of ISIL. The report clearly demonstrates that
ISIL affiliates are still active in many parts of the world, even as the world now
faces the COVID-19 pandemic. We know that this threat remains and works through
media propaganda, which may inspire attacks once normal public mobility and
assembly resume.
That leads me to my second point. Indonesia believes that we should always
invest in soft measures towards countering terrorist narratives and steering people
away from the violent extremism that is conducive to terrorism. We need to promote
and facilitate the spread of messages of peace, moderation and tolerance as the best
approach to confronting terrorist propaganda. We must provide messages that reject
negativity and amplify positivity and hope.
My third and last point is that, despite the pandemic, our fight against terror
should neither cease nor waver. The pandemic should in no way hinder our fight
20-1118121/33

S/2020/836

against terrorism, as that is the hope of the terrorists. Let us not permit the pandemic
to create more terrorists or let their affiliates regroup or consolidate. We need to stay
attuned to how the threat of ISIL continues to evolve during and after the pandemic
in order to adjust our response.
Resolution 2532 (2020), adopted last month, anticipated those concerns, as
it called for the immediate cessation of hostilities during the pandemic, except in
the fight against terrorist groups. To that end, Indonesia would like to reaffirm
our commitment to working together with all countries and the United Nations to
strengthen our counter-terrorism cooperation.

22/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
At the outset, allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx for the in-depth analysis of the situation
regarding countering the threats posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). The eleventh report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/774) provides a
comprehensive overview of the situation on the ground, including insights on how
the terrorists adapt to the circumstances of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We
note with appreciation that this document duly reflects assessments of those trends
provided by various States, including Russia.
At present, the level of the global terrorist threat, despite the failure of the
leaders of ISIL to build a pseudo-caliphate in Syria and Iraq, remains high. The
principles of organization and tactics used by ISIL suggest that it has now fully
transformed into a network structure with a high degree of autonomy of branches
and sleeper cells in various countries and regions of the world. The high command
of the organization has sufficient financial resources to restore mechanisms for
coordinating and planning terrorist attacks in the border area between Syria and
Iraq, and is doing just that.
At the same time, the terrorists do not intend to abandon plans to revive the
caliphate in Iraq. ISIL continues to build up its combat potential and is seeking to
expand the area and scope of terrorist attacks in the country. The determination
of ISIL to focus on expansion across the African continent is now obvious. At the
same time, in addition to the States of the Sahara-Sahel zone, where ISIL branches
are already actively operating, the countries of Central and Southern Africa are in
their sights.
A difficult situation is developing in Afghanistan, where approximately 4,000
ISIL fighters are present. The main units are concentrated in the eastern provinces
of Kunar and Nangarhar, where their numbers reach 2,000 terrorists. According
to various estimates, there may be an additional 2,000 fighters in the north of the
country. Supporters of the world caliphate regularly carry out large-scale terrorist
attacks in various cities of the country, mainly against the Shiite minority.
Recently, the leaders of the international terrorist organization have shown
increased interest in South and South-East Asia, which, in their opinion, are
promising for recruiting new supporters.
The spread of COVID-19 provoked large-scale socioeconomic turbulence
around the world and diverted the attention of many States from the counter-terrorism
agenda, which in turn paves the way for the international terrorist organizations
to increase their deadly potential. Terrorists are seeking to use the coronavirus
pandemic to increase the number of supporters, primarily at the expense of those
dissatisfied with the actions of the authorities in the context of the crisis, and in order
to carry out hybrid attacks that combine terrorist attacks, biothreats, the spread of
propaganda and the incitement of terrorist acts.
Recently, there has been a noticeable increase in the activity of international
terrorist organizations on the Internet, where calls for supporters to take various
actions in order to increase panic in society are spreading. ISIL leaders are
brainwashing their supporters and urging their followers to intensify their activities.
At the same time, the pandemic has somewhat disrupted the relocation of
terrorists to various hotspots and made it difficult to deliver funds and weapons to
conflict zones. Some terrorist cells lack money and arms. In particular, branches of
20-1118123/33

S/2020/836

ISIL in North Africa can no longer profit from smuggling and human trafficking due
to the closure of borders between countries.
However, despite those obstacles, international and regional terrorist groups
are rapidly adapting to the pandemic and gaining supporters.
There is undoubtedly still huge room for improvement in the area of
international cooperation, especially with regard to the repatriation of foreign
terrorist fighters and their family members to their countries of origin. Among the
most vulnerable in that connection are the women and children associated with
foreign terrorist fighters, currently trapped in camps and detention facilities in the
Middle East.
The Secretary-General’s report once again sheds light on the insufficient
repatriation rates and the horrific conditions in which these people have to fight
for their lives. Unfortunately, this is the battle from which some of our colleagues,
including in the Council, decided to withdraw. It is totally unacceptable to prioritize
human rights issues while denying innocent children their right to live.
Russia calls on the Council to ensure support for the repatriation efforts of
States. All counter-terrorism resolutions must recognize that problem.

24/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

Annex XI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah DeShong
I wish to begin by joining Council members in thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx for their valuable briefings on
the threats that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) poses to international
peace and security.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains profoundly concerned about the
acts of violence and the atrocious crimes committed by ISIL and its affiliates. Recent
terrorist attacks across the globe demonstrate that, despite its territorial defeat in
Iraq and Syria, ISIL is continuing to expand its network, threatening State authority
and disrupting peaceful societies as it carries out attacks against innocent civilians.
We also note with particular concern, the findings in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2020/774) that the global threat from ISIL is likely to increase in the medium to
long term if the international community fails to comprehensively address it. Also
disturbing is the observation that the inequalities and social fractures, accelerated
and magnified by the coronavirus disease pandemic, have the potential to feed into a
vicious circle of destabilization and violence that ISIL is keen to exploit.
In order to address the threats to international stability and security arising
from ISIL’s continued expansion, the international community should renew its
commitment to strengthening cooperation, bolstering stability and enhancing
institutional capacities across all regions. Comprehensive strategies that promote
social inclusion and cohesion, including through sustainable social and economic
development initiatives, should be advanced in order to build resilient societies and
reduce radicalization. Moreover, all counter-terrorism actions must be conducted in
accordance with international law and accompanied by the full implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We must also effectively and efficiently share information
responsibly with our partners in law enforcement and the intelligence community.
Countering the financing of terrorism is also an essential part of the global
fight against terror. It is therefore of the utmost importance to monitor changes in the
terror-financing techniques utilized by ISIL. Similarly, in order to combat emerging
terrorist financing risks, we call on the international community to fully implement
resolution 2462 (2019), which requires Member States to disrupt and criminalize
the financing of terrorism for any purpose. In that regard, we commend the efforts
made by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in the area of terrorist financing, and welcome
the recent launch of a global capacity-building programme, pursuant to resolution
2462 (2019), on the prevention and suppression of the financing of terrorism. We
underscore, however, that all initiatives to combat terrorist financing must be
designed in such a way that they safeguard all legitimate and well-managed financial
activities, including in offshore jurisdictions.
In conclusion, we underscore the central role of the United Nations in
preventing and countering terrorism. The threats posed by terrorism can only be
defeated through increased regional and international cooperation and through a
comprehensive approach, with the active contribution and participation of all
Member States. Finally, we reaffirm our commitment to contributing to the global
efforts of preventing and countering terrorism.

20-1118125/33

S/2020/836

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
We congratulate Indonesia on its successful presidency of the Security Council
and thank the briefers for their insightful perspectives on the Secretary-General’s
eleventh strategic-level report (S/2020/774) on the threat posed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) to international peace and security and the various
efforts of the United Nations to support Member States in countering that threat.
Appropriately, this meeting takes place shortly after the United Nations
marked the third International Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to the Victims
of Terrorism on 21 August in an event that provided a moving and timely reminder
of the immense human costs that result from terrorism. As humankind continues to
fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, South Africa strongly supports
the Secretary-General’s call for an immediate global ceasefire in all corners of
the world.
The Secretary-General’s report illustrates that, much like the COVID-19
pandemic, which is proving to be a stubborn threat despite massive efforts to counter
it, ISIL/Da’esh continues to be a stubborn threat to international peace and security.
The report describes a new surge of ISIL activity in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic, while the group continues to pursue its deadly agenda via new affiliations
in different regions of the world. South Africa is encouraged by the progress made by
the Organization’s leadership in its development of a global multi-agency framework
to assist Member States with the protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of third-country nationals returning from Syria and Iraq in order to
meet the ongoing challenge of individuals with suspected links to ISIL — especially
women and children — stranded in camps or being held in the north-east of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
The report also describes the inherent risks of the greater online recruitment
and radicalization of a much larger captive audience, and of making greater use of the
Internet as a substitute for activities impeded by the COVID-19 pandemic. Equally
important is the report’s mention of the possibility that the widespread economic
depression resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic could lead to the exacerbation of
socioeconomic challenges linked to radicalization and terrorism.
South Africa has consistently sought to highlight the importance of measures
to address these root causes, which give rise to the resentment that ultimately fuels
terrorism. On that point, we urge the United Nations and its Member States not
to allow the COVID-19 pandemic to prevent us from reaching the Sustainable
Development Goals by their target date, which would inevitably allow extremist
movements throughout the world to take further root.
We are of course particularly concerned about the situation in Africa. As the
report details, the persistent instability in Libya continues to provide fertile ground
for the spread of terrorism on the continent. At the same time, Islamic State affiliates
in the form of the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, the Islamic State West Africa
Province and Al-Shabaab in Somalia, and the Islamic State Central Africa Province
(ISCAP) continue to carry out frequent attacks while attempting to entrench their
operations and strengthen their ties with core and local strategic partners of ISIL.
Naturally, a key concern for South Africa is the situation described in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where ISCAP has continued its attempts to
establish a greater operational presence and has carried out attacks against the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the forces of the United
26/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We are also particularly concerned about the insurgency that is gripping
northern parts of South Africa’s neighbour, Mozambique, where some attacks have
been claimed on behalf of ISCAP.
Both of those situations are the focus of high-level regional attention by the
Southern African Development Community (SADC). Indeed, only a few days ago,
the leaders of SADC’s 16 member States expressed their commitment to supporting
Mozambique in addressing terrorism and violent attacks. It is important that these
regional efforts continue to enjoy the full support of the international community and
the United Nations. Allow me in this regard to express South Africa’s appreciation
to the United Nations for its continued support, including the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism’s valuable contribution to a Southern Africa-wide counterfinancing of terrorism operational plan, developed and implemented in collaboration
with the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating South Africa’s steadfast condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and our strong commitment to
supporting United Nations-led efforts to fight this scourge. As always, we call for the
further development and enhancement of regional strategic partnerships, including
with the African Union, and we emphasize the critical importance of ensuring that
all of our counter-terrorism measures across the board are conducted in accordance
with international human rights and humanitarian law.

20-1118127/33

S/2020/836

Annex XIII
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

I thank both Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov and Assistant
Secretary-General Michèle Coninsx for their comprehensive briefings.
I would like to take this opportunity to express Tunisia’s support for and
solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their families all over the world on the
occasion of the third International Day of Remembrance and Tribute to the Victims
of Terrorism, held on 21 August.
As the report of the Secretary General (S/2020/774) indicates, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) and Al-Qaida continue to constitute a
threat to international peace and security. Despite its previous military defeat in
Syria and Iraq and the continued efforts to combat its affiliates around the world,
ISIL is attempting to reconstitute and rebuild its network and readjust its continued
ambition for a territorial existence, particularly in conflict zones.
The increase in the number of terrorist attacks in Syria and Iraq compared to
the same period last year is very concerning in this regard, despite the restrictions
imposed by the pandemic. Furthermore, ISIL still maintains ownership of important
financial resources amounting to $100 million. It continues to engage in illegal
activities, including organized criminal enterprise, and reap profits from donations
and fundraisings, especially through social media campaigns.
The accelerated decentralization between the central command in Da’esh
and Al-Qaida and their remote affiliates has been increasingly visible, with local
groups acquiring their own distinct regional characteristics and objectives. This may
constitute both an opportunity and a threat. On the one hand, the lack of command,
with the recent deaths of several terrorist leaders, creates a power vacuum that
the international community needs to use to good advantage to further mangle
the strategic direction of ISIL and Al-Qaida and the effectiveness and outreach of
their propaganda. On the other hand, however, affiliates are increasingly adapting
themselves to regional contexts and exploiting local grievances by building financial,
operational and family ties with other terrorist and organized-crime groups and
by exacerbating tensions among different ethnic groups in some contexts to fuel
conflicts and insecurity.
Tunisia expresses grave concern with regard to the growth of terrorism and
violent extremism in Africa, particularly in Libya and the West Africa and Sahel
regions, where terrorist groups are systematically undermining poor socioeconomic
conditions, marginalization, porous borders and the lack of security and political
and social instability. We express particular concern about the recent reports of
thousands of mercenaries from north-western Syria travelling towards Tripoli. This
relocation constitutes a major terrorist threat not only to Libya but to the entire
region. The terrorist travel towards Libya can only prolong the conflict and renders
it bloodier and more difficult than ever to resolve peacefully. Tunisia calls upon
the international community to uphold its obligation to disrupt terrorist travel
and support.
To a certain extent, the pandemic has reduced terrorist threats in the world,
given the difficulty of terrorist movement, and terrorists’ access to financial
resources and regular means has minimized the opportunities for terrorist attacks
against civilians and soft targets to take place. Nonetheless, we should not ignore the
possible medium- and long-term effects of the pandemic on the terrorist threat, as
explained in the Secretary-General’s report and in the analytical paper submitted by
28/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). The unprecedented
social, economic and political challenges resulting from the pandemic have been
quickly integrated into the strategies and propaganda of terrorist groups, in order to
escalate their attacks and spread hateful and extremist ideas to a captive audience
that is more than ever exposed to their online platforms.
The dire economic and social consequences of the pandemic on countries and
populations have also increased the fragility of societies while pressuring Member
States to dedicate resources to countering terrorism and violent extremism measures.
Such vulnerabilities can be exploited in future to radicalize those most affected
and marginalized.
For the foregoing reasons, the response to the terrorist threat should be
comprehensive and multi-dimensional.
First, States Members of the United Nations need to maintain the necessary
resources and focus on their counter-terrorism priorities, while keeping and
enhancing means of international coordination and cooperation despite the current
pandemic, in a manner consistent with international law, particularly international
human rights law, international humanitarian law and international refugee law.
Secondly, it is crucial to address the deep causes of terrorism and establish the
necessary safeguards to build resilience against terrorism and radicalization through
the promotion of human rights, gender equality, youth participation, sustainable
economic development and social cohesion. Tunisia also reiterates its call for the
international community to disrupt all safe havens of terrorism through the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, particularly during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. In this regard, the report of the Secretary-General highlights resolution
2532 (2020), in which the Security Council, considering the unprecedented extent of
the COVID-19 pandemic likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security, demanded a general and immediate cessation of hostilities and a durable
humanitarian pause. However, the Council affirmed that these requirements do not
apply to military operations against ISIL and other designated terrorist groups.
Thirdly, the international community must address the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters (FTFs) in a manner consistent with the realities, needs and capacities
of different Member States. The Security Council has recognized in several of its
resolutions that FTFs pose a serious threat to their States of origin and that these
fighters have, upon their return, attempted, organized, planned and participated in
terrorist attacks, including against soft targets. Tunisia reaffirms that Member States
need to ensure that all perpetrators of terrorist crimes are held accountable for their
acts, including through judicial and law-enforcement cooperation.
Finally, during the pandemic, the United Nations needs to remain vigilant
and unified in its response to terrorism. It is crucial that we adapt to the new and
unprecedented challenges before us and that we ensure the continuity and efficiency
of our response, particularly through the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies.
The postponement of the review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy should not make us lose focus on the priority given to counter-terrorism
efforts nor hinder respect for our international obligations and commitments,
including international human rights law, international humanitarian law and
international refugee law. We remain committed to multilateral and multi-stakeholder
cooperation in striving to reach our common objective of a world free of terrorism.

20-1118129/33

S/2020/836

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for his informative assessment
of the evolving threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS) and the
ongoing United Nations efforts to counter it. Last year, we saw how our collective
efforts resulted in ISIS’s loss of territorial control and the death of its leader, Abu
Bakr Al-Baghdadi. These victories in the battle against ISIS are a testament to the
ongoing work of the global coalition to defeat it.
The coalition continues to pursue four main non-military lines of effort:
counter-financing; counter-messaging; detention, repatriation and accountability for
crimes and abuses by foreign terrorist fighters; and stabilization of areas liberated
by ISIS. It is critical that the coalition continues each of these efforts.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/774) has made it clear that ISIS
affiliates continue to pose a serious threat, from West Africa to South-East Asia. The
United States seeks to call attention to the vast scale of this threat by identifying,
sanctioning and targeting each ISIS affiliate. Earlier this year, the United States
worked with Council members to list five ISIS-affiliated terrorist organizations
in the Security Council Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. We thank
the many countries that sponsored these listings and encourage States Members of
the United Nations to join us in identifying, listing and countering similar affiliates
around the world.
Even though ISIS and its so-called caliphate have been defeated on the
battlefield, we must work together to ensure that the population of detained foreign
terrorist fighters as well as their family members displaced in Syria and Iraq do not
become the nucleus of an ISIS 2.0. We share the Secretary-General’s deep concerns
regarding the thousands of foreign terrorist fighters and their family members, most
of whom are young children, who are still in camps and detention facilities. Foreign
terrorist fighters must face prosecution and accountability for their crimes, and we
need to rehabilitate and reintegrate family members, so a new generation of ISIS
fighters does not emerge.
The United States has led by example, bringing back our citizens and
prosecuting them where appropriate. Countries must repatriate, prosecute, rehabilitate
and reintegrate foreign terrorist fighters and their families, as appropriate.
We are disappointed that Indonesia’s efforts to draft a meaningful resolution
on the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of terrorists were stymied by the
refusal of Council members to include repatriation. The world is watching. Will the
Security Council make efforts to address the situation of foreign terrorist fighters
and their family members left in Syria and Iraq? Or — just as the Council did two
weeks ago with our draft resolution on the Iran arms embargo (S/2020/797) — will
members dismiss this grave threat to international peace and security and bury their
heads in the sand?
We would also like to take this opportunity to challenge the Council to
refuse to accept countries’ attempts to misuse counter-terrorism to pursue their own
political ends. We are deeply concerned about the situation in Xinjiang, where more
than a million Uyghurs and other Muslims have been detained under the false guise
of counter-terrorism. Confinement that is imposed based on vague indicators and
without fair trial guarantees is inconsistent with international law. Counter-terrorism
30/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

and countering violent extremism should never be used as a pretext to silence
political dissent or freedom of expression or to violate religious freedom or repress
minority groups.
The United States stands ready to work with our partners to prevent and
counter terrorism, while protecting and promoting human rights and fundamental
freedoms. We can only hope our partners will rise to the occasion to join us —
particularly when it comes to addressing threats emanating from Iran — the world’s
number one State sponsor of terrorism.

20-1118131/33

S/2020/836

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx for their informative briefings.
We highly appreciate the Secretary-General’s eleventh strategic report on the
threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) (S/2020/774). We
share the concern that, during the reporting period, the international community
faced a two-pronged attack — from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and from new attacks by ISIL and its affiliates, especially in conflict areas.
Terrorists are taking advantage of every opportunity to exploit and exacerbate the
harsh socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic and prolonged conflicts, turning them
to their advantage. They sow discord and radicalization by promoting narratives
on inequalities, inequities, poverty, marginalization and discrimination. These are
stark reminders that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations remains a serious
threat to international peace and security.
We take this opportunity to thank the Indonesian presidency for consistently
focusing the Council’s attention on addressing the threat of terrorism. In this
regard, my delegation wishes to stress the importance of international and regional
cooperation, as no country is safe until all are safe. That is particularly true when
States have to stretch their domestic resources dedicated to meeting other priorities.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/774) confirms that the issue
of foreign terrorist fighters returning to their home country or relocating to third
countries is a growing challenge, in particular when countries reopen their borders.
ISIL’s financial reserves, worth some $100 million, together with various fundraising
methods used by terrorist groups, add to the seriousness of the threat. It is therefore
crucial to enhance the sharing of intelligence and analysis between and among
States on terrorists’ movement, imminent attacks, recruitment, financing and online
propaganda, as well as on building national capacity in law enforcement.
At the global level, the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
continues to represent a comprehensive and effective framework for eliminating the
threat, with the United Nations assuming a central coordinating role. We welcome
in particular the instrumental functions fulfilled by the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED),
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015), as well as various other relevant United
Nations agencies, in providing technical assistance and capacity-building. Their
efforts to ensure business continuity, deliver technical assistance and engage with
Member States through online platforms deserve a special note.
We wish to highlight the contribution of the recent Virtual Counter-Terrorism
Week in maintaining the momentum in the fight against terrorism. We have listened
to and welcome the emphasis on strengthening the coherence, coordination and
effectiveness of United Nations counter-terrorism work, particularly between
UNOCT and CTED. The COVID-19 pandemic shows how important it is to ensure
synergies and coordination in our actions with limited resources.
Last but not least, addressing the multidimensional threat of terrorism
requires a comprehensive and holistic approach, which includes addressing the
conditions conducive to terrorism. We must remain firmly committed to preventing
and resolving conflicts, sustaining peace, promoting development and ensuring
respect for human rights for all. Bringing terrorists to justice and preventing the
32/33

20-11181

S/2020/836

return of terrorism continue to be of the utmost importance and must be carried out
in accordance with national laws and international obligations. We are convinced
that mutual legal assistance and the sharing of best practices in the prosecution,
reintegration and rehabilitation of terrorists and their dependents, as appropriate,
can prove beneficial and should be furthered. It is also critical to adopt a wholeof-society approach by involving all actors, especially women, young people,
non-governmental organizations, the private sector and academia, in building
balanced and cohesive societies that are resilient to terrorism and radicalisation.
In closing, Viet Nam reiterates its firm position rejecting terrorism and
will continue to be a devoted partner in advancing our common struggle against
terrorism on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and our
common values.

20-1118133/33
