S/PRST/2001/9*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 March 2001
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4300th meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 March 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Georgia — Letter dated 17 March 2001 from the Acting Permanent Representative
of Ukraine to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2001/242)”,
the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the successful holding of the third
meeting on confidence-building measures between the Georgian and Abkhaz
sides in Yalta on 15 and 16 March 2001 and the resumption of dialogue
between them, and notes the documents signed there (S/2001/242). It hopes
that action flowing from the Yalta meeting will lead to a narrowing of the
positions of the two sides and stimulate further constructive dialogue aimed at
achieving a comprehensive political settlement of the conflict, including a
settlement of the political status of Abkhazia within the State of Georgia and
other key issues. The Council underlines the contribution that confidencebuilding measures can bring to the peace process and commends the efforts by
the Government of Ukraine in ensuring the success of the Yalta meeting.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the efforts by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to enhance contacts at all levels
between the Georgian and Abkhaz sides, in close cooperation with the Russian
Federation, in its capacity as facilitator, the Group of Friends of the SecretaryGeneral and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
“The Security Council encourages the two sides to engage with renewed
commitment in the peace process. The Council notes the stated willingness of
the two sides to ensure favourable conditions for the continuation of the peace
process, their stated commitment to the non-use of force and their stated
determination to intensify efforts in order to create the necessary climate for
the voluntary return of internally displaced persons and refugees in secure and
dignified conditions. The Council also notes the important contribution that the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia and the Collective Peacekeeping
Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States continue to make in
stabilizing the situation in the zone of conflict.

* Reissued for technical reason.

01-29824* (E)

220301

*0129824*

S/PRST/2001/9

“The Security Council underlines the unacceptability of the holding of
self-styled local elections in Abkhazia, Georgia, on 10 March 2001, which it
deems illegitimate and unhelpful. The organization of these elections
represents an additional obstacle to the attempts to reach a comprehensive
settlement of the conflict based on international law.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of negotiations on the core
political questions of the conflict. In this regard, it looks forward to the
briefing to be provided by the Secretary-General on the progress of the
political settlement, including on the status of the draft paper his Special
Representative intends to submit to the two sides, as referred to in paragraph
16 of its resolution 1339 (2001) of 31 January 2001.
“The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter and
reaffirms its commitment to advancing the peace process.”

2
