TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

nd
, MEETING: 18 AUGUST 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1502) . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge d’Affaires
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9385)

Pay
1

a.i. of Lebanon

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9387) . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1502

-

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND SECOND MEETING

on Monday, 18 August 1969, at 4 p.m.

President: Mr. J. DE PINIES (Spain).

text of the identical letters he has addressed to the
Governments of Lebanon and Israel,

Besent: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia,

3. Mr. MORALES SUAREZ (Colombia) (traMslated from
Spanish): Mr. President, during the Council’s discussions I
have not yet had an opportunity to perform the pleasant
ddty of noting the brilliant performance by Ambassador
Boye of Senegal as President of the Council or to express
my delegation’s great pleasure at seeing you, a worthy
representative of Spain, occupying a post in which your
outstanding qualifications have already been displayed.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l502)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

4. The events described in the Security Council during
these meetings are a source of profound concern to the
delegation of Colombia for several reasons. First of all,
within the world arena, such events thwart the basic
purposes of the United Nations, undermine the possibilities
of conciliation and understanding and-which is more
inhumane and painful-may represent the sacrifice of
innocent persons. Furthermore, the cordial and Iong-standing relations maintained by my Government with Lebanon
make us sincerely distressed that these deplorable events
should be affecting that country’s nationals and territory.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9385).
3. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9387).
Adoption of the agenda

5. My delegation considers-and this is an unquestionably
valid principle-that reprisals are indefensible actions, contrary to international ethics and the canons of justice; one
nation, which is necessarily motivated by partial considerations, cannot have the right to use this pretext to punish
the acts of other nations and violate their integrity or the
security which their nationals are entitled to enjoy.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge! d’Affaires
a.i. of Lebanon addressed to the President of the Security
CounciI (S/9385)

6. In accordance with the general criterion which determines my delegation’s position in the Security Council,
however, we cannot consider only one aspect of the
problem, because we would then become an instrument of
one-sided interests, instead of serving the cause of justice.
The fact is that violations of the cease-fire which are
maintaining tension in the Middle East have occurred.
These violations must be censured indiscriminately, regardless of their origin or the reasons given to justify them.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9387)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In accordance with the decision’ previously taken by the Council, I
shall now invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel
to take places at the Council table.

7. My delegation is ready to consider in a constructive
spirit measures designed to forestall and prevent a recurrence of the kind of events now being considered by the
Council, In our desire to serve the cause of peace, we
clearly see that the road to understanding, as the Permanent
Representative of Colombia to this Organization has put it,
is not through extremes but through the mid-course of law,
reason and justice.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the CounCil
table.
2. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish): The Council will now continue its consideration of the item on the
agenda. Before calling on the first speaker on my list, I
must inform the members of the Council that document
S/9393 has been circulated, In this document, the
Secretary-General transmits to the Security Council the

8. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Colombia for the kind words he has
addressed to me.
1

representatives who hope that July will be a month devoted
more to bilateral than international diplomacy” [14&‘r~~
meeting, para. 261.

9. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, the grave events which have recently occurred in the Middle East are once again engaging
the attention of the Security Council. These events, which
have caused loss of life, human suffering and substantial
material damage, come after other similar events which
have been repeated with tragic frequency in recent months,
as has already been said in this Council.

17. We all know full well to which representatives and
what bilateral diplomacy Lord Caradon was referring, juslt
as we all know full well the value of the pacifying influence
which can be exerted by the countries on whose behalf
those important representatives are acting. Indeed, what he
said about the month of July is also applicable to the
month of August.

10. This time, the SCC~Cof the bloody incidents to which I
refer was the frontier between lebanon and Israel. In
saying this, we wish to point out with alarm two particularly significant facts. The first .is the obvious continued and
increasing deterioration in the general situation. I need not
recall that the state of affairs in one of that region’s most
critical areas has recently been described by a highly
authoritative spokesman as a virtual state of war.

18. Our faith in the results of bilateral diplomacy, sincere
as it is, nevertheless does not inspire us to excessive
optimism, because we have been discouraged by many
set-backs. Even so, we have hopes that progress may be
made towards the achievement of peace,
19. So far, I have referred to the general situation and our
position on the conflict dividing the States in that region,
all of which are linked with us by firm ties of friendship.

11. The second fact is that the frontier between Lebanon
and Israel, which until recently was one of the few areas
praciically free of incidents and actions of the kina we are
discussing, now seems also to be a place where truce
violations and continuous threats of breach of a peace so
precarious that it is hardly worthy of the name are almost
aaily occurrences.

20. With regard to the bloody incidents which are the
reason for these meetings, I wish to repeat once again the
principles and sentiments my delegation has already ex.
pressed in similar cases in the past. We sincerely and
fraternally deplore the loss of life, whether Arab or Israeli,
and even more so when the victims are innocent civilians.
We lament the human suffering resulting from the acts of
violence committed in violation of the truce or armistice.
We deeply regret the material damage, especially when it is
suffered by developing countries whose economic infras
structures are therefore basically weak.

12. In view of the obvious gravity of the situation, our
first and basic concern is the complex general problems of
peace and security in the tormented Middle East region.,We
are fully aware of the modest means at our disposal and our
action in this Council has a firm and well-defined purpose:
to co-operate with the utmost determination in ‘the
establishment of a just and lasting peace between the
countries af the area.

21. We consider it the bounden duty of all parties
concerned scrupulously to observe the cease-fire, truce or
armistice. Although we reserve our right to examine each
violation individually, we have never been and are still not
willing to overlook any violent incident of this kind or any
violation of the cease-fire, all of which we unhesitatingly
condemn.

13. By the unanimous vote of its members, the Security
Council has created the legal instrument which provides
what may be the only effective means of achieving that
stable and just peace. I refer, of course, to resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. The implementation of
all its provisions and unconditional adherence to the
principles contained in it point the way to peace.

22. These general considerations, which-1 repeat-have
already been stated many times, will determine my delegation’s attitude towards any proposal that may be submitted
to the Council.

14. We well understand the many and complex obstacles
in the way of the achievement of this common objective
but we do not believe that any of these obstacles are
insurmountable, if nersistcnt efforts and firm determination
are combined with the necessary patielice and tenacity,

23. Before concluding my statement, I should like to
mention the proposal contained in the text of the identical
letters which the Secretary-General addressed to the
Governments of Lebanon and Israel on 16 August I969
through their Permanent Representatives. This letter is
reproduced in document S/9393, circulated today. The
proposal is as follows:

1.5. Bearing this objective constantly in mind, we believe
that one of the basic prerequisites is scrupulous observance
,of the cease-fire provisions adopted by this Council and
prevention of violations of these provisions. If this is an
obvious prerequisite for the creation of the minimum
conditions for the fruitful development of the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, and of
the action, which WC hope is co-ordinated and effective, by
the four permanent members of this Council, then the
authority of this Council makes it mandatory that the
cease-fire, truce or armistice be respected.

“In view of the increasing seriousness of the situation .in
the Israel-Lebanon sector, I consider it to be my duty to
propose to both Governments concerned, as I now do,
that United Nations Observers, in adequate number to
observe effectively, should be stationed on both sides,
with the function of observing and maintaining the
Security Council cease-fire.”

16. At the 1483rd meeting of the Council on 1 July 1969,
the representative of the United Kingdom said: “. . . my
careful inquiries indicate that there are several highly placed

24. In all modesty but also with all firmness, we venture
to urge the Governments concerned to consider this
proposal of the Secretary-General.
2

25. At the beginning of my statement, I said that until
recently the frontier between Lebanon and Israel was
practically free from the bloody incidents which have so
often engaged the attention of the Security Council in
other areas of the same region. It is our fervent wish that,
despite the events which took place a few days ago, this
distinction which made the Lebanese-Israeli frontier practically unique, may be preserved.

has become almost totally ineffective in the Suez Canal
sector and that a virtual state of active war now exists
there., .“/S/9171].1
31. This state of active warfare has now spread to a
country which did not participate in the June 1967 war and
which has shown moderation and restraint in the midst of
passion and conflict. Admittedly, there have been commando raids from Lebanese territory but there is little
evidence that the Government of Lebanon has been directly
responsible for them. Indeed, there is reason to believe that
since the Israeli raid against the Beirut airport last December, when a dozen airliners were destroyed, the Lebanese
Government has tried to restrict the commando activities.
The representative of Israel seemed to be aware of this
when he stated:

26. In this spirit and to this end, we simply but firmly
urge Israel and Lebanon to consider the proposal of the
Secretary-General most carefully in the hope that it may
meet with a rapid and favourable response from the
Governments concerned,
27. Mr. LIU (China): For the second time since last
December the Security Council has been convened to deal
with a dispute between Lebanon and Israel. ‘i’his time
Lebanon has charged that on 11 August units of the Israeli
Air Force raided villages in southern Lebanon, using napalm
bombs, rockets and machine-guns, and causing several
civilian casualties. Those charges have not been denied by
Israel. In his statement before this Council the other day,
the representative of Israel characterized the Israeli attack
as an act of self-defence against commando bases on
Lebanese territory. He asserted:

“

saboteur squads trained and equipped primarily in
Syha *have crossed the border and have established
themselves on Lebanese soil. , , . Indeed, the presence of
the terror bases seems to have had some repercussion on
the internal political situation in Lebanon.” (1498th
meeting, pam. 47.1
32. That being so, it seems to my delegation that the Israel
air attack on Lebanon was directed against the wrong party
and cannot fail to stir up strong anti-Israel sentiment in a
country which has played a moderating role in the Middle
East situation. It is hardly necessary for me to add that my
delegation has always been opposed to the doctrine of
retaliation, a doctrine which must be regarded as contrary
to the spirit of the Charter.

“The shelling and mining raids from Lebanese territory
had been going on day after day in utter disregard of the
cease-fire, endangering the lives of innocent civilians,
bringing bloodshed and destruction to towns and villages.”

28. For his part, the representative of Lebanon has
disclaimed any responsibility for “the actions of the
Palestinian commandos” who have been struggling for the
recovery of their legitimate rights. He has not tried to
conceal the fact that “The Lebanese people , , . have always
stood, and firmly stand at present, on the side of, . . the
PdeStinian
people.” [Ibid., para. 33.1

33. My delegation deplores all acts of violence regardless
of their source or origin. It is a matter of profound regret to
us that the situation in the Middle East has!so deteriorated
as to make the cease-fire totally ineffective. Although the
border warfare is still limited in scope and magnitude, there
is the danger that those who control the destiny of the area
may fmd themselves under such constant and unbearable
pressure as to act against their better judgement and drift
into all-out war without actually wishing it. The Secrirlty
Council must therefore exert itself to prevent any further
deterioration of the situation. It is in the light of those
considerations that my delegation will support any measure
that may be worked out in the course of the current
discussions.

29. Thus, the essential facts involved in the present case
are not in dispute. The crux of the matter is how these facts
are to be evaluated in the context of the over-all situation
in the area,

34. I may add that my delegation whole-heartedly welcomes the initiative taken by the Secretary-General in his
communication
today proposing that United Nations
Observers be stationed in the Israel-Lebanon sector.

30. It is a sad commentary on the state of affairs in the
*Middle East that over two years after the tragic events of
June 1967 the psychological gulf separating the Arabs and
the Israelis remains as unbridgeable as ever, and the
prospects for lasting peace continue to be bleak. In recent
months the situation has further deteriorated. A state of
violence and counter-violence prevails along all the ceasefire lines. The Secretary-Genera1 of the United Nations,
speaking of the situation in the Suez Canal sector, said in a
special report dated 21 April 1969: “, . , the only conclusion to be drawn is that the Security Council cease-fire

35. The PRESIDENT (D’anslated from SpnnMt): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Lebanon, on
whom I now call.

He added:
“The Lebanese authorities seemed unable or unwilling
to curtail those attacks. Israel had no alternative but to
resort to self-defence.” [149&h
meeting, paras. 66
and 67.1

36. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): In the exercise of my right
of reply, I wish to refrain from the sort of recriminations to
which Mr, Tekoah resorted in his last statement before the
Council, I do so for two reasons: out of respect for this
Council, whose authority and dignity we wish to enhance;
1 See Official Records of the Security Ccwncil, Twenty-fourtlr
Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1969.

3

Arab Guerrilla Forces”. In the conclusion of Ws article:,
Mr. Wren mentioned the case of one of the fedayeen who
told him:

and because the facts about our complaint and about the
aggressive action of Israel against Lebanese territory are
sufficiently clear.

“We didn’t accept it for twenty years”-meaning the
fact of being forced out of his home and country, “Our
children will not accept it. Their children will not accept
it. There is room for us. We know it very well, What can
we do? I don’t want to live forever in a tent”.

37. Nevertheless, Mr. Tekoah has raised some points which
call for replies.
38. Mr. Tekoah resorts to the easy task of heaping insults
and slander on the feclayeen-the resistance fighters who
rose from the ranks of the million and a half Arab
Palestinian refugees-and calls them murderers, assassins,
and so on. On 15 August [1501st meeting], he saw fit to
quote to the Council the contemptuous proclamation of
last March of the Vice-President of the Association of
Resistance Fighters of Belgium, a proclamation which has
already been firmly accounted for here in the Council.

And looking towards the west, he added: “I sometimes take
my children to the top of the mountains to show them the
lights of Jerusalem. I tell them, ‘That is your land’ “,
43. We cannot tell these people not to struggle for their
rights. We can only tell them that we are ready to
administer justice to them.

39. But for Mr. Tekoah’s sake, and for the information of
the Council, I should like to mention that Israel has no
monopoly on the feelings of resistance fighters in the
world. If I wished to detain the Council on this matter, I
could recite scores of declarations, articles, and resolutions
by resistance fighters in many lands in favour of the
Palestinian Arabs and their resistance fighters. I would
mention only a certain news dispatch which I am sure has
not gone unnoticed by members of the Council. The New
York Times of 14 July 1969 reported from Amman,
Jordan, the visit of a Dutch resistance hero, Mr. Piet Nak,
who helped organize Amsterdam’s historic general strike in
February 1941, in sympathy with the Jews-an act for
which he was decorated twenty-five years later by Israel.
But this time Mr. Nak went to the Middle East at the head
of a pro-Arab delegation called “The Palestine Committee
in the Netherlands”. That Committee is composed of
several Dutch groups and associations. Mr. Nak stated that
the sensibility that had moved him to champion the cause
of the Jews in 1941 has led him now to champion the cause
of the Palestinians, and he added: “After fourteen days in
the Middle East, I am convinced I have chosen the right
side”.

44. An esteemed Israeli Professor of history, Dr. Yakov
Talmon, has seen the light and felt the needed humanitarian
compassion towards the Arab Palestinians. In a letter to the
Israeli Minister of Information, Mr. Galili, he wrote:
“In world public opinion, and in my own personal
opinion, Israel’s recognition of the Arab Palestinians asa
people entitled to their right to self-determination
remains the major issue . . . Our respect for the rights of
others is the measure according to which the democratic
character and the moral nature of our State will be
evaluated.”
45. The Israeli authorities claimed that on 1 August Qiryat
Shemona was attacked with Katyusha rockets emanating
from Lebanese territory. On that occasion the Lebanese
Minister of Information denied this and other Israeli
allegations that settlements in northern Galilee were sub.
jetted to attack directed from within the Lebanese borders.
He stated that Israel’s persistence in levelling these accusations against Lebanon was only a cover-up for its aggressiveness against Lebanon.
46. The Israeli representative, in his statement here on 13
August j1498th meeting], went on to enumerate twenty
one attacks alleged to have been made against Israel. May I
remind the Council that none of those alleged attacks had
been the subject of any letter of complaint addressed to the
President of the Council or to the Secretary-General prior
to our debate. After they were brought out of Mr. Tekoah’s
bag, the Lebanese military authorities thoroughly investigated the charges. They are in a position emphatically to
deny their veracity.

40. The Palestinian Arabs, Christian and Moslem alike,
have legitimate and inalienable rights in their homeland, in
Jerusalem, and to their Holy Places. The question is
repeatedly asked, how to restore those rights to the
Palestinians. The answer has also been repeatedly given by
the United Nations. Year in and year out resolution
194 (III) of 11 December 1948 has been reiterated by the
General Assembly. It stipulates in favour of the Arab
refugees for repatriation or compensation. The road is clear;
it must be travelled, and the major block on the way to
peace with justice should be removed,

47. To add to his long list of fabricated accusations against
Lebanon. Mr. Tekoah has sent to you, Mr. President, his
letter of 15 August 1969 [S/9392] in which he claims that
two similar, attacks were made. The Lebanese authorities
categorically refute this new charge,

41. It behooves all of: us to ponder the sad situation in
which those refugees have lived for twenty-one years. Their
plight must gain the compassion and the attention of all
mankind. They cannot go on for ever living in squalor and
misery. The restoration of their rights and their human
dignity is the essence of the whole Palestinian problem.
Their feelings must be taken into consideration.

48. All these charges are clearly trumped up to confuse
the cardinal issue before the Council: namely, the Lebanese
complaint against the premeditated, well-planned, massive
and aggressive air attack by Israel against seven villages ia
southern Lebanon, where a number of civilians were killed
and injured, some of them as a result of bums inflicted by
napalm,

42. Allow me to offer a quotation. In its issue of 13 May
1969, Look magazine published an illustrated article by its
senior editor, Mr. Christopher S. Wren, entitled “With the
4

49. The “Johnny-come-lately”
policy followed by Israel
of lodging unfounded counter-complaints against well-substantiated Arab complaints smacks of frivolity and of an
underestimation of the role of the Security Council. For
the sake of argument, I wish to grant Mr. Tekoah a point:
the Lebanese word may not be enough; it is pitted against
the Israeli word. Therefore, why go around the North Pole
to reach the truth-the real facts? There is a shorter and
more direct road. It follows a straight line: the legal line of
the United Nations machinery established under the Armistice Agreement. The Armistice Commission is still juridically alive; its members are physically present in Lebanon.
They are absolutely free to perform their duty, and
Lebanon, as always in the past, is willing to facilitate their
task and to co-operate with them. For over two years they
have been prevented by Israel from performing their
mission.

54, For the sake of peace and justice, the conquest of
Arab lands must be terminated-a situation which, as the
President of Lebanon, Charles Helou, has said, “Pretends to
find in violence the foundation of peace”. That situation
must come to an end. Otherwise, the consequences ace
bound to lead to disastrous developments.
55. I should like to quote in French the apt words which
President Helou pronounced on 21 November 1967.
(The speaker continued in French.J
“The omnipotence of truth and justice, if disregarded,
always asserts itself in the end. Error and iniquity, by an
inevitable chain reaction, are destined to provoke disasters of unlimited consequences, To admit the primacy
of force by allowing the victor to subject the vanquished
to his law is to invite the vanquished of yesterday to take
over the initiative of violence in order to win their own
victory. If force and not justice is to govern international
relations, what power does not run the risk of becoming
another Palestine one day? Lebanon, a country of
fraternity and tolerance, is opposed to any policy of force
and racism, in solidarity with the Arab States.”

50. The Secretary-General, in his report to the General
Assembly on 17 September 1967, considered that the
Armistice Agreements between the Arab States and Israel
were still valid. That was and remains our view. The
Security Council can reaffirm this legal fact; it can take the
necessary measures to make Israel respect its obligations
under the Armistice Agreements. The members and the
observers of the Commission could then readily ascertain
the true facts and report them to the Council. Should the
Council determine that there is a real need to strengthen
the system of observation through the machinery of the
Armistice Agreement, the Lebanese Government is agree.
able to entertaining recommendations to that effect.

56. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanislzl: The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Israel, on whom I
now call.
57. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have asked to speak in order
to make a few very brief observations on the statement just
made by the representative of Lebanon.

:’ 51. Israel can do likewise if it is really interested in the
promotion of peaceful conditions. But, alas, this has not
been and is not its interest. Its interest lies in taking the law
into its own hands, in defiance of a binding international
agreement and of United Nations resolutions. This led Israel
treacherously to attack the International Airport of Beirut
on 28 December 1968, for which it was strongly and
unanimously condemned by this Council; and to attack
seven Lebanese villages in southern Lebanon on 11 August
1969, for which it deserves an equal condemnation.

58. I regret to inform the Security Council that, even as it
pursues its deliberations, acts of aggression from Lebanese
territory are continuing, After Friday’s meeting of the
Council I submitted, on instructions from my Government,
a letter to the President in which I drew attention to the
following attacks against Israel:
“On the night of 14-15 August, approximately at 2400
hours local time, the village of Metullah was subjected to
bazooka fire from Lebanese territory.

I/ 52. We are certain that the Council is conscious of its duty
under the Charter to prevent aggressive acts against the
sovereignty, peace and security of a Member State. Lebanon does not request the legal protective shield of the
Security Council only because it is a Member State entitled
to benefit from the system of security established by the
Charter; Lebanon requests’ it because Lebanoq is a small,
defenceless, peace-loving, non-militaristic and non-aggressive nation; Lebanon requests it because, from the inception of the United Nations, Lebanon has whole-heartedly
and profusely contributed to the development and strengthening of the United Nations, to the elaboration and
application of its principles, to the promotion of all the just
causes and rightful endeavours it has espoused and undertaken, to the writing, declaration and application of human
rights; Lebanon requests it because Lebanon has shown on
many occasions its peaceful policies and its support for all
actions tending to promote peace in the world.

“On the same night saboteurs crossed from Lebanon
into Israel and blew up a water conduit near the town of
Qiryat Shemona near the Lebanese frontier. A second
unexploded charge was later discovered in the same area.
A water conduit and an electricity pole were also blown
up between the villages of Manara and Yiftah.
“In both cases tracks of saboteurs were traced from and
to the cease-fire line with Lebanon,” /S/9392!.
59. Yesterday, 17 August, a mining raid in the Herman
area resulted in the blowing up of a vehicle and the death of
an Israeli soldier. These further incidents underline the
gravity of the situation created by the continuous acts of
aggression’perpetrated from Lebanon.
60. Today the representative of Lebanon has chosen again
to express support for terror warfare against Israel and for
the fedayeen-Arab
assassins organized, trained and
financed by the Arab Governments to wage warfare against

53. Lebanon has every juridical and moral reason strongly
to request that the Council take the necessary action to
curb the aggressive acts of Israel against Lebanon.
5

Israel by murdering Israeli men, women and children. They
do so whenever regular Arab armies are incapable of
carrying out full-scale hostilities, That has been the pattern
for the past twenty years. By now the entire world knows
what these assassinsstand for. Their spiritual father, Haji
Ammin El Husseini, is a former collaborator of Hitler’s who
spent the Second World War years in Berlin advising
Eichmamr on the annihilation of Jews, a man declared a
war criminal by the Allies. Their present leader, Yassir
Arafat, defined on 5 June 1968 the aim of the fe&yeen
terror warfare against Israel as follows: “The liquidation of
the Zionist existence”.

the bear into his vineyard.” To Lebanon we say simply:
“Get the bear out, and there will be no trouble,” It is to be
hoped that the Lebanese representative and his Government
will see the wisdom of that proverb.
66. The PRESIDENT (translated fvam Spanish): I call on
the representative of Lebanon,
67. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): I have only one comment
to make on the last statement by Mr, Tekoah. It is not the
bear that we have in Lebanon. We have over 200,000
innocent lambs who have been driven from their homeland,
Palestine ;

61. Let there be no mistake about it. By identifying
themselves with the terror organizations, the Lebanese
Government in Beirut or the Egyptian Government in Cairo
identify themselves with the fanatical attempt to destroy a
Member State of the United Nations.

68. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I calI on
the representative of Israel.
69. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It is not unusual for Arab
delegations from time to time to employ the plight of
refugees-with which all of us fully sympathize-for
political purposes, in particular. for debating contests, The
Arab delegations tend on such occasions to ignore one
simple fact. An almost equal number of Jewish refugees
from Arab States left their homes and settled in Israel after
the 1948 war. The only difference between the Jewish
refugees from the Arab States and the Arab Palestinian
refugees is that, while the latter have been abandoned by
their brethren and many of them continue to live on
international charity, the Jewish refugees from the Arab
States have been accepted and fully integrated into Israel.

62. It is after adopting such an attitude that the Lebanese
representative comes here to preach to us of Lebanon’s
loyalty to the United Nations and its machinery and to
demand a one-sided Security Council resolution directed
against Israel.
63. The Lebanese representative’s line of argument in his
statement of today, in which denial follows denial about
facts known to all, is reminiscent of the old Jewish folklore
story about the glassjar. A landlady who lent a glassjar to
her next-door neighbour went after some time to ask for its
return. The neighbour, an astute landlady herself, cried out
the following answer: “Really, my dear, you are all wrong.
First of all, I have never taken any jar from you. Secondly,
don’t you remember that the jar wasreally all chipped and
cracked, nothing but a broken piece of glass? Finally, I
have long ago returned the jar to you, and it is real temerity
for you to suggestthat I want your miserable vessel.”

70. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish): I haveno
more speakers on my list. I believe that all the members of
the Council have participated in this debate, with the
exception of my own delegation. I now propose therefore
to make a statement on this matter, speaking on behalf of
SPAIN.

64. As I indicated at previous meetings, the facts concerning armed attacks from Lebanese territory have been not
only widely reported but also openly admitted by Lebanese
leaders and the Lebanese press. It may of course happen
that, for the sake of debate in the Council, arguments put
forward here are somewhat different from attitudes
adopted ehewhere. However, the gap between the Lebanese
representative’s protestations and the views expressed by
the Government of Lebanon on other occasions is most
striking and unusual. Thus, Le Monde of 9 August reports
that the Prime Minister of Lebanon declared on the
previous day to the Middle East News Agency: “The
Government of Lebanon should assume its part of the
responsibility for the activities of commandos.” Will the
representative of Lebanon-indeed, will the Security Council-not recognize the responsibility which Lebanon’s Prime
Minister says his country should assume?

71. The Security Council is considering the complaint
made by Lebanon concerning the bombing of some
Lebanese villages. In that bombing the most modern
weapons were used, inflicting considerable damage and,
what is even worse, leaving dead and wounded among the
civilian population.
72. We also wish to mention the complaints lodged
subsequently by the representative of Israel concerningthe
activity which, according to his information, is being
conducted by irregular forces. We deplore all the casualties
inflicted, whatever the cause.
73. The attempts to justify the Israeli aggression againsl
Lebanon by invoking the right of self-defence are, in mY
delegation’s opinion, completely unacceptable. This explanation given by the delegation of Israel shows that the
attack of 11 August was a premeditated action, Whlelr
therefore cannot be disregarded by this Council. On the
contrary, it deservesour denunciation and condemnation.

65, If the Lebanese Government were only to seeas they
are the dangers inherent in the situation created by the use
of Lebanese territory as a base for armed attacks against
Israel and to face squarely its international obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations and the cease-fire,
the solution would not be long in coming. There is an Arab
proverb which may well hold the key to the understanding
of the situation. The proverb states: “He himself brought

74. Last December there was another Israeli attack, f&e
based on the so-called right of self-defence. The Council did
not accept that explanation, however, and cannot acceptit
now. It is, to say the least, a mockery of the legal principles
of self-defence to try to fit preventive war and reprisal into
6

considers itself wronged- Israel-to settIe the conflict. Do
away with the root causethat is to say-the occupation of
the territories seized by force in violation of the Charter
and the effects will readily disappear . , .” [1469th

that framework. Such actions are nothing but acts of force
contrary to the United Nations Charter, Article ‘2 (4) of
which forbids the Members of the Organization to resort to
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State. At the sametime, it is
well known that Lebanon scrupulously observes its international commitments and has always respected the 1949
Armistice Agreement with Israel. In my delegation’s view, it
is essential for that Agreement to be maintained and strictly
and scrupulously observed by both parties in the future.
This will provide us with a safeguard against an increase of
tension in the region and an extension of the zone of
conflict.

meeting, para. 581.

76. Over two years have now elapsed since the war of June
1967 and almost two years since the Security Council
adopted resolution 242 (1967). The longer its implementation is put off and .the withdrawal of the military forces
occupying the territories of the Arab countries is delayed,
the longer the danger of a recurrence of these incidents will
persist. On this point too, Israel tries to base its case on the
right of conquest, but reprisal, preventive war and conquest
are inadmissible under the United Nations Charter. Only a
few days ago, together with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, I attended a moving ceremony in honour
of the memory of a distinguished observer who died in the
performance of his duty. It is time to put an end to this
conflict, to prevent the loss of innocent victims and to
restore calm and security, so that all the countries of the
area can live in peace and quiet.

75. I should like at this time to lacall the statement made
by my delegation during the Security Council debate on 28
March 1969:
“My delegation has always considered that, if this grave
conflict /in the Middle East/ is to be settled, political
solutions must be worked out; but in the face of so many
denunciations by Israel of the attacks which it alleges are
being committed by the Arab States, my delegation
wonders whether Israel has failed to realize that all these
acts could be avoided if Israel were to withdraw immediately from the territories which it occupies. Had this
withdrawal already been carried out, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the reievant
resolutions, all those victims whom we mourn today
would have been spared or at least, the legal and
procedural position of Israel before this Council would be
far clearer. My delegation cannot understand why these
acts of violence are periodically denounced before the
Council, when it is within the power of the party which

77. In the face of the accusations submitted, the Council
cannot stand aloof. It must discharge the responsibility
entrusted to it by adopting an appropriate resolution which
forcefully condemns the premeditated attacks against Lebanon and, at the same time, issues a warning that a repetition
of the attacks wiil oblige it to take more effective steps, in
conformity with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

7

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont
depositoires
du monde
entier.
Informer-vous
Nations
Unier,
Sectidn
der venter,
New York

KAK IlOJlY’llrlTb

M3AAHHR

COMO

PUBLICACIONES

CONSEGUIR

Las public&ones

de las Nociones

en tadas porter
del mundo.
Cons&e
Ventas,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

DES NATIONS

,

en vente
dons
les librairies
et les agances
oupr6r
de votre librairie
ou odrerrez-vous
b:
ou Genhve.

OPTAHHSAIJLIH

06bEAklHEHHblX

DE LAS NACiONES
Unidqs

UNIES

estbn

en venta

o su librero

o dirljase

Price: $IJ.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

HAUHtl

UNIDAS
en libterias

in other

y cosos

a: Naciones

currencies)

Unidar,

distribuidoros
Scccl6n

de

82195-December

1972-2,050
