112

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Unity at its thirty-third ordinary session, held at Monrovia
from 6 to 20 July 1979, 76
Aware of the need to implement fully, during the Decade,
national, subregional and regional projects aimed at establishing an integrated transport lnd communications network
in Africa to support the accelerated development of the
continent,
Noting with appreciation the considerable financial efforts
made by the Governments of African States to enable a
considerable part of the programme for the first phase ( 19801983) of the Decade to be financed and implemented,
Considering that sustained efforts must be exerted to
mobilize additional resources in order to ensure the implementation of the programme for the Decade,
Recalling the decision by which the Conference of African Ministers of Transport, Communications and Planning, at its second session, held at Addis Ababa from 16
to 18 March 1981, authorized the Executive Secretary of
the Economic Commission for Africa to organize four consultative technical meetings between member States, interested African intergovernmental organizations and donors, 77
Aware of the role played by the Economic Commission
for Africa as the lead agency in the implementation of the
programme for the Transport and Communications Decade
in Africa,
Bearing in mind resolution 422 (XVI) adopted on l 0 April
198 l by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa at its seventh meeting, 78 in which the
Conference, i7!te: alic~, requested the Executive Secretary
of the Comm1ss10n, m collaboration with the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity, to embark
as early as possible on the preparation of the plan of action
for the second phase (l 984-1988) of the Decade,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the Transport and Communications
Decade in Africa; 79
2. Takes note of the results of the consultative technical
meeting on transport and communications for West Africa
which was held at Lome from 8 to 11 June 1981, and ot·
the report on the organization of three other meetings scheduled to be held in 1982;80
3. Notes with satisfaction the contribution made by
some countries to the implementation of the programme for
the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa;
4. Expresses its disappointment, however, at the overall level of resources mobilized so far, which is far below
the level required to finance the subregional programme,
and ap~als to do~or_ co1;1nt~ies, the funding agencies and
the vanous financial mstttuhons to increase their financial
support to the regional and subregional projects for the
Decade;
5. Also ~otes wit~ s_atisfaction the measures taken by
.the ~on?m1c Comm1ss1?n for Africa with respect to the
organ1zat1on and scheduling of the three other consultative
technical meetings, to be held at Ouagadougou from 20 to
23 January 1982, at Yaounde from 15 to 18 March 1982
and at Abidjan from 3 to 5 May 1982;
6. Reiterates its appeal to States members of the Eco~omi~ Commission for Africa to give the highest priority
m ~elf development plans to transport and communications
oroJects;

7. Appeals to donor countries and funding agencies to
participate constructively and in large numbers in the three
consultative technical meetings to be held in I 982 and to
consider, together with the Economic Commission for Africa, possible ways of financing those projects for the Decade that are not national in character;
8. Urges the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa to maintain close co-operation with member States, the Organization of African Unity, regional
African development organizations, development agencies
and interested specialized agencies with a view to the updating, on a regular basis, of the programme for the first
phase of the Decade and in order to relate better the projects
to national and subregional plans;
9. Calls upon States members of the Economic Commission for Africa to step up their efforts in connection with
the study of the possible sources of finance for the implementation of the projects adopted for the Decade;
10. Requests the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Commission for Africa to maintain the necessary co-ordination between the sources of finance and the African countries to assure the success of the implementation of the
programme for the first phase of the Decade;
11. Also requests the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa to organize in 1982, with
groups of donor countries and the financing institutions and
with the participation of Governments, United Nations institutions and African intergovernmental organizations, the
three consultative technical meetings scheduled with a view
to finding additional financial resources for the implementation of the projects for the Decade;
12. Further requests the Executive Secretary of the
Economic Commission for Africa to begin as soon as possible, in collaboration with the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity, the preparation of the plan
of action for the second phase of the Decade;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Economic Commission for Africa with the financial means and
resources necessary to enable it to organize the three consultative technical meetings scheduled to be held in 1982,
inter alia, by using extrabudgetary funds and existing resources to the maximum extent possible, to complete the
preparation of the plan of action for the second phase of the
Transport and Communications Decade in Africa and to
fulfil effecti~ely its role as the lead agency for the Decade,
and to submit to the Economic and Social Council, at its
second regular session of 1982, a progress report on the
implementation of the programme for the Decade;
14. Requests the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Commission for Africa to continue to submit progress reports on the implementation of the programme for the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on
the progress achieved in the implementation of the present
resolution_
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/178.

Multinational Programming and Operational
Centres

76

See A/34/552, annex I.
See EJCN. 14/8 I 2/Rev. I.
78
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /98/.
Supplement No. 14 (E/1981/54), chap. IV.
79
A/36/342.
80
Ibid., sect. V.
77

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 32/ I 97 of 20 December 1977
and _33/202 of. 29 January I 979 on restructuring the economic and ~octal sectors of the United Nations system so
as to make tt more fully capable of dealing with problems

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of international economic co-operation and development in
a comprehensive and effective manner,
Recalling, in particular, section IV of the annex to resolution 32/197 on structures for regional and interregional
co-operation, through which the General Assembly designated the regional commissions, inter alia, as the main
general economic and social development centres within the
United Nations system for their respective regions,
Recalling also its resolution 35/64 of 5 December 1980
on special measures for the social and economic development of Africa in the 1980s,
Recalling further the Final Act of Lagos. 81 adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary
session, devoted to economic matters, held at Lagos on 28
and 29 April 1980, which called, inter alia, for the establishment of a subregional common market by 1990 as the
first step towards the establishment of an African economic
community by the year 2000,
Taking note of resolution 311 (XIII) adopted on I March
1977 by the Conference of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa, 82 by which the Conference decided to
establish a certain number of Multinational Programming
and Operational Centres at the subregional level,
Bearing in mind that the Multinational Programming and
Operational Centres have become an integral part of the
Economic Commission for Africa, through which the Commission effectively carries out its terms of reference not
only with regard to studies, research, the organization of
meetings and consultations but also with regard to its operational activities as an executing agency,
Emphasizing the importance of the activities of the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres for the
African countries and the need for substantial and adequate
financial and human resources to sustain those activities,
I. Calls upon the Secretary-General urgently to seek
to provide extrabudgetary resources to enable all the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres to carry
out in 1982, at the subregional level, their work programme
in the field of general programming, research, studies and
the organization of meetings;
2. Welcomes the financial support which the United
Nations Development Programme has extended to the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres since their
inception and urges the Administrator of the Programme to
continue with this essential support to the operational activities of the Centres during the third programming cycle,
1982-1986, of the Programme;
3. Calls upon other organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system, as well as intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, to render their fullest
support to the activities of the Multinational Programming
and Operational Centres;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa, to submit to the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1982, a report on
the financing of the Multinational Programming and Operational Centres on an established basis;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December /981
81

A/S-11/14, annex II.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. Sixtv-third
Session, Supplement No. 7. vol. I (E/5941). part Ill.
82

36/179.

Interrelationships between resources, environment, people and development
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Director-General for
Development and International Economic Co-operation on
interrelationships between resources, environment. people
and development, 8 '
Conscious of the interrelationships between resources,
environment, people and development, as noted in the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 84
Recognizing that the application of existing knowledge
concerning those interrelationships could lead to a more
efficient use of available resources in the United Nations
system,
Recalling its resolution 35174 of 5 December 1980, in
paragraph 5 of which it requested the Secretary-General_ to
take the requisite steps for implementation of a system-wide
programme of work on the interrelationships between resources, environment, people and development,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions 1981/
51 of ~2 July I 981 and 1981/73 of 24 July 1981,
Aware that the formulation and implementation, at the
national level, of policies and strategies in the fields of
resources, environment, people and development fall within
the prerogative of Governments,
I. Requests the Director-General for Development and
International Economic Co-operation:
(a) To initiate implementation of a co-ordinated multidisciplinary programme of work on interrelationships between resources, environment. people and development, as
outlined in his report, 8 -' and within this framework the recommendations on this subject of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme 85 and of the
Economic and Social Council; 80
(b) Urgently to consult Governments on the elements
contained in his report, as he proceeds in the implementation
of the above-mentioned programme of work;
2. Supports the arrangements proposed by the DirectorGeneral for Development and International Economic Cooperation for interagency consultations and programme
support in the implementation of the programme of work,
as well as the establishment of a small advisory body, to
be financed through the trust fund which has been established for financing activities concerning interrelationships
between resources, environment, people and development,
to assist him in the over-all guidance of the programme of
work and to oversee the operation of the trust fund;
3. Appeals to Governments to contribute to the trust
fund;
4. Decides to review at its thirty-eighth session the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 198/
36/180.

Special measures for the social and economic
development of Africa in the 1980s
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
I May 1974. containing the Declaration and the Programme

"' A/36/571. annex
4
"
Resolution 35/56. annex. para. 41.
" See Official Record., of 1he General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session,
Supplement No. 25 (An6/25 and Corr. I). annex I, decision 9/1, sect. II.
'" See Economic and 'ioc,al Council resolution 1981173 of 24 July 1981.
