S/PV.8611

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8611th meeting

Wednesday, 4 September 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Edjo Memba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2019/682)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-26999 (E)
*1926999*

S/PV.8611

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya; and Ms. Mohamed.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Russian): As this is
the first public meeting of the Security Council for
the month of September, I should like to take this
opportunity, on behalf of the Council, to pay tribute
to Her Excellency Ms. Joanna Wronecka, Permanent
Representative of Poland to the United Nations, for
her service in the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. I am sure I speak for all
the members of the Council in expressing our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Wronecka and her team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2019/682)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, and Ms. Marwa Mohamed, Head
of Advocacy and Outreach of Lawyers for Justice in
Libya.
Mr. Salamé is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Tripoli.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/682, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Salamé; Ambassador Juergen Schulz,
Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany, in his
2/17

04/09/2019

I now give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: Allow me to congratulate the Russian
Federation on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.
I am grateful for the Council’s expression of
support on the occasion of the emergency meeting held
on 10 August (see S/PV.8595), the day of the bombing
in Benghazi that killed three United Nations staff
members. I would like to pay tribute to our colleagues
and friends, Clive Peck, Hussein Abdalla Mahmoud
El-Hadar and Seniloli Tabuatausole, whose lives were
cut short by that cowardly attack. Clive and “Tabs”,
as Mr. Tabuatausole was known, travelled the world
as United Nations security personnel, enabling the
vital work of peacemaking and delivery of life-saving
humanitarian assistance. Hussein had been with the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) for
nearly six years and was due to be married this month.
As United Nations staff members, their sacrifice for the
benefit of Libya and all Libyans will not be forgotten.
I also want to pay tribute to our two staff members
who are still recovering from serious injuries and the
eight other injured Libyan civilians. In parallel to the
United Nations internal inquiry into the incident, we
are requesting the Libyan authorities to cooperate
with us in the investigation and to swiftly bring to
justice the perpetrators. I would like to call upon
Member States to provide the United Nations with any
information they might have on this horrific attack.
The United Nations will remain in Libya. Of course,
we will work to mitigate further risk to our personnel
and operations. But the tragic irony is that, the worse
the situation on the ground becomes, the greater the
need for our presence, mediation efforts and provision
of humanitarian assistance. The Benghazi hub remains
open, and the limited number of United Nations staff
members continues to operate from there. A longerterm position concerning the hub will be taken only
once a fuller assessment of the security situation in the
city and associated risks has been made.
Today marks five months to the day since General
Haftar launched his offensive to seize control of Tripoli,
halting an active and promising political process
and returning the country to renewed conflict. Since
4 April, the conflict has spread geographically and has
19-26999

04/09/2019

The situation in Libya

exacted a heavy toll on civilians and those fighting. To
date, more than 100 civilians have been killed and over
300 injured and 120,000 civilians have been displaced.
There are no confirmed figures on the total number
of fighters who have died so far but, anecdotally, the
figure appears to be in the low thousands. The blood
of yet another generation of young Libyan men is being
spilled on the battlefield, when their skills could be
better used to rebuild their country.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
shelling of airports. A disaster was closely averted last
Sunday, when a plane full of pilgrims returning from
Mecca was miraculously not hit by a series of shells fired
at Mitiga airport. Seven people were injured. I would
ask for the Council’s strong support in condemning
such indiscriminate shelling, which threatens the
lives of substantial numbers of civilians. The United
Nations has consistently responded to requests by the
Government of National Accord that we inspect sites
that have been subjected to attacks. We have conducted
multiple visits to Mitiga airport and one to Zuwara
airport and other civilian sites, including the detention
centre in Tajura, which have been subjected to air strikes
or drone attacks or have been hit by various projectiles
since 4 April. Reports from all those visits are shared
with the Panel of Experts and, when necessary, with the
International Criminal Court.
The situation in the southern town of Murzuq
remains grave. More than 100 people have been
killed and many more injured in the fighting between
the Tebu and Ahali communities. That includes the
precision air strikes on 4 August targeting a gathering
of Tebu representatives, in which more than 40 people
were killed. Thousands have been displaced as homes
and businesses have been looted and burned. The local
conflict risks taking on a national dimension as each
party mobilizes national actors behind them. Elders
from outside Murzuq have tried to mediate an end to
the violence but, unfortunately, without success. On
24 and 25 August, following a number of preparatory
meetings, I convened separate sessions with Ahali and
Tebu representatives to discuss ending the violence and
the return of the displaced and to initiate a discussion
on how the roots of grievances could be addressed
to prevent future tensions from again turning into
serious conflicts.
United Nations humanitarian agencies have
delivered assistance to 1,500 families affected by the
violence in Murzuq. Re-establishing local civilian peace

S/PV. 8611

is an integral part of our mission. It is particularly true
in the south, where the events in Murzuq might spill
over to other cities where different tribes and ethnic
groups have lived in peace until recently. Local peace
also needs to be built on stable local authorities. I remain
concerned about the attempts of the unrecognized
eastern Government to assert control over local
municipalities. The efforts of the interim Government
to conduct parallel municipal elections or establish
appointed municipal steering committees, including
in municipalities where elected councils are already
in place, exacerbate local conflict and fragment local
Government structures. That is unfortunate, given that
local Governments are the most resilient institutions
and are expected to play a crucial role in reconciliation,
the delivery of services and reconstruction. Libyans
broadly agree on the need for further decentralization.
Kidnappings and enforced disappearance continue
across the country. I am very disappointed to report that
there has been no news regarding the fate of House of
Representatives member Siham Sergewa since she was
abducted from her home in Benghazi on 17 July. I reiterate
the call on the authorities in the east to investigate the
enforced disappearance of Ms. Sergewa and make the
findings known. The authorities are responsible for the
safety and security of the people under their territorial
control. They must take all the necessary steps to
determine her whereabouts. The voices of Libya’s
elected representatives cannot be allowed to be quashed
through intimidation or enforced disappearance. I
welcome the continued and loud support of the many
Member States demanding Ms. Sergewa’s swift return.
I reiterate the absolute need for those found responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law to be held accountable
before the competent bodies.
Following my call for the gradual and progressive
closure of all detention centres holding migrants and
refugees, on 1 August the Minister of the Interior
ordered the closure of three of those centres. The
United Nations submitted a contingency plan to the
Government of National Accord on alternative options
to detention. That plan includes release into urban
settings with the provision of assistance, the provision
of necessary health care, access to the labour market
and the identification of durable solutions outside Libya.
Those centres need to be closed through a gradual and
deliberate process in which the relevant United Nations

19-269993/17

S/PV.8611

The situation in Libya

agencies are provided the necessary means to assist that
vulnerable population.
Despite those calls and Government claims to
have shuttered the Tajura detention centre — which
was the site of the deadly air strike in July — migrants
continue to be sent there. Migrants and refugees
continue to be detained in compounds controlled by
armed groups, thereby placing them in extreme danger.
Nearly 500 of those who escaped the July attack on
the Tajura detention centre spontaneously entered the
gathering and departure facility, which is managed
by the department for combating illegal migration.
With more than 1,000 refugees, the infrastructure in
the gathering and departure facility is overstretched
and the humanitarian situation in the facility is
deteriorating rapidly.
Hundreds of migrants and asylum seekers were
intercepted by the Libyan Coast Guard in recent
weeks. Some are now being freed, while others are
being handed over to detention centres. We know of
at least three cases where the occupants of the boats
were immediately freed when they landed on Libyan
territory. UNSMIL continued to receive reports of the
indefinite arbitrary detention of migrants and refugees,
extortion and beatings, trafficking and inhumane
detention conditions, including severe overcrowding
and shortages of food and water. Urgent funding for
the 2019 humanitarian response plan is necessary to
allow us to continue to respond to the needs of the most
vulnerable in Libya, including migrants.

04/09/2019

to enable stability for the benefit of Libyans and the
return to the political process. In that regard, I would
encourage the Council to consider adding a provision
to the Mission’s mandate to enable scalable ceasefire
support for whatever form of further truce or cessation
of hostilities is agreed between the parties. The violence
in Libya is exacerbated by the supply of additional
arms, ammunition and war material into the country.
Violations of the arms embargo have been both
routine and often blatant on the part of both of the main
parties to the conflict and their respective sponsor
member States. The Panel of Experts is reportedly
investigating more than 40 cases of varying magnitude,
despite non-cooperation on the part of most of the
perpetrator member States. It is sadly true to say that
the arms embargo has been ineffective since 4 April
and that there have been no interdictions or searches
conducted at sea, despite such activities being authorized
by resolution 2473 (2019). The reported recent arrival
of thousands of mercenaries into the country threatens
the further extension and escalation of the conflict.
We continue to mobilize national and international
support for a further cessation of hostilities and renewed
dialogue. After a long tour in the eastern part of the
country, my political deputy recently visited Misrata as
part of our engagement with communities across Libya.
As combat fatigue has become more prevalent on the
ground, we are working to build confidence between
the parties.

It is notable that, in response to my 29 July call
for a truce, there was an explicit and positive response
by the Government of National Accord, as well as a
positive, although unilateral and conditioned response,
from General Haftar. As a result of the truce, there was
a substantial reduction in violence along the main fronts
in southern Tripoli and elsewhere. There were certainly
some violations but, broadly speaking, the truce held
for the duration of the Eid Al-Adha festivities.

Despite the bellicose rhetoric and strong
polarization in the country, there is popular support
for an end to the violence, including among the actual
fighters. In fact, fighters are sometimes more sensitive
to the idea of ending the conflict than some politicians.
Confidence-building measures among the different
groups engaged in the conflict include the exchange of
prisoners, exchanges of mortal remains, family visits to
prisoners and, in some cases, phone calls to establish
proof of life.

Despite the subsequent relapse of violence, the
principle has been established that both parties can
commit to a prolonged truce and, without a doubt, the
wide and public support of the international community
played an important role in the lull in the fighting. We
are working to build on the Eid Al-Adha truce through
confidence-building measures to establish a deeper and
more prolonged ceasefire. When such a ceasefire takes
place, it will be necessary that it be sufficiently robust

In parallel, I have started an intensive campaign
with international stakeholders in order to reach
consensus on holding an international meeting of
concerned parties that would contribute — through
an unequivocal message — to ending the conflict and
resuming the political process. To support that goal,
I visited Germany, Malta, the United Arab Emirates,
Turkey and Tunisia. Two days ago, I had lengthy and
constructive discussions with leading officials in Cairo.

4/17

19-26999

04/09/2019

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8611

I intend to continue my tour in the days ahead, starting
with the Arab Maghreb.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Salamé for his briefing.

I am particularly grateful for the strong message
delivered by the Group of Seven major Powers calling
for an international conference bringing together all
the stakeholders and regional actors relevant to the
conflict in Libya, as well as for the recognition that
only a political solution can ensure Libya’s stability. It
remains abundantly clear that, without the commitment
of key external actors engaged in Libya, the conflict
will continue.

I now give the floor to Ambassador Schulz.

The international conference is the second
step in my three-point initiative. We would like the
international community to use that meeting to send a
strong message on the need to respect the arms embargo,
to commit to non-interference in Libyan affairs, to
address the main causes of conflict, as formulated by
the Libyans themselves, and to emphasize its clear
and active support for whatever political formula
the Libyans agree to. An international meeting, with
the active support of our partners from the regional
organizations concerned, therefore remains a sine
qua non to gain the commitment of the main external
stakeholders necessary to ending the conflict and
resuming a Libyan-owned political process.
Many Libyans feel abandoned by part of the
international community and exploited by others.
Without the unequivocal support of the Council and the
broader international community for an immediate end
to the Libyan conflict, I believe that we are faced with
two highly unpalatable scenarios.
One scenario is a persistent and protracted lowintensity conflict that will see continued fratricide
among the Libyans, the immiseration of the
population, the exposure of the vulnerable migrant
and refugee community to further depredations,
the further destruction of the country’s alreadybattered infrastructure and a growing transnational
terrorist threat.
An equally unsatisfactory scenario is a doubling
down of military support for one side or the other by
their external patrons, resulting in a sharp escalation
that will assuredly plunge the entire region into chaos.
The idea that war should be given a chance and that
a military solution is at all possible is quite simply a
chimera. I believe that the Council is capable of more,
and I also believe that the Libyans deserve better.

Mr. Schulz (Germany): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 30 July to
4 September 2019, during which time the Committee
held a formal meeting and conducted additional work
through the written silence procedure.
At the formal meeting held on 30 August 2019,
which was organized in follow-up to a recommendation
contained in the interim report of the Panel of Experts,
the Committee held a discussion with 22 invited
Member States on sanctions implementation. The
Panel of Experts also briefed the participants about the
different sanctions measures. In their interventions,
Committee members and invited Member States
addressed various aspects of the sanctions regime,
emphasizing, in particular, respect for the arms
embargo. Invited Member States also expressed their
commitment to cooperating with the Committee and
with the Panel of Experts. I intend to propose follow-up
action to Committee members on some of the ideas and
proposals that were raised during the meeting.
With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee
responded to a request for guidance from the Republic
of Korea. The Committee also received an update from
the Panel of Experts containing a preliminary case
study on air strikes in Murzuq on 5 August.
In connection with the assets freeze, the Committee
received an exemption notification under paragraph 19
(a) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by the United
Kingdom in relation to the legal expenses of Ms. Aisha
Al-Qadhafi, a listed individual. No negative decision
was taken.
The Committee further received an exemption
request, under paragraph 19 (b) of resolution 1970
(2011), submitted by Switzerland, for the purpose of
allowing a subsidiary of the Libyan Africa Investment
Portfolio, a listed entity, to cover expenses arising from
a national court ruling. The Committee is seeking
further information from Libya in relation to that
exemption request. The Committee also responded to
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the applicability of the
assets freeze measure to a particular entity.

19-269995/17

S/PV.8611

The situation in Libya

With regard to the travel ban, the Committee
approved, with modified travel dates, an exemption
request pursuant to paragraph 16 (a) of resolution 1970
(2011) from Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi. The Committee was
subsequently informed by Oman, Ms. Al-Qadhafi’s
State of residence, that she would not be travelling.
Furthermore, the Committee received a response from
Egypt on the circumstances surrounding the travel of
Mr. Abu Zayd Umar Dorda, a listed individual, from
Libya to Egypt through Tunisia on 17 February.
The Committee wrote to Libya in connection
with measures aimed at preventing illicit exports of
petroleum, including crude oil and refined petroleum
products, from Libya. The letter was in follow-up to a
recommendation contained in the interim report of the
Panel of Experts and asked to activate the oil focal point
and provide his contact details so that the Committee
can correspond with him directly.
We would also like to recall that, in my previous report
to the Security Council (see S/PV.8588), I informed the
Council that the Committee was considering proposals
submitted by a Member State for the designation of
three individuals involved in the criminal network that
illicitly exploits crude oil and other natural resources
in Libya. In that regard, the Committee has sought
additional information from the designating Member
State. The Committee received one implementation
report during the reporting period — from the Kingdom
of the Netherlands — submitted pursuant to paragraph
12 of resolution 2441 (2018).
Finally, in an update on 5 August, the Secretariat
informed the Committee that the Tunisian authorities had
not yet terminated the legal proceedings, as requested
by the Secretariat, against Mr. Moncef Kartas, a
member of the Panel of Experts, and that his belongings,
including a phone, laptop and documents, had also not
been returned. The Committee continues to follow the
case, while recalling paragraph 16 of resolution 2441
(2018), which “urges all States ... to cooperate fully
with the Committee and the Panel”, as well as the 1946
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Schulz for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mohamed.
Ms. Mohamed: My name is Marwa Mohamed.
I am a Libyan human rights defender who has been
6/17

04/09/2019

working on peace and justice in Libya for over 10 years.
Today I speak in my capacity as Head of Advocacy and
Outreach at Lawyers for Justice in Libya. We are a
Libyan organization registered in the United Kingdom
that is working on, and in, Libya to promote human
rights, the rule of law and access to justice.
The 2011 uprising brought Libyans, for the first
time, a profound sense of belonging and ownership
over our collective future. Civil society flourished and
began to take many shapes and forms. But this growing
movement was disrupted by increased intimidation
and violence. The assassination of women’s rights
advocate Salwa Bugaighis in 2014, who was shot dead
in her home, was a turning point. From that moment on,
civil society began to withdraw from the public space,
political leadership and activism. The recent abduction
and disappearance of parliamentarian Siham Sergewa
is a stark illustration of how complete impunity for
attacks and intimidation of activists — women in
particular — has only emboldened perpetrators.
Those of us who choose to fight for peace and
justice in Libya continue to face repression. I address
the Security Council today as a member of Libya’s civil
society who is committed to rebuilding the future of
our country, one that is based on the rule of law and
respect for human rights. That is possible only if we
work together. My statement today will focus on
three main areas of concern, namely, the gendered
impact of the conflict, the widespread use of enforced
disappearances and torture, and the targeting of
civilians and civilian objects.
What happened to Salwa and Siham illustrates a
broader pattern of the risks that human rights defenders,
in general, and women, in particular, face for their
activism in Libya. Since 2014, women human rights
defenders have been routinely subjected to genderbased violence and threats, including physical assault,
abductions, sexual violence, as well as gender-related
slurs and smear campaigns designed to undermine us
and undercut the legitimacy of our work. Such attacks
have also increased on social media. The threat of
reprisals and retaliation for participating in politics or
carrying out human rights work, combined with a lack
of accountability for such acts or specific steps by the
United Nations-backed Government to address these
risks, has effectively forced women out of public life.
The proliferation of weapons despite the United
Nations arms embargo, the breakdown of State
19-26999

04/09/2019

The situation in Libya

institutions, and the general state of lawlessness has had
a disproportional impact on Libyan women’s security
and freedom of movement. Women living in conflictaffected areas are vulnerable to sexual harassment,
rape and abduction. According to 1,300 first-hand
interviews conducted by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
the majority of migrant and refugee women and girls
have been systematically gang-raped by traffickers or
have witnessed others taken away to be abused along
their journey. Migrant and refugee women, who are
held in detention centres run entirely by male guards,
are also strip-searched and exposed to sexual violence,
including rape. Nevertheless, sexual and gender-based
violence, on the whole, remains underreported.
The State’s inability to control the activities of
armed groups and militias has left women vulnerable,
with no accountability for the attacks against them.
In the absence of a central State authority, women
have had to take their safety into their own hands by
adhering to specific dress codes, travelling only with
a male guardian or restricting their movements to the
daytime. That has resulted in profound limitations on
their freedom of movement and their ability to engage
fully in public life.
Given the gendered impact of the conflict on
Libyan women, it is especially critical that they be
meaningfully included in all political talks to bring
sustainable peace to Libya. The token representation
of women or their inclusion at stages when they can
have no influence over the outcome undermines the
effectiveness of any peace process.
Although poorly documented due to fear of
reprisals, enforced disappearances have become a
widespread pattern across Libya since 2011. The only
official numbers from the Ministry of the Interior are
from 2017, and they indicate that 257 people disappeared
in March and April in Tripoli alone. The figure is likely
higher across Libya and over the nine years since the
conflict started. Militias routinely abduct individuals
from their homes, streets, checkpoints and places of
work, holding them in unofficial places of detention
with no access to lawyers, their families or judicial
oversight — usually subjecting them to torture and
other ill-treatment. UNSMIL has reported that some
of the disappeared have been held for up to two years.
Others have never been seen again.

S/PV. 8611

This was most recently illustrated by the enforced
disappearance of parliamentarian and women’s rights
activist Siham Sergewa, who had expressed political
views critical of the offensive of the Libyan National
Army (LNA) on Tripoli and had called for the formation
of a civilian State. Siham was abducted by armed
militias from her home in Benghazi on 17 July. Her
fate remains unknown. Siham’s case is one of many.
Enforced disappearances are used in Libya to deter any
kind of dissent and send a message that there are those
above the law who can operate with total impunity.
Without accountability, the cycle will continue.
Since the LNA’s offensive on Tripoli began,
indiscriminate targeting of civilians and civilian
objects have been documented by Lawyers for Justice
in Libya, activists on the ground and other international
organizations. They include attacks on Mitiga airport
and medical personnel and facilities, in violation of
international humanitarian law, which may amount to
war crimes.
According to the World Health Organization, 106
civilians have been killed, 294 injured and more than
10,000 people displaced across Libya since April.
Furthermore, according to UNSMIL, as of 15 August,
there had been over 37 attacks on health workers and
facilities — with 19 hospitals attacked and 11 medical
personnel killed, in clear violation of international
humanitarian law. Migrant detention centres have also
not been spared. An aerial attack on the official migrant
and refugee detention centre in Tajura in July left 46
dead and at least 130 wounded.
As Secretary-General Guterres himself warns in
his latest report (S/2019/682) on the situation, Libya is
likely to erupt into a full civil war unless immediate
action is taken. It is a test of the Council’s credibility
to act now.
We therefore call on the Security Council to
demand an immediate ceasefire to end the current
conflict and ensure that all civilians are protected from
attacks, including sexual and gender-based violence,
and to stop the transfer of weapons that are being used
to perpetuate the violence. All Member States must
uphold and enforce the United Nations embargo on all
weapons transfers and sales to Libya. The absence of a
clear message from the Security Council has led to an
intensified stockpiling of weapons on both sides at an
alarming rate.

19-269997/17

S/PV.8611

The situation in Libya

We furthermore call on the Council to demand
accountability from all parties to the conflict and
call on the International Criminal Court to initiate
investigations into possible war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
We call on the Council to protect women human
rights defenders. Libyan authorities must ensure
an enabling environment for all women, including
women human rights defenders, peacebuilders and
political leaders. The Council must demand that Libyan
authorities, UNSMIL and all parties to the conflict
ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in all phases of the peace and reconciliation
process. UNSMIL’s active and public support for
substantive engagement by women in conflict and
post-conflict dialogue would send a clear message that
women’s participation and contributions are not only
vital, but necessary.
In conclusion, while warring parties are fighting
for power, it is the Libyan people, the civilians on
the ground, who are paying the ultimate price, many
with their lives. It is their voices that should guide the
Council’s actions in bringing an end to this conflict and
restoring peace to Libya.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Mohamed for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council and
to wish you every success in managing its work for the
month of September. We also wish to thank Poland for
its distinguished presidency of the Council during the
month of August.
At the outset, I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, for his briefing. We assure him of our full
support. We also wish to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, for his briefing. We also
wish to thank Ms. Marwa Mohamed, Head of Advocacy
and Outreach at Lawyers for Justice in Libya, for
her briefing.
8/17

04/09/2019

I wish to focus in my statement on two topics,
namely, field and political developments and
humanitarian developments. Concerning the former
topic, we welcome the commitment of the warring
Libyan parties to the first step of Mr. Salamé’s plan,
which calls for respecting the humanitarian truce
that was initiated on the occasion of Eid Al-Adha
Al-Mubarak, which helped to significantly limit acts of
violence. We hope that we will be able to build upon it
in order to adopt confidence-building measures for a
ceasefire. At the same time, we hope that the Libyan
parties will tangibly respond to the three-step proposal
of the Special Representative, including holding of
international and national meetings that would lead to
strengthening efforts towards resuming the political
process based on dialogue. That would result in ending
the institutional division and reaching lasting security
and stability as part of the comprehensive democratic
process through transparent and credible presidential
and parliamentary elections based upon Paris, Palermo
and Abu Dhabi understandings.
To achieve that goal, the Security Council must
remind all Member States to comply with their
commitments according to the relevant Security Council
resolutions that established the sanctions regime,
foremost of which is arms embargo imposed with
regard to Libya. In his briefing, Mr. Salamé regrettably
mentioned that there had been non-compliance
with some of the sanctions, which have proved
ineffective since the outbreak of the conflict in April.
Non-compliance with Security Council resolutions
will lead to grave consequences, and Libya could
not be an active participant in international forums.
Emphasis should also be placed on restoring the rule of
law throughout the country by strengthening the State
and its role in building unified security institutions
as well as curbing control by armed groups and their
intervention in sovereign institutions.
Furthermore, we are deeply concerned about the
information contained in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/682) regarding an influx of foreign fighters
to Libyan soil and their participation in the ongoing
conflict there. That will lead to an increased risk of
spreading of terrorist hotbeds and entrenching their
destructive activities. The increased attacks recently
by the terrorist group Da’esh have clearly demonstrated
this growing challenge against the security and stability
of Libya and the region.
19-26999

04/09/2019

The situation in Libya

Concerning the humanitarian developments, we
have mentioned before that the daily humanitarian
suffering of the brotherly Libyan people as a result of
increased armed confrontations has reached the most
vulnerable, namely, illegal migrants in the detention
centres. We express our support for the proposal of
the Special Representative to release those migrants
while providing them with safe shelters until their
asylum applications are ready, or until they receive
repatriation support.
We appeal to the warring Libyans parties to
exercise self-restraint, respect human rights law as well
as international humanitarian law and to stop targeting
civilians and civilian institutions. They must allow
humanitarian agencies and humanitarian workers to
safely reach affected areas in order to deliver assistance
to those in need.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, and the Russian Federation
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. You can count on our support. We would also
like to thank Poland for the way they managed the work
of the Council in August.
I would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé for
his briefing on the situation in Libya. I also thank
Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Security
Council established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, for his briefing on the work of the
Committee. And I thank Ms. Marwa Mohamed, Head
of Advocacy and Outreach at Lawyers for Justice in
Libya, for sensitizing the Council to the impact of
the Libyan conflict on women and ordinary citizens
throughout Libya.
South Africa commends the Secretary-General and
Special Representative Salamé for their tireless efforts
to bring together all the Libyan parties and stakeholders
with the aim of reaching an agreement on a permanent
ceasefire. In that regard, we welcome the Special
Representative’s three-step proposal to bring an end to
the conflict, as echoed by Ms. Mohamed.
Eight years since the start of the Libyan conflict,
the country remains deeply divided and on the brink of
a civil war. The failure by the Libyan parties to reach an
agreement to end the conflict has dire consequences for
Libya and the broader region in Africa. Furthermore,
the crisis has exacerbated the ongoing migrant crisis.
South Africa wishes to echo the sentiments of the
African Union Peace and Security Council in stressing

S/PV. 8611

“the need for a peaceful and consensual solution
to the Libyan crisis, which continues to impact
negatively on the security and the stability of
neighbouring countries”.
I wish to take the opportunity of today’s meeting to
focus my intervention on three key issues.
First, there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Libya. South Africa therefore calls all on
parties to agree to a permanent ceasefire and to return
to political dialogue. South Africa will continue to
support the convening of a Libyan national peace and
reconciliation forum, preceded by a national dialogue
conference with a view to unifying the people of Libya.
In that regard, we commend the role played by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya in supporting
those processes.
Secondly, my delegation remains convinced that the
resolution of the Libyan crisis lies in close consultation
and cooperation among the United Nations, the
African Union, the European Union and the League of
Arab States. Equally, we call on neighbouring countries
and those with influence on the political stakeholders
to promote a negotiated settlement.
Thirdly, South Africa emphasizes that there should
be full implementation of the arms embargo. The arms
embargo is important not only to curb the flow of arms
into Libya but also to stem the illicit flow of arms into
the Sahel region and beyond, which fuels conflicts and
causes instability elsewhere on the African continent.
South Africa supports the observation of the
Secretary-General that the rule of law be restored
throughout Libya. That should be accompanied
by the full restoration of State control, including a
holistic security strategy that is built on professional,
accountable and unified security institutions.
South Africa wishes to impress on the Council that
for as long as there is conflict over Libya’s resources,
achieving consensus on a resolution will be difficult.
As such, we call for a comprehensive dialogue that
includes agreement on resource sharing by all political
stakeholders for the sake of reaching a lasting,
sustainable peace for all Libyans. De-escalating the
Libyan conflict necessitates resolving that longstanding financial dispute.
Finally, we wish to urge the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to ensure the inclusion
of women in the processes to resolve the crisis, as

19-269999/17

S/PV.8611

The situation in Libya

Ms. Mohamed requested. Women form an important
constituency in Libya. As such, their involvement in
the formal and informal political processes remains
critical. That is in line with a number of resolutions
adopted by the Council that advocate for the full and
equitable participation of women in public life in order
to build and sustain a strong and vibrant democracy.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China congratulates the Russian Federation on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. We are convinced that,
under your leadership, Mr. President, the Council will
have a fruitful month ahead. China affirms its full
cooperation and support for your work. We also wish to
thank Poland, as President for the month of August, for
its contribution to the smooth conduct of the Council’s
work. China thanks Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Salamé and Ambassador Schulz for
their briefings. I also listened carefully to the statement
by the civil society representative, Ms. Mohamed.
The situation in Libya has been in turmoil for
more than eight years, subjecting the Libyan people to
tremendous suffering and leading to the deterioration
of the security and humanitarian situation in the
surrounding region. The international community must
take effective measures to help Libya to bring about a
cessation of hostilities and the resumption of a political
dialogue. China wishes to make the following remarks.
First, the political process should be Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned. China commends the relevant parties in
Libya for honouring the commitment to a truce during
the Eid al-Adha festivities. All parties must build
upon that, bear in mind the overarching interests of
Libya and its people, strengthen mutual trust and seek
solutions through dialogue and consultations, with a
view to ultimately achieving lasting peace, prosperity
and stability in the country.
Secondly, the international community must play a
constructive role in seeking a solution to the situation
in Libya. It is imperative to uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Libya. Priority must be given to issues
such as foreign terrorist fighters and the influx and
proliferation of weapons in Libya. Council resolutions
must be strictly implemented. Countries with influence
must strive to promote peace negotiations and move
10/17

04/09/2019

the parties towards the cessation of hostilities and the
resumption of dialogue.
Thirdly, support must be given to the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and Special Representative
Salamé. It is also important to leverage the advantages
and roles of the African Union (AU), the League of
Arab States and other regional organizations. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé has
put forward a three-step proposal, which provides a
practical approach to resolving the situation in Libya.
The international community must create conditions
conducive to its implementation, in particular the
second and third steps. The AU and the League of Arab
States are well placed to mediate between the parties to
the conflict and should be supported in that task so as
to build synergy with the United Nations.
Fourthly, the issue of sanctions must be properly
addressed. Under the current circumstances, it is
important to strictly implement the arms embargo on
Libya. At the same time, the purpose of the sanctions
is to facilitate a political settlement. Caution should
be taken to prevent other sanctions from negatively
impacting Libyan civilians or any third countries.
Nor should sanctions compromise the overall national
interests of Libya or the normal lives of Libyans and
their humanitarian needs. The Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
its secretariat and the Panel of Experts should carry out
their work impartially and in strict accordance with the
relevant Council resolutions.
China supports the Libyan people in the pursuit of
peace and stability. China always takes an impartial
stance on the Libyan question and will continue to play
a constructive role in promoting a political settlement
of the Libyan issue. China will work together with the
international community and actively contribute to
restoring peace and stability in Libya.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would
like to take the opportunity of this briefing on the United
Nations Mission of Support in Libya to congratulate the
Russian Federation on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council and to assure you, Mr. President, of our
support. I also wish you every success. I would also like
to thank Poland for the quality of its presidency over
the past month. We congratulate Mr. Ghassan Salamé,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, on
his excellent and, as always, informative briefing.
Lastly, I also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz for
19-26999

04/09/2019

The situation in Libya

his briefing on the periodic report on the activities of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, and Ms. Marwa Mohamed
for her enlightening presentation on the work of the
non-governmental organization Lawyers for Justice
in Libya.
On 21 May, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General drew the Security Council’s
attention to the possible consequences of the clashes
between General Khalifa Haftar’s troops and the forces
of the Government of National Accord, led by Prime
Minister Faiez Serraj (see S/PV.8530). After nearly six
months of hostilities for control of the capital, Tripoli,
the Libyan crisis is increasingly at an impasse, with
almost no prospects for an early settlement.
Like other members, Côte d’Ivoire has repeatedly
expressed to the Council its deep concern about the
security and humanitarian consequences of the fighting
and their impact on the political process to resolve the
crisis. While hoping that the stakeholders recognize
that there will not be a just and lasting peace in their
country without an inclusive, viable and credible
political process, the international community must
unfortunately continue to count the tragic number of
victims of those clashes, which has reached 1,093 deaths
and more than 105,000 displaced persons, according
to estimates by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees as of 9 August.
Of equal concern is the fate of sub-Saharan migrants,
victim to all kinds of human rights abuses and violations
in detention centres, 53 of whom died in the bombing
of the Tajura detention centre on 3 July. Côte d’Ivoire
would like to reiterate its strong condemnation of that
attack and calls for the immediate implementation of
a credible and independent investigation to identify
the perpetrators and hold them accountable before the
law for their acts. In addition, my delegation strongly
hopes that the migrants rescued off the Libyan coast
will be treated with humanity and dignity and that their
repatriation to their countries of origin, if they agree,
will be carried out in conjunction with the specialized
agencies of the United Nations, in accordance with the
relevant international standards.
The documented arms deliveries to the parties to the
conflict, in flagrant violation of the embargo, remain
another source of concern to my country, especially
since they are fuelling a conflict whose stalemate
seems to make the possibility for the resumption

S/PV. 8611

of intra-Libyan dialogue increasingly remote. Côte
d’Ivoire therefore strongly supports the effective
implementation of resolution 2473 (2019), adopted
unanimously on 10 June, which mandates the strict
implementation of the arms embargo through the control
of vessels off the Libyan coast. Compliance with the
arms embargo would no doubt be a decisive factor in
the conclusion of a lasting ceasefire, which would ipso
facto create an environment conducive to the revival
of the political process to resolve the crisis. It is urgent
that the crisis see a swift political resolution that would
create the conditions for an extension of State authority
throughout the national territory and the reversal of
the dangerous trend towards the entrenchment of the
Islamic State in certain parts of the country.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to congratulate Mr. Salamé
once again for his personal and steadfast commitment to
the quest for a return to peace in Libya and to encourage
him to continue his outstanding mediation efforts
with the warring parties despite the many and varied
obstacles he faces. My country remains convinced that
there can be no lasting peace and stability in Libya
without an inclusive, credible political dialogue and calls
for a lasting ceasefire under the auspices of the United
Nations. To that end, the international community, in
particular the Security Council, must use mediation
and good offices to convince the parties to lay down
their weapons and engage in direct dialogue on all the
issues fuelling their differences.
In that connection, my delegation welcomes the plea
of the African Union and the Group of Seven (G-7), made
on the margins of the recent G-7 Summit in Biarritz,
France, for a truce and an inter-Libyan conference. The
organization of such a conference, which Côte d’Ivoire
avidly hopes will take place, can be made possible only
through the joint efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union in keeping with the strategic framework
signed in April 2017.
In that regard, my country would like to recall
the communiqué of the African Union Peace and
Security Council following its meeting of 5 July,
which emphasizes the role of the African Union and
its readiness to work closely with the countries of the
region to find lasting solutions to the Libyan crisis. It
is also worth recalling the concerns expressed by the
African Union High-Level Committee on Libya as to
the ongoing foreign interference that further polarizes
the positions of the actors in the Libyan crisis, thereby
compromising efforts to achieve a much-desired

19-2699911/17

S/PV.8611

The situation in Libya

ceasefire and establish a fruitful dialogue, which is
essential for the return of peace and stability to Libya.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate, once again,
my country’s support to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the staff of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya for their continued
efforts to find solutions to the multiple challenges
facing Libya. My country is convinced that, however
complex they might seem, the obstacles to peace and
stability remain surmountable, but will be overcome
definitively only through the Libyan people’s deep
desire for peace, strong national ownership of the
crisis-resolution process and sustained support from
the international community.
Mr. Edjo Memba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, allow me to join others in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of this organ for the month of September
and to thank Poland for its excellent work last month.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/682) of 26 August. We also extend our
thanks to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, and Ambassador Juergen
Schulz, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, for their briefings. We also
thank Ms. Mohamed for the information provided to
the Council.
Allow me to begin my intervention by expressing
the solidarity of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
with the Libyan people and our hope that a solution
to the serious crisis is found and that the peace so
desired by Libyans and the countries of our region of
Africa is restored. We reiterate our firm support for
Mr. Salamé in his immeasurable task and unwavering
message that there is no military solution in Libya. We
urge the parties to establish an immediate and definitive
ceasefire and to resume the political process through
direct, frank and inclusive dialogue.
We approach today’s meeting with the utmost
concern about the situation and the deterioration of
humanitarian conditions. We are concerned about the
number of civilians killed and internally displaced,
as well as the more than 5,000 migrants and refugees
arbitrarily held in detention centres, not to mention
the high number of deaths off the coast of Libya and
in the Mediterranean recently. In that connection, we
12/17

04/09/2019

welcome the measures presented by Mr. Salamé at the
meeting held on 29 July (see S/PV.8588), in particular
the call for the closure of detention centres, which we
strongly support and hope will soon take place.
It is with alarm that we highlight the repeated
violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law. We condemn the attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure, clear recent
examples being the attacks against Zuwara and Mitiga
airports between 15 and 17 August and 1 September. We
also condemn the deplorable attacks on health personnel
and health facilities, as well as the obstruction of
access to basic resources such as water and electricity,
among others.
With regard to the security situation, we deeply regret
the escalation of the conflict, which is compounded by
the presence of foreign fighters and active terrorists and
by egregious and orchestrated violations of the arms
embargo by the main actors in the conflict, as well as
by other United Nations States Members. The massive
flow of arms serves only to rekindle the conflict and
spread instability and insecurity throughout the region.
The Council must be stricter and speak unequivocally
on this issue and must take more effective measures to
put an end to the crisis.
Without straying too far from the matter, allow
me to further insist on a point that we have long been
stressing and which we believe was, and continues to
be, the main obstacle crippling the work of Mr. Salamé
and the United Nations, that is, the issue of blatant
and deliberate foreign interference in Libya. It is a
key factor in the crisis and, if not removed from the
equation, will doom us to the prolongation of this
painful conflict. As we stated at the our meeting on
29 July, the Council and the United Nations must
vehemently condemn such interference as a violation
of the principle of State sovereignty and integrity, and
consequently, of the Charter of the United Nations and
a pillar of the Council, namely, the safeguarding of
peace and security. Accordingly, we believe that, by
not condemning such interference and failing to take
definitive action, the Council and its members are
legitimizing, and therefore permitting it to happen. We
do not believe that this is the image the Council wants
to project to the world.
To conclude, we urge the Council and the
international
community
to
redouble
their
efforts to find a genuine political solution
19-26999

04/09/2019

The situation in Libya

focused on the interests of the Libyan people.
We commend the United Nations work in coordination
with the African Union and repeat the statement by
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission at
the latest Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, held in Japan on 28 and 30 August, that
“African problems ought to be solved by Africans
themselves, as illustrated by the signing on 6 August
of the peace agreement between the Government of
Mozambique and the armed opposition RENAMO
and by the political arrangements for a democratic
transition in Sudan.”
Once again, we express our solidarity with the
Libyan people.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, on behalf
of my delegation, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September. We wish
you every success.
We would also like to commend Poland for its
successful presidency last month.
My delegation would like to thank the briefers:
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL); Ambassador
Juergen Schulz, in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya; and Ms. Marwa Mohamed,
Head of Advocacy and Outreach of Lawyers for Justice
in Libya.
I agree with the observation of the SecretaryGeneral in his most recent report (S/2019/682), which
states that Libya’s descent into political uncertainty and
armed hostilities is deeply alarming. There can be no
military solution to the conflict in Libya. Allow me to
focus on the following points.
First, military actions must stop immediately. Today
marks five months since the start of the current crisis
in Tripoli and Libya as a whole. While we welcome
the truce that was observed during the weekend of Eid
Al-Adha, we are still concerned about the situation on the
ground, including various attacks on civilian facilities
and the attack in Benghazi last month that resulted in
the death of three UNSMIL personnel. We extend our
deepest condolences to the families of the victims for
their loss and call on all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and exercise restraint with regard to

S/PV. 8611

attacking civilian facilities. We urge all parties to stop
undertaking military action, de-escalate tension on
the ground and return to political negotiations. In that
regard, I would like to reiterate the call on all Member
States to fully respect the arms embargo and not to
intervene in the conflict or take measures that would
exacerbate it, as stated in the Security Council press
statement of 5 July (SC/13873) and in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011).
Secondly, Indonesia reiterates its call for the
protection of civilians. The current report shows that
since the outbreak of fighting, more than 100,000
people, half of whom are children, have fled their
homes. A total of 552,000 people are in need of
humanitarian assistance. Basic supplies, such as water,
food and electricity, are limited and the fighting has
resulted in at least 395 civilian casualties. Even in the
midst of that dire situation, the Libya humanitarian
response plan for 2019 received less than 29 per cent of
its requested funding. Conditions are indeed dreadful;
the situation must end.
Thirdly, Indonesia supports the convening of a
Libyan dialogue for Libyans to peacefully discuss the
future of Libya. We welcome and support the three-step
initiative put forward by Special Representative
Salamé at the most recent Council briefing in July
(see S/PV.8588). The truce during Eid Al-Adha was a
first step that, to a certain extent, has been successful
in reducing violence, in particular in the Tripoli area,
as mentioned by Special Representative Salamé. It is
a very important step. It not only triggers the start of
the plan, but is also a beacon of hope for Libya and
the international community. It shows that peace
can be achieved in Libya. We hope to transform the
accomplishment of the truce into a lasting ceasefire
using confidence-building measures.
The next step, which involves the international
community, is also very important to support the
Libyan national dialogue. We call on all partners and
regional organizations, including the African Union
and the League of Arab States, to engage constructively
and maintain their support in a sincere manner to find
a solution for peace in Libya.
Indonesia reiterates its full support for UNSMIL
and Special Representative Ghassan Salamé, including
his latest appeal to the Council to consider adding a
provision to the Mission’s mandate to enable scalable
ceasefire support for any form of further truce or

19-2699913/17

S/PV.8611

The situation in Libya

cessation of hostilities to be agreed upon by the
conflicting parties. We look forward to the unity of the
Council in providing the same support in the upcoming
extension of the UNSMIL mandate.
In conclusion, we hope that our voices in the
Chamber today will resonate with the people in
Libya and that we are able to do what we are all here
for — saving lives.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September, and thank Poland
for its successful presidency in August.
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting and Special Representative Ghassan Salamé,
Ambassador Juergen Schulz and Ms. Marwa Mohamed
for their informative briefings on the most recent
developments on the ground.
We would like to begin by reiterating the need
for the parties to return to the table in the quest for
a political solution, which is the only viable one in
this context. That entails an immediate, unconditional
ceasefire, followed by confidence-building mechanisms
and institutional unification processes, in particular in
the case of the security forces. The goal is to prevent
further escalation, which would undoubtedly benefit
terrorist groups in that area.
In reaffirming our support for the plan put forward
by Special Representative Salamé, we welcome the
efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) to maintain the political process through
meetings held within the framework of track-two
dialogues, in which many women have participated.
As Ms. Mohamed reminded us, that is crucial to any
political, social and economic solution. At the same
time, we welcome the initiatives spearheaded by young
Libyans to promote a humanitarian truce.
We are particularly concerned about the serious
human rights violations committed by all parties to the
Libyan conflict, including allegations about the use of
child soldiers. In that regard, it is imperative that those
responsible be held accountable. Indiscriminate attacks
and the destruction of basic civilian infrastructure,
including by air strikes on hospitals and health and
humanitarian personnel, must be investigated and
punished. That is all compounded by the serious
humanitarian situation that has plagued the country,
14/17

04/09/2019

as a result of the ever-increasing number of internally
displaced persons, owing to violence and the loss
of basic services, and in particular the critical and
degrading conditions suffered by migrants and refugees
in detention centres, which, as proposed by the Special
Representative, should be redesigned or closed. That
is in line with the Secretary-General’s assertion that
Libya is not currently a safe port of disembarkation and
that necessary measures must be taken in that regard,
including efforts to prevent migrants and refugees from
falling back into the hands of traffickers.
In all such cases, the assistance of the international
community is crucial, in particular in efforts to end
the current crisis. The first step is to ensure strict
compliance with the arms embargo imposed by the
Council and to refrain from taking measures that could
exacerbate the current situation.
We conclude by expressing our solidarity with the
Libyan people and reaffirming our support for Special
Representative Salamé and the entire UNSMIL team
for their commendable and necessary work under such
difficult conditions. We also endorse the extension of
the Mission’s mandate. In that regard, we welcome the
reopening of United Nations offices in the east of the
country and encourage the Mission not to halt efforts
to ensure the resumption of a comprehensive political
dialogue in coordination with and in support of the
Government of National Accord.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, Mr. President,
let me too extend our best wishes for your presidency and
thank Poland for its successful presidency last month.
I would like to thank Special Representative Salamé
and Ms. Mohamed for their enlightening briefings. I
would like to make four short points.
First, with regard to the arms embargo, the
continued flow of arms into Libya, in open breach of
Security Council resolutions, harms the Libyan people
and the authority of the Security Council and must end.
It also weakens the readiness of the conflicting parties to
negotiate, thereby undermining Special Representative
Salamé’s mediation efforts. We again urge all States
to immediately take the measures necessary to ensure
the full and strict implementation of the arms embargo.
Non-compliance with the sanctions regime has grave
consequences for Libya. We therefore urge all United
Nations Member States to immediately halt any arms
delivery. The illicit flow of arms needs to stop and
19-26999

04/09/2019

The situation in Libya

needs to stop now. Otherwise, we may see even more
escalation to come.
Secondly, with regard to the political way ahead,
there is no military solution for Libya, and what Libya
needs right now is an immediate ceasefire, negotiations
between the parties to the conflict and a push in that
direction by all external actors with influence on them.
Let me, first and foremost, reiterate our firm
support for Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Salamé, his team at the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and their important
and tireless work in such difficult and dangerous
circumstances. We will work to renew and strengthen
UNSMIL’s mandate in the coming weeks. We strongly
support the three-step plan that Special Representative
Salamé proposed to the Council in his previous briefing
(see S/PV.8588) in order to revive an inclusive political
process under United Nations auspices.
We commend the commitment of the parties to the
truce during Eid Al-Adha and the substantial reduction
of violence during that period along the main front
lines. That positive first step must now be extended to
a prolonged, robust and lasting ceasefire. We therefore
urge all relevant actors to support the implementation
of the three-step plan, bring about a genuine ceasefire
and use their influence to bring all parties back to the
political process.
Thirdly, the conflict in Libya, fuelled by the ongoing
flow of arms, has caused a humanitarian disaster, and
the briefings by Special Representative Salamé and
Ms. Mohamed reminded us that the most vulnerable
in conflict-affected areas, as well as migrants and
refugees, especially need immediate protection. We
strongly condemn all attacks on civilians, civilian
infrastructure and health workers, and once again urge
all parties to the conflict to comply with international
humanitarian law to avoid further casualties and
safeguard the lives of civilians.
We welcome the decision of the Libyan authorities to
close three detention centres, but it is important that the
closures be implemented gradually and deliberately and
that those set free are supported by the Libyan authorities
and international humanitarian organizations.
Lastly, I want to especially thank Ms. Mohamed
for her very informative briefing about the situation of
women in Libya today. Civil society plays an important
role in many areas and aspects — in reporting crimes,

S/PV. 8611

protecting women, building supportive networks and
giving women a voice. We strongly condemn sexual
violence perpetrated against migrant women and girls.
The absence of a central State authority and the lack
of accountability for crimes of sexual and genderbased violence are alarming and contribute to general
insecurity and a climate of fear.
The abduction of House of Representative
lawmaker Siham Sergewa is a case in point. It shows
how dangerous it is for women to participate in the
political process in Libya these days in a climate of
reprisals against women who speak out or get involved
in political and social activities. We need to see her swift
return so that her voice can be heard. Her case is a stark
reminder that the involvement of women in political
processes and peacebuilding is absolutely critical.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish you every success.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2019/682) on the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL); Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the latest developments in my country;
and Mr. Schulz, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
for his briefing on the work of the Committee.
Today’s date of 4 September marks five full months
since the beginning of the aggression against the capital
of my country, in which one-third of the population of
Libya lives. That aggression has resulted in the deaths
of hundreds of Libyans, including civilians. That
indiscriminate attack has also led to the displacement
of tens of thousands of citizens and the destruction of
the capital’s infrastructure, including the sole airport
used by all citizens from every part of Libya.
The war continues unabated. Unfortunately,
regional and international interests have taken
precedence over the interests of the Libyan people, who
yearn for a democratic and civilian State in which the
rule of law reigns. My delegation would like to express
its sincere appreciation for all the efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union
to reach a solution and end that aggression. We also

19-2699915/17

S/PV.8611

The situation in Libya

reiterate that such efforts will fail without a unified
international initiative that engages all international
stakeholders involved in the Libyan issue. Any result or
outcome of such an initiative should be binding on all.
Anyone hesitating or obstructing such an agreement
must be held to account by the international community,
especially the Security Council, as such actions risk
destabilizing Libya and the unity of its institutions.
My delegation commends the latest report of the
Secretary-General, especially its positive reception
of the political initiative of the President of the
Presidency Council to end the current crisis. In that
regard, we welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Salamé’s call for the convening
of an international conference on Libya in which all
international stakeholders having an interest in Libya
would participate.
We believe, however, that it is imperative to hold
a Libyan national meeting before such an international
conference, as had been planned prior to the attack on
the capital. That would enable us to develop a national
position that would represent the will of the Libyan
people and be supported later by the international
community, rather than vice versa. One of its goals
would be to reach a unified position to end the negative
interference of some countries. It would also send a
clear message to all parties with regard to the need to
reach an agreement that should speedily establish the
constitutional and legal steps required for the holding
of parliamentary and presidential elections within
specific time frames so as to end the present chaotic
state of affairs of the Libyan people. It would also end
their suffering caused by violations their basic rights,
owing to unjustified disagreements and wars.
The report of the Secretary-General touches upon
the reasons undermining the peaceful process aimed
at achieving the goal of holding a comprehensive
national conference. The Secretary-General attributes
the failure to hold the conference mainly to the war
launched against Tripoli on 4 April. My Government has
therefore called on the Security Council to act swiftly
to counter the blatant aggression and end the attack.
It should also hold the perpetrators accountable and
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
all of which have always called for a peaceful solution
as the only alternative to end this crisis.
Unfortunately, we have witnessed procrastination
within the Council. We could have saved the lives of
16/17

04/09/2019

hundreds of young Libyans and migrants who have lost
their lives to indiscriminate shelling had the Council
assumed its responsibilities and implemented its
resolutions on Libya. Nevertheless, as a State Member
of the United Nations, my country remains hopeful
that the Council will speedily adopt urgently needed
measures to end the insidious aggression so that the
country can resume the political process and advance
along the path of peace, which is the only satisfactory
alternative for all Libyans, who continue to entertain
high hopes to that end.
The severe conditions resulting from war in
my country provide fertile ground for terrorist
organizations that do not differentiate between Libyans
in the eastern or the western part of the country. The
activities and actions of those organizations threaten
peace and security in Libya and throughout the entire
world, My Government condemns in the strongest
terms the latest terrorist attacks in Libya. The security
apparatus in the west of the country is working to
dismantle the organizations that are using the current
war circumstances to commit despicable crimes against
State institutions and civilians.
In this vein, we remind the Council that the war
on terrorism and its organizations is an international
struggle in which the Government of National Accord
and its allies are participating. Our anti-terrorism forces
are still combating terrorism in various hotspots all over
the country, in direct cooperation and coordination with
the United States of America. We call on the Council to
assist my country to eradicate the conditions that enable
terrorists to achieve their objectives and spread even
further, especially given the security vacuum created
by the latest attacks.
Turning to the reference in the Secretary-General’s
latest report to the need to hold perpetrators accountable
for their crimes under international humanitarian law,
my country’s delegation appeals once again to the
Council to form a fact-finding team to investigate the
crimes committed against civilians and health facilities,
as well as migrant detention centres. One of the team’s
tasks would also be to determine who is responsible for
acts such as the indiscriminate shelling of the Al-Intisar
and Abu Salim neighbourhoods early in the war and the
detention centre for illegal migrants in Tajura on 2 July,
as well as the attack on the civilian field hospitals.
The latest such violation was the shelling of the Mitiga
civilian airport two days ago, which injured a number of
workers and traveling pilgrims and damaged a number
19-26999

04/09/2019

The situation in Libya

of civilian aircrafts. Those gross violations must be
investigated immediately. We therefore reiterate our
call on the International Criminal Court to expedite
its procedures and prosecute the perpetrators of those
attacks as war criminals.
My delegation would like to echo the call of the
Secretary-General, in his latest report, for States to
revisit policies that support the return of migrants to
Libyan shores. We would also like to stress the need
for international coordination in that regard, as the
responsibility to care for those migrants should not be
shouldered exclusively by Libya, as a transit country,
but rather by the international community, including the
countries of origin and destination. Necessary assistance
should also be provided to those migrants so that they can
be repatriated and reunified with their families through
the adoption of an international mechanism to monitor
the implementation and financing of this operation. We
agree with the Secretary-General’s assessment in his
report that Libya is not a safe refuge for migrants in the
light of the prevailing security problems due to political
disagreements and the war against the capital over the
past five months.
My delegation stresses that, just as it is the duty
of any country to maintain the safety and stability of
its people, it is the national duty of the internationally
recognized Government of National Accord to combat
the aggression against Tripoli. We reiterate our position
that an aggressor cannot be a partner in a democratic
civil State. Past experience shows that aggressors have
rejected State institutions and categorically rejected
the placing of the military under the control of a
civil authority. My Government reiterates its position
rejecting the call for a ceasefire based on the status

S/PV. 8611

quo, which would put the aggressor on an equal footing
with the victims of the aggression. We totally reject
that scenario.
My Government also stresses that it will spare no
effort to counter the aggression to the best of its ability
until it defeats the aggressor. We will start a new phase
unlike previous phases that the country has seen since
2011. We will all work together as Libyans to build a
strong State free of armed groups or authoritarianism.
In conclusion, we would like to thank Ms. Marwa
Mohamed for her briefing and commend her for
informing the Council of the violations to which Libyan
women are subject, including abduction and killings.
In that connection, we stress that in the current
political circumstances, such violations, sadly, affect
everyone — men and women. In order to address this
issue in particular and protect human rights in general,
we need the support of the international community for
the efforts of the Government of National Accord until
we reach a political solution leading to the formation of
a strong Government that has control over all Libyan
territory and can address all such violations and hold
their perpetrators accountable.
Since Ms. Mohamed is Libyan and defends human
rights, especially those of women in Libya, she ought
to have delivered her statement in Arabic so that all
Libyans — men and women — would have been able to
directly follow her words.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

19-2699917/17
