S/2017/510

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 June 2017
Original: English

Thirty-third progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2333 (2016), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for a final period until 30 March
2018 and requested to be kept informed of the situation in Liberia and the
implementation of the Mission’s mandate. The present report provides a midterm
update on major developments in the country since my predecessor’s special report
dated 15 November 2016 (S/2016/968).

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation and related developments
2.
The political landscape in Liberia was dominated by preparations for the
presidential and legislative elections scheduled for October 2017. Given the
establishment of new political alliances and bargaining among the 22 registered
political parties and coalitions, it is unlikely that any presidential candidate will
achieve an absolute majority in the first round, requiring a second electoral round in
November.
3.
On 29 December 2016, the National Elections Commission certified the first
opposition alliance, the Coalition for Democratic Change, comprising the Congress
for Democratic Change, led by former presidential candidate and current Senator of
Montserrado County, George Weah; the National Patriotic Party, led by former First
Lady and current Senator of Bong County, Jewel Howard Taylor; and the Liberia
People’s Democratic Party, led by the former Speaker of the House of
Representatives, Alex Tyler. On 21 January 2017, the coalition named Mr. Weah as
its standard-bearer and Ms. Taylor as its vice standard-bearer. Following allegations
in the media that the former President, Charles Taylor, had influenced the formation
of the new coalition, on 16 March, Mr. Weah reportedly admitted to holding a
telephone conversation with Mr. Taylor, who is serving a 50 -year sentence after
having been found guilty by the Special Court for Sierra Leone of aiding and
abetting war crimes and crimes against humanity committed in Sierr a Leone.
4.
On 23 January, the President of Liberia, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, presented her
final annual state of the nation address, identifying the fight against corruption and
national reconciliation as priorities for the remainder of her tenure. The Pre sident

17-09487 (E)

190617

*1709487*

S/2017/510

also called for the passage of land rights and local government legislation and for
the holding of a national forum with political stakeholders to agree on peaceful
elections in October 2017 and the subsequent transition to a new Government in
2018.
5.
On 3 March, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Code of
Conduct for Public Officials and Government Employees, which contains provisions
requiring that all persons appointed by the President wishing to seek elective office
resign two years, or three years for tenured appointees, prior to standing for
election. As a consequence, prominent persons wishing to seek office could be
disqualified, while current officials engaged in political activities, such as serving
on campaign teams, or using government resources to support partisan or political
activities could also be affected. There remains a lack of consensus among political
parties on the applicability of the Code of Conduct.
6.
On 14 March, the President issued Executive Order No. 8 3, operationalizing
the Office of the Ombudsman, which is tasked with overseeing implementation of
the Code of Conduct. On 3 April, the President nominated the former Inspector
General of Police, Chris Massaquoi, as Chair, in addition to two members, one o f
whom had to be replaced for not meeting the age criteria. The nominees still await
Senate confirmation.
7.
In March, allegations emerged in the media that the Chair of the National
Elections Commission, Jerome Korkoya, holds citizenship in the United States of
America, which is unconstitutional in Liberia. Reactions have been mixed. Some
legislators called on Mr. Korkoya to explain allegations of lying under oath during
his confirmation hearings, and some political parties called for an adjudication of
the matter in court. Mr. Korkoya denied the allegations and called upon his accusers
to provide evidence. On 12 May, Mr. Korkoya was sued by a group of citizens and
an unregistered political party, alleging a violation of the Aliens and Nationality
Law. Several presidential candidates also allegedly hold dual citizenship and could
face similar challenges.
8.
On 30 May, a group of opposition political parties formally presented to the
National Elections Commission a document entitled “the Ganta Resolution”,
committing to peaceful elections in 2017. The parties had adopted the resolution in
September 2016. Additionally, on 31 May and 1 June, the Government of Liberia,
supported by UNMIL, the African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), hosted a national forum facilitated by the Interreligous
Council of Liberia, which culminated in the signing of the “Farmington River
Declaration” on 4 June by standard-bearers and political leaders of 20 out of
22 registered political parties declaring their commitment to a peaceful electoral
process and the transfer of power to a new administration in January 2018.
9.
The Governance Commission began work on a bill proposing arrangements for
the transition from the current to the next Government, wit h provisions for
regulating the process. Meanwhile, the General Service Agency has started to
document and verify all government assets to ensure accountability during the
transition.
Electoral process
10. From 1 February to 14 March, the National Elections Commission conducted a
nationwide voter registration exercise, which was judged credible by national and
international observers despite initial technical glitches that resulted in a one -week
extension of the process. On 31 March, the Commission anno unced the provisional
results of the voter registration, which recorded 2.1 million voters, of whom
approximately 48 per cent are women. The provisional voter roll should be
2/19

17-09487

S/2017/510

exhibited from 12 to 17 June, pending the timely release of funds by the
Government.
11. On 9 May, the National Elections Commission issued a writ of elections,
indicating that the elections would be held on 10 October 2017. The last day for the
nomination of candidates by registered political parties and applications by
independent candidates is 11 July. The official campaign period will be from 31 July
to 8 October. In preparation for the effective adjudication of election -related
disputes, a retreat for judges took place in May, during which the elections law,
particularly amendments made in 2014, was discussed.
12. A number of efforts were undertaken to encourage full participation in the
democratic process. On 14 February, a women’s situation room opened in Monrovia
to receive complaints of election-related violence and support the voter registration
process. As part of the efforts to enhance women’s participation in politics and
governance, UNMIL quick-impact projects facilitated training to further empower
100 female political aspirants and campaign managers engaged in grass -roots
advocacy. Additionally, in March and April, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) launched a series of stakeholder consultations on youth
engagement, bringing together representatives from women and youth
organizations, the Ministry of Youth and Sports, the National Elections Commission
and the United Nations to discuss prevention of election -related violence, including
gender-based electoral violence; increasing trust and cooperation between youth and
security providers; and raising awareness of Security Council resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2250 (2015). On the basis of those consultations, UNDP developed a
project on enhancing youth participation in the 2017 electoral processes, which
received $1.8 million in support from the Peacebuilding Fund.
13. In accordance with his good offices and political support mandate, my Special
Representative routinely engaged with political stakeholders, encouragin g
interaction through the Inter-Party Consultative Committee. Additionally, UNMIL,
in close collaboration with the Press Union of Liberia, media managers and other
partners, worked to encourage incisive yet responsible election -related journalism.
The Mission also conducted civic awareness initiatives aimed at preventing
electoral violence and enhancing reconciliation, and has provided support for voter
education initiatives using various platforms, including radio, roadshows and social
media. The Commission also receives support through a UNDP project and a donorfunded basket fund.
14. From 10 to 12 May, my Special Representative consulted with senior
government officials in Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea and Sierra Leone in support of
national efforts aimed at facilitating an environment conducive to peaceful elections
in Liberia. All interlocutors welcomed the spirit of good neighbourliness prevailing
among the Mano River Union countries and affirmed their commitment to
supporting Liberia during the electoral process. Additionally, the United Nations,
the African Union and ECOWAS have agreed to coordinate closely with respect to
messaging throughout the political period and beyond. To enhance the prospect of a
free and fair electoral process, several international partners, including the African
Union and ECOWAS, plan to deploy election observers to complement national
observers.
15. During the reporting period, UNMIL trained 655 senior Liberia National
Police officers, including 163 women, in command, control and communications, as
well as crisis and incident management. This will support the police’s elections
operations centre at their headquarters in Monrovia, as well as three regional
operations centres. In January, the national police established an election security
task force, comprising law enforcement and security agencies, which will engage at
17-09487

3/19

S/2017/510

the ministerial and donor levels to conduct joint assessments of security risks and
undertake operational planning. UNMIL provides support and strategic guidance to
the task force. Additionally, 555 police officers, including 179 women, were trained
in community policing and election security. To build public confidence, the
national police leadership regularly visited different counties to engage with
community stakeholders and held a session in Monrovia with political party
representatives on ensuring peaceful campaigns.
National reconciliation, political reforms and governance
16. The Government, with UNMIL support, continued its efforts to advance
non-judicial recommendations presented by the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission in 2009. In December 2016 and January 2017, Palava Hut hearings
focused on forgiveness were held in Grand Gedeh and Lofa Counties. A total of 269
war-related victim statements were recorded and 177 cases were amicably resolved.
On 8 March, the President dedicated a memorial site honouring Liberians who had
died during the civil war on the site of the Paynesville massacre.
17. In April, a national stakeholder review of the Strategic Road Map for National
Healing, Peacebuilding and Reconciliation was conducted by the Liberia
Peacebuilding Office, with support from UNMIL. The review revealed that the road
map remained relevant and that the Government’s political and financial
commitment, as well as strengthened coordination among key stakeholders, would
be required to achieve national reconciliation. In May, the Liberia Peacebuilding
Office and UNMIL disseminated the findings of a social cohesion and reconciliation
index measuring progress in advancing reconciliation, and used the results to
initiate policy discussions with government officials, civil society and the
international community. The index identified areas requiring urgent interventions
aimed at strengthening civic trust in government institutions, reducing aggressive
tendencies, including sexual and gender-based violence, and enhancing
development. The Liberia Peace Ambassador, responsible for developing an agenda
for lasting peace in partnership with the National Reconciliation C ommission,
continued efforts at improving relations between the police, commercial
motorcyclists and local communities in Monrovia. He also held conflict resolution
meetings in Bomi, Bong, Montserrado and Nimba Counties in April, and in Grand
Gedeh, Maryland and River Gee counties in May. UNMIL supported some of these
initiatives, including through its quick-impact projects. In May, the Ministry of
Internal Affairs hosted peace and reconciliation dialogues for women and youth
representatives, county officials and traditional chiefs in Bomi, Gbarpolu, Maryland,
Nimba and Sinoe Counties.
18. In March, the President appointed the chairperson and commissioner for
policy and planning of the newly established Liberia Land Authority. The President
also appointed three other Land Authority commissioners; on 25 May, the Senate
confirmed one, while others are still pending. Although land has been identified as a
major conflict trigger in Liberia, the land rights bill, recognizing customary land
rights, has yet to be enacted. In December, the Legislature decided to hold further
consultations with constituents to enhance citizen support and national ownership of
the new law, which were initiated in May. My Special Representative, in keeping
with his good offices mandate, encouraged the passage of reform legislation,
including the pending local government and domestic violence bills.
19. The decentralization of public services continued, with the Government
establishing county service centres that provide document -related services, such as
the issuance of birth and marriage certificates and driver’s licences. Service centres
are operational in eight counties and are planned to be available in all 15 counties
by the end of 2017.
4/19

17-09487

S/2017/510

20. Liberian authorities also undertook efforts to address disputes between
communities and concessions. In March, the National Bureau of Concessions, with
support from UNMIL and UNDP, launched multi-stakeholder conflict mitigation
platforms in four conflict-prone concession sites, specifically Golden Veroleum in
Sinoe County; ArcelorMittal in Nimba County; Maryland Oil Palm Plantation/
Cavalla Rubber Corporation in Maryland County; and Sime Darby in Grand Cape
Mount County. The platforms, which are funded through assessed contributions, are
aimed at establishing sustainable local mechanisms for managing disputes between
concession companies and local communities.
21. In November 2016, the Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission lost a highprofile case relating to the misappropriation of $5.7 million from the sale of 15,000
tons of petroleum products valued at $13 million, which had been donated by the
Government of Japan. A former minister of commerce and a former managing
director of the Liberia Petroleum Refining Company were among those indicted for
economic sabotage, misapplication of entrusted property, criminal conspiracy and
violation of public procurement procedures and processes. However, the Ministry of
Justice advised the Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission not to proceed with the
cases because of insufficient evidence to secure a prosecution. Between November
2016 and 1 June 2017, 20 audit reports released by the General Auditing
Commission implied fraud and/or misappropriation at ministries and other
government agencies. As of May 2017, the cases of 11 individuals and 6 institutions
had been sent to the Ministry of Justice for further investigation and prosecution.
22. On 22 and 23 February, the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection
hosted an event to review progress in implementing Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) as part of Global Open Day for Women and Peace. Participants,
including those from civil society, observed that transformative leadership could
help to overcome structural challenges hindering women’s participation in
governance, including financial and cultural obstacles.

B.

Security situation
23. The security situation remained generally stable, although there were sporadic
incidents such as armed robberies, burglaries, presumed ritual killings, land
disputes, mob violence and demonstrations. The national police were unable to
respond appropriately to all incidents, especially in the remote counties, owing to
understaffing and a lack of resources, such as vehicles; hence not all incidents were
attended to or reported.
24. Following the discovery of the body of an 18-year-old girl purportedly killed
for ritual purposes in Buchanan, Grand Bassa County, approximately 500 persons
besieged the Liberia National Police station on 6 January, demanding that the
suspect be handed over for mob justice. The national police were initially
overwhelmed but were reinforced by Police Support Unit officers and contained the
situation.
25. On 8 February, a land dispute between the Mandingo and Mano ethnic groups
in Sokopa Town, Nimba County, resulted in the killing of one person; another
person is missing and presumed dead. Residents of Sokopa Town fled into the bush
for several days and only returned to their homes after intervention.
26. On 18 April, a group of Armed Forces of Liberia soldiers attacked national
police officers at the police station in Paynesville, o n the outskirts of Monrovia,
resulting in the injury of two police officers. The police had earlier confiscated a
motorcycle from a soldier for violating the curfew. No arrests were made.

17-09487

5/19

S/2017/510

27. On 29 April, unarmed forest rangers who were trying to arrest illegal miners
and poachers from Sapo National Park, in Sinoe County, came under attack,
resulting in the death of one ranger and injuries to five others. Six suspects were
arrested.
28. On 20 May, 17 Armed Forces of Liberia soldiers assaulted civilians in
Wainsue, Bong County, injuring 15 residents. Five soldiers were arrested and
military investigations are ongoing.
Protection of civilians
29. UNMIL completed a review of its protection of civilians strategy in January,
which prioritizes prevention through good offices and enhancement of national
capacity. In February, a mapping exercise of possible threats to the protection of
civilians, such as election-related human rights violations and conflicts over
concessions, was completed, and throughout the period under review a series of
training exercises was conducted for partners of the United Nations and national
partners.

C.

Regional situation
30. On 4 June, Liberia hosted the fifty-first session of the Summit of ECOWAS
Heads of State and Government, during which the President of Togo, Faure
Gnassingbé, was elected to succeed Ms. Johnson Sirleaf as Chair of ECOWAS.
During Ms. Johnson Sirleaf’s tenure, Liberia domesticated several ECOWAS
protocols, including on mutual assistance in criminal matters and on establishing the
ECOWAS criminal and intelligence bureau. Additionally, the region witnessed
progress in the consolidation of democracy, strengthening peace and security,
improving financial stability and promoting institutional reform. On regional
integration, progress was made in implementing the protocols on free movement of
persons and goods, particularly the Common Internal Tariff, the ECOWAS Trade
Liberalization Scheme and the Economic Partnership Agreement.
31. The Mano River Union organized a meeting in Monrovia on the
implementation of its 2013 strategy for cross-border security on 30 November and
1 December 2016. Participants from Member States, ECOWAS and UNMIL met to
review achievements; identify challenges and share experiences with the joint
border security and confidence-building units; and propose recommendations aimed
at harmonizing border control, generating momentum for the implementation of the
strategy and enhancing cross-border security cooperation.
32. Following the withdrawal of troops from the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and UNMIL formed police from the Côte d’Ivoire -Liberia border
in January and February 2017, respectively, inter-mission cooperation activities
were subsequently focused on supporting the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia in developing their bilateral cooperation. In May, my Special Representative
engaged in consultations with Liberia’s neighbouring countries on regional
cooperation, including discussions on the transnational crime un its and the West
Africa Coast Initiative.

D.

Humanitarian situation
33. Conditions in Côte d’Ivoire remained generally conducive to the voluntary
return of Ivorian refugees, although the rate of return of refugees living in Liberia
slowed during the first five months of 2017 compared with that of the same period

6/19

17-09487

S/2017/510

in 2016. Refugees expressed concerns about security, as well as access to land, basic
services and livelihood opportunities in areas of return, in addition to scepticism
about the national reconciliation and social cohesion processes in Côte d’Ivoire. To
mitigate those concerns, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees organized visits by refugees to villages of return so they could assess
available reintegration programmes and security conditions. As at 6 June, Liberia
was hosting 15,460 registered Ivorian refugees, including 11,726 living in refugee
camps and 3,734 living with host communities, down from the peak of
approximately 224,000 refugees in 2011.
34. Lessons learned from the Ebola virus disease outbreak have informed the
effort of the Ministry of Health to develop a more resilient health system. Thanks to
the national health policy and plan, which is aimed at strengthening national
capacity to detect, mitigate and respond to public health threats, there was an
effective response to a meningitis outbreak that began in late March. As at 6 June,
31 persons had been infected, 13 of whom had died. The clinical and laboratory
results of 13 of the 31 cases were positive for Neisseria meningitidis serotype C,
leading to the conclusion that the disease was meningitis. On 17 May, an agreement
was reached between the Ministry of Health and the World Bank regarding the
development of capacity to diagnose tropical and other communicable diseases in
the country within 48 hours of testing.
35. The Government, with support from the World Food Programme, undertook a
zero hunger strategic review process that is aimed at assessing the nature of
vulnerability in the country and designing a road map for eliminating hunger by
2030, in accordance with the Sustainable Development Goals. The report was
launched by the President on 16 May.

E.

Human rights
36. The human rights situation continued to be characterized by the high incidence
of sexual and gender-based violence; harmful traditional practices, such as female
genital mutilation, forcible initiation into secret societies, trial by ordeal and
accusations of witchcraft; curtailment of the freedom of speech; and limited national
capacity and resources to promote and protect human rights or to meet treaty
reporting obligations.
37. Between June 2016 and March 2017, the Government reported 1,404 cases of
sexual and gender-based violence, including rape, of which 70 per cent of the
victims were girls under 18 years of age. Following the unsuccessful attempt in
2016 to enact a domestic violence bill containing provisions criminalizing female
genital mutilation, efforts are under way, as part of the National Human Rights
Action Plan, to develop a new bill criminalizing the practice in accordance with the
recommendations of the universal periodic review. In November 2016, the United
Nations/Government of Liberia joint programme on sexual and gender -based
violence entered its third implementation phase, which is scheduled to run until the
end of 2020, resources permitting; $3.2 million of the required $36 million has been
secured. The programme, which aims to reach all counties, will focus on changing
perceptions and attitudes while strengthening systems to address rape, early
marriage, domestic violence, harmful traditional practices and their interlinkages
with sexual and reproductive rights, HIV and AIDS.
38. In November 2016, Liberia submitted its long-delayed treaty report on the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which assesses the State’s
record in implementing the treaty. In December, a platform for civil society
organizations focusing on human rights was created, which will enhance

17-09487

7/19

S/2017/510

coordination and advocacy. In March 2017, the Independent National Commission
on Human Rights was accredited to the Global Alliance of National Human Rights
Institutions, allowing the Commission to access resources, engage with other
institutions and more effectively carry out its mandate in line with the principles
relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights (Paris Principles). The Commission also published a report on the
conditions of prisons and prisoners in Liberia in April that underscored human
rights violations experienced by prisoners, including limited me dical care,
overcrowding, prolonged pretrial detention, poor sanitation and inadequate
nutrition. In June, the Commission finalized a manual on receiving complaints to
guide case review.

F.

Economic situation
39. The macroeconomic situation continued to be affected negatively by the global
decline in commodity prices and the residual impact of the Ebola outbreak, as
demonstrated by real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, which was 8.7 per cent
in 2013, 0.7 per cent in 2014, zero in 2015 and 0.5 per c ent in 2016. In March 2017,
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) reduced Liberia’s 2016 economic growth
estimate to minus 1.2 per cent from its October 2016 estimate of 0.5 per cent. The
estimate for 2017 is 3.0 per cent. IMF estimates that Liberia faces a significant
shortfall in revenue despite receiving nearly $75 million in direct budget support
from donors for the financial year 2016/17.
40. Contraction of the fiscal space, which was also attributed to obligations linked
to the security transition, resulted in a per capita decline in GDP of approximately
2.0 per cent. IMF projects economic growth of between 2.5 and 3.0 per cent for
2017/18. The fiscal out-turn for 2016/17 is estimated at $520 million, representing a
6.0 per cent decline against 2015/16. Meanwhile, the ability of Liberia to borrow is
limited by the rise in its debt risk rating from “low” to “moderate” in March 2017
because of its high debt to GDP ratio.
41. Inflation remained high, rising from 7.7 per cent in December 2014 to 12.5 per
cent in December 2016; inflation eased, however, to 9.9 per cent as of February
2017. The depreciation of the Liberian dollar followed the circulation of millions of
new banknotes in the fourth quarter of 2016, which created uncertainty about the
economy and was a factor in the decrease in the purchasing power of the Liberian
dollar and the corresponding increase in the price of basic commodities.

III. Development of national security and justice capacity
A.

National security strategy and architecture
42. Progress was made in developing the national security strategy and
architecture. On 19 May, a revised national security strategy aimed at building
peace, security, stability and development through the accountable and effective
coordination of the security sector was submitted by the National Security Adviser
to the members of the National Security Council for approval following a review of
the 2008 strategy that has been under way since September 2016. UNMIL is
providing advice on the elaboration of an implementation plan, to be completed by
the end of June. In line with the statement of mutual commitments between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Government, with support from the United
Nations and the World Bank, preparations began in April for a public expenditure
review of the justice and security sectors, which will be conducted from May 2017

8/19

17-09487

S/2017/510

to April 2018. It will inform costing for implementing the justice and security
aspects of the Agenda for Transformation, the revised national security s trategy and
the second phase of the peacebuilding plan conveyed to the Security Council in my
letter dated 4 April 2017 (S/2017/282).
43. In April, the Ministry of Justice began a public safety reform initiati ve
entailing a review of the legal framework regulating private security companies and
the elaboration of a public safety road map. The Ministry is also drafting, with the
support of UNMIL, a public safety law covering the regulation of private security
companies, which will be submitted to the Office of the President by the end of
June.
44. The National Commission on Small Arms developed regulations for
implementing the Firearms and Ammunition Control Act and undertook a series of
public sensitization activities. The draft uniform code of military justice remains
pending before the Legislature. In the interim, civilian and military officials have
received training on the memorandum of understanding signed between the
Ministries of Justice and Defence in May 2016 seeking to enhance accountability by
subjecting the armed forces to the jurisdiction of the civilian justice system.
45. As part of its efforts to build a gender-responsive security sector architecture,
on 27 March, the Ministries of Justice, Defence, and Gender, Children and Social
Protection, with support from UNMIL, launched a gender and security sector task
force. The task force will coordinate security sector gender focal points to develop
joint programmes aimed at enhancing equal participation and opportunities for men
and women in the security sector. Subsequently, with UNMIL support, gender
offices were established to mainstream gender in security operations in the Ministry
of Justice, the Armed Forces of Liberia, the Liberia Immigration Servi ce, the Drug
Enforcement Agency and the Bureau of Corrections and Rehabilitation.
46. UNMIL also worked to enhance civil society engagement in the security sector
reform process, including through a security sector reform think tank established in
December 2016 at the University of Liberia. From 20 February to 20 April 2017,
civil society organizations sensitized the population to new accountability
frameworks within the sector. UNMIL also engaged with the Geneva Centre for the
Democratic Control of Armed Forces on designing a project aimed at enhancing the
capacity of the next Legislature to provide effective oversight of the security sector;
initial assessments to that end were conducted in April and May.

B.

Liberia National Police
47. As at 6 June, the strength of the national police stood at 5,127 officers,
including 970 women. The majority of the police service, or 3,858 officers,
including 748 women, were deployed in Montserrado County as at that date, leaving
only 1,284 officers deployed throughout the rest of the country. Forty-one officers
are dedicated to addressing accountability, administrative and personnel matters, in
support of the decentralization of policing services. In April, 15 senior officers,
including five women, graduated from a leadership and management training course
in Ghana.
48. The Inspector General of Police, appointed in September 2016, has prioritized
leadership, management, professionalism and the delivery of services. However,
gaps remain. Policy management and civilian complaints review boards required by
the Liberia National Police Act of 2016 are not yet operational. Consequently, in
December 2016, 244 officers were promoted in violation of the Act, which requires
that the Ministry of Justice’s policy management board approve all promotions. The
national police, with UNMIL support, continued to sensitize officers with regard to

17-09487

9/19

S/2017/510

the Act. Meanwhile, the drafting of six administrative instructions and seven
regulations to implement components of the Act was completed in M arch.

C.

Liberia Immigration Service
49. As at 6 June, the strength of the Liberia Immigration Service stood at 2,606
personnel, including 751 women. Of those personnel, 1,914 were deployed to border
areas and Roberts International Airport. In April, 15 immigration officers completed
a leadership and management course in Ghana, with support from Irish Aid.
50. The Liberia Immigration Service has prioritized the development of
regulations and administrative instructions to ensure effective implementation of the
Immigration Act. UNMIL provided support by printing and disseminating 1,500
copies of the Act and supporting sensitization programmes for immigration officers.
Although the Liberia Immigration Service made progress in drafting regulations and
administrative instructions, delays in establishing the policy management and
civilian complaints review boards under the immigration law hindered effective
management, oversight and accountability.
51. The immigration service has adequate capacity to monitor migration and
detect fraudulent travel documents. Border security mechanisms were strengthened
with programmatic support provided by UNMIL in line with its mandate, and
implemented together with the national police and other law enforcement agencies
with border functions. Seventeen of 45 official ports of entry were provided with
modern equipment to manage migration and enhance border security. During the
reporting period, 140 Liberia Immigration Service officers, including 30 women,
were trained in fraudulent document identification, accountability and integrity.

D.

Justice and corrections
52. In April, 60 magistrates completed a one-year training course conducted by the
judiciary and were subsequently deployed outside of Montserrado County to
enhance access to justice.
53. Efforts intensified during the reporting period to introduce plea bargaining in
order to alleviate the high level of pretrial detention. As at 1 June, 1,450 persons, or
65 per cent of the prison population, were pretrial detainees. There were nine prison
escapes, owing to severe crowding, weak infrastructure and the inability of
overstretched officers to ensure control, particularly at corrections facilities outside
of Monrovia.
54. On 11 April, the Minister of Justice signed new standard operating procedures
and a five-year strategic plan for the Bureau of Corrections and Rehabilitation. Aft er
one year of mentoring, in March, UNMIL handed over to the Bureau prisoners’
electronic data, which it had previously collected and maintained. Since assuming
full responsibility for this task, the Bureau has regularly distributed relevant data to
criminal justice institutions. UNMIL assisted in building the Bureau’s gender
responsiveness in prisons through pilot training organized by the Group of Friends
of Corrections that was conducted in early December.
55. Between November and December 2016, UNMIL and the Bureau of
Corrections and Rehabilitation provided training for 60 mid -level managers,
including 17 women, in incident management and operational capacities to enhance
corrections management and accountability through improved internal management
and oversight.

10/19

17-09487

S/2017/510

E.

Armed Forces of Liberia
56. The strength of the armed forces stood at 2,000 personnel as at 6 June. The
United States provides training and support for strengthening defence institutions,
professional development, maritime security, engineering support and medical
readiness. Through this partnership, the armed forces developed its first nationally
led officer candidate school, which initiated its first course on 1 May. ECOWAS
also provides mentoring for the armed forces. In March, Fre nch military instructors
conducted a 10-day infantry training exercise and mentoring programme aimed at
enhancing combat skills for 50 members of the Armed Forces of Liberia in Zwedru.
57. The army continued to face operational challenges owing in part to insufficient
funding, which hampered its ability to sustain operations outside of Montserrado
and Margibi Counties. Nonetheless, the army participated in three joint training
exercises with the national police and other security agencies during the period
under review.
58. The coastguard has 85 personnel and is capable of patrolling up to 150
nautical miles off the coast. On 3 February, a commercial fishing vessel was
intercepted while illegally trawling in Liberian waters.
59. Liberia contributes 78 troops to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). In May, a Liberian
peacekeeping soldier was killed during an indirect attack on a MINUSMA camp.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
A.

Military component
60. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2333 (2016), the authorized military
component of UNMIL comprised 434 personnel as at 28 February 2017, compared
with the previous ceiling of 1,240 personnel. The force comprises one infantry
company (230); a three-helicopter aviation unit (105 personnel); a level II hospital
(69 personnel); and 15 military observers and 15 staff officers. While the force is
consolidated in Monrovia, it retains a quick response capability that can deploy up
to three platoons anywhere in the country, while military observers regularly
conduct patrols throughout the country.
61. The quick reaction force established within UNOCI pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2162 (2014) was repatriated from Côte d’Ivoire to Senegal in
February, where it is being retrained and equipped prior to its deployment to
MINUSMA pursuant to Council resolution 2295 (2016). An advance team of 250
troops will deploy to Mopti, Mali, by the end of July, while it is planned that the
remaining 400 members, including the aviation unit, will deploy by the end of
August.

B.

Police component
62. The police component was reduced to 310 personnel by 28 February from a
previous ceiling of 606, pursuant to resolution 2333 (2016). In line with its revised
concept of operations for police, UNMIL has consolidated two formed police units
in Monrovia that retain the capability to simultaneously deploy up to one platoon
from each unit anywhere in the country.

17-09487

11/19

S/2017/510

63. The 50 individual police officers, also consolidated in Monrovia, undertake
activities through a mobile team concept involving frequent visits to counties,
jointly conducted with national counterparts where possible. Priority tasks include
supporting the development of the leadership, internal management,
professionalization and accountability mechanisms of the national police, with a
particular focus on election security and supporting national security agencies to
protect civilians in the event of a deterioration that could risk a strategic reversal of
stability.

C.

Civilian component
64. In the UNMIL budget submission for 2017/18, the abolition of 228
international and national civilian and United Nations Volunteer posts on 1 July
2017 is proposed, leaving 237 international, 421 national and 125 United Nations
Volunteer posts as from that date. The timelines for the departure of remaining
personnel will be carefully phased to correspond with the conclusion of mandated
tasks, including good offices and political support, limited logistical assistance for
the electoral process and the transfer of UNMIL responsibilities and assets,
including UNMIL Radio, to partners. Determination of the personnel to be retained
after 1 July 2017 was based on a comparative review exercise endorsed by the
Secretariat that was undertaken in accordance with lessons learned from previous
exercises.

D.

Support considerations
65. As at 1 November 2016, the Mission operated 27 sites across the country,
which have since been reduced in line with the streamlined mandate and the
reduction of uniformed personnel. As from 1 July 2017, UNMIL operations will be
reduced to 18 sites in Monrovia, field offices in Voinjama and Zwedru and a
communications hub in Gbarnga. To continue countrywide transmission of UNMIL
Radio as field offices closed, the station partnered with the Liberia Broadcasting
System, primarily with shared broadcast towers and facilities.
66. Given the potentially sensitive transition from the current Government to
another in January 2018, it is essential that UNMIL remain able to fully implement
all aspects of its mandate until 30 March 2018. Consequently, the Mission’s
liquidation plan entails pre-liquidation in as many areas as possible while
substantive activities are under way, with rapid liquidation to be undertaken
between 1 April and 30 June 2018. UNMIL has undertaken a thorough assessment
of its sites and assets to assist in achieving rapid liquidation. Assets have been
grouped and some are being shipped to other peacekeeping missions. From
1 January 2018, most of the remaining UNMIL assets will be beyond their usable
life, which will help to expedite asset disposal and site closures. The Mission has
engaged closely with the Global Service Centre and UNOCI to ensure that relevant
lessons are incorporated in liquidation planning. Additionally, two UNMIL
personnel have been deployed to UNOCI to assist with its ongoing liquidation and
gain valuable experience for UNMIL liquidation in 2018.

E.

Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
67. In furtherance of my zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse,
UNMIL and the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection carried out an
awareness-raising campaign throughout the country, encouraging community

12/19

17-09487

S/2017/510

members to report allegations and to direct victims to sexual and gender-based
violence referral pathways that include options for legal, psychosocial, community
or protection choices. UNMIL provided mandatory training on sexual violence and
other conduct-related issues for 979 United Nations staff and related personnel, as
well as 6,287 community members near United Nations premises. Ten allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse, covering a period of one year, were reported during
the period and are being investigated.

F.

Safety and security of personnel
68. No major security incidents against United Nations personnel were recorded
during the reporting period, although there were 111 road traffic accidents involving
United Nations vehicles. Efforts are under way to improve r oad safety, including
through training for UNMIL personnel in defensive driving. Three robberies, 11
burglaries, three thefts and one minor fire were recorded at the residences of United
Nations personnel, while street crime targeting United Nations person nel included
one armed robbery, five unarmed robberies, two thefts and four assaults. Seven
United Nations personnel died during the reporting period, one in a traffic accident
and six of natural causes.
69. With respect to United Nations facilities, assets and operations, 23 incidents
were recorded, including four burglaries, one theft, two cases of attempted theft,
seven minor fires, four peaceful protests by local actors, four intrusion -related
incidents and one instance of damage caused by rain.

V. Transition of the United Nations engagement in Liberia
70. Given that the United Nations engagement in Liberia is transforming, UNMIL
and the Government of Liberia are working closely together to develop clear
messaging aimed at assuaging public anxiety about the Mission’s closure. Those
messages underscore the fact that Liberian security services have significantly
increased their capacity to maintain peace, as demonstrated by their effectiveness
over the 11 months since the end of the security transitio n. The messages also stress
that the United Nations and other partners will remain engaged in Liberia after the
closure of the peacekeeping operation. Information campaigns conducted
throughout the country, including through UNMIL Radio, have utilized vari ed
approaches with local actors and traditional communicators.
71. In March, UNMIL and the United Nations country team established a joint
transition task force. The objectives of the task force are twofold: first, to support
Liberia’s political transition, specifically the transfer of political and administrative
power to a new Government in January 2018; and second, to support the United
Nations transition with a view to ensuring the continuation of peace consolidation
priorities currently supported by UNMIL. These efforts are closely associated with
those of the Governance Commission, as described in paragraph 9 above. Also, by
my letter dated 4 April 2017 (S/2017/282), I transmitted to the Security Council the
peacebuilding plan requested by the Council in resolution 2333 (2016) that was
jointly developed by the Government of Liberia and the United Nations, in
consultation with bilateral, regional and other partners, including the World Bank
and the European Union, which provides a framework for sustaining peace in the
context of the transitions under way in Liberia. The Government has initiated a
process for developing its implementation plan.
72. A capacity mapping exercise finalized by the United Nations country team in
May, which detailed the requirements for a strategy to sustain peace in Liberia,
17-09487

13/19

S/2017/510

identified considerable gaps in financial and material resources i n addition to human
and logistical capacities that the country team will face after UNMIL is withdrawn.
Pursuant to resolution 2333 (2016), UNMIL worked closely with the country team
to identify strategies for addressing its gaps in capacities, including with a view to
accelerating preparations for the Mission’s drawdown and closure. In that regard,
identified UNMIL assets will be written off and transferred in accordance with
relevant financial rules and regulations in order to support the operations of United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes. Additionally, as recommended in the
special report of the Secretary-General of 15 November 2016 (S/2016/968), the
country team and the Government are supporting the implementation of tasks
mandated to UNMIL, with funding from the Mission’s budget. Among the areas of
intervention are community policing; border management, security and
stabilization; election-related dispute resolution; and combating impunity for sexual
and gender-based violence.
73. UNMIL also engaged closely with the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel to initiate the process of handing over relevant activities, including
those related to support for the Mano River Union. In addition, UNMIL has begun
discussions with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) about establishing a stand-alone OHCHR office as part of the
United Nations country team after the withdrawal of UNMIL. With regard to
UNMIL Radio, a range of possible options are under consideration to facilitate its
sustainable transfer to an independent entity after the Mission’s withdrawal,
pursuant to resolution 2333 (2016). This includes its possible conversion to a
regional radio station under the auspices of ECOWAS, a proposal supported by the
President of Liberia.
74. Efforts are also under way to enhance engagement with regional partners. In
April, my Special Representative visited Abuja to consult with ECOWAS and
Nigerian officials on a range of issues, including measures to be taken jointly in
order to prevent conflict during the electoral period and democratic transition, and
by regional partners after the withdrawal of the peacekeeping operation. Specific
possible interventions under consideration could be finalized on a bilateral basis
with the Liberian authorities.

VI. Observations
75. Ensuring credible presidential and legislative elections in October 2017 and a
peaceful transfer of power in January 2018 are monumental milestones that will
consolidate Liberia’s transformation to sustained peace and democratic order. The
citizens of Liberia have played an essential role in the country’s positive journey
since the end of the civil war in 2003, and I wish to pay tribute to their efforts.
However, sustaining peace will require the people and Government of Liberia to
remain committed to nurturing that hard-won peace, throughout the electoral
process and beyond.
76. I commend the stated commitment of all stakeholders to ensure that the
elections in October will be free, fair and transparent and that any dispute will be
resolved peacefully through established mechanisms in accordance with the law. I
urge all Liberian citizens to actively participate in the electoral process in a
constructive manner. I particularly welcome public commitments made by political
party leaders to violence-free elections and acceptance of the electoral outcomes. I
also welcome the outcome of the ECOWAS Summit of 4 June, specifically the
signing of the “Farmington River Declaration” by 20 out of 22 registered political
parties in Liberia in the presence of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government,

14/19

17-09487

S/2017/510

committing to violence-free elections in October and a peaceful transition to a new
Government. Additionally, given the importance of a free and professional press to a
democratic society, I am pleased by the commitment media manag ers have made to
ensure inclusive and professional coverage of the electoral process.
77. Liberia made history by being the first country in Africa to democratically
elect a female President, and the role of the women of Liberia in bringing peace
through grass-roots activism has been well documented. Given the importance of
women’s leadership in sustaining peace, I call upon all political actors to
demonstrate the transformational leadership required to overcome the legal,
structural, cultural and other obstacles to women’s political participation. Liberia’s
future also requires the development of a new generation of political leaders. I
underscore in that regard the importance of including youth, who comprise the
majority of the population, in the democratic process.
78. The National Elections Commission has demonstrated through numerous
electoral processes its professionalism and impartiality, learning and applying
lessons with each process. I stress the continued need for efforts aimed at ensuring
transparency and a level playing field, which are essential for sustaining public
confidence in the credibility of the electoral process. In that regard, I welcome the
Commission’s continued engagement with political parties through the Inter -Party
Consultative Committee, and underscore the importance of this mechanism for
dialogue and the resolution of contentious issues. I also note the important role of
the newly established Office of the Ombudsman, the work of which should begin
without further delay. While I recognize the constrained fiscal space, I urge the
Legislature to prioritize the passage of the national budget and the Government to
disburse funding expeditiously to the National Elections Commission.
79. Just beyond the electoral exercise will be a significant transition: the handover
of power from President Johnson Sirleaf to a democratically elected successor in
January 2018, which is unprecedented in the modern history of Liberia. The United
Nations, working in close cooperation with the African Union, ECOWAS and other
counterparts, will remain closely engaged in supporting that historic transition. I am
pleased to note that preparations aimed at facilitating the preservation and transfer
of government assets, information and documentation to the nex t Government is
already under way. The success of this process will be of critical importance to the
integrity of the democratic process and the stability of the incoming Government. I
also wish to commend the Government of Liberia for its full engagement on the
development of a peacebuilding plan, as requested by the Security Council, and call
upon all international partners to generously support the implementation of this
plan.
80. The people of Liberia have long recognized that sustaining the hard -won peace
will require political, institutional and other reforms aimed at overcoming the
societal and structural inequities that were at the root of the long conflict. While I
recognize that some governance improvements are advancing, including the
decentralization of public services, it is concerning that protracted delays continue
to undermine efforts to advance deeper, and essential, structural reforms. In that
regard, I call upon all legislators to prioritize the passage of proposed legislation
that would have a positive impact on the lives and livelihoods of their constituents,
in particular the pending land rights, local government and domestic violence bills,
and to give attention to the constitutional amendments proposed by the Government.
81. Sustaining peace in Liberia will also require that real impetus be given to the
essential process of national reconciliation, which has not gained adequate
momentum since the issuance of the report of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission in 2009. The people and Government of Liberia must demonstrate
17-09487

15/19

S/2017/510

courage by taking forward those important recommendations, including those aimed
at addressing continued impunity for human rights abuses and violations committed
during the civil war through criminal accountability. Priority must be given to
restorative justice, truth and reconciliation.
82. It is concerning that efforts to root out the scourge of corruption have been
ineffective, contributing to a dangerous cynicism that undermines trust and
reconciliation. It is essential that all actors responsible for prosecuting and
adjudicating corruption cases, particularly those involving prominent personalities,
demonstrate through action that there will no longer be impunity for bribery,
misappropriation of public funds, malfeasance and other corrupt acts.
83. I am very encouraged by the performance of the Liberian security services,
which have proactively demonstrated their capacity to maintain stability and protect
the population independently since the conclusion of the security transition from
UNMIL in June 2016. Efforts under way to put in place a robust and well coordinated electoral security plan aimed at responding effectively to any incident
of public disorder are commendable and must be redoubled. I welcome the
increasing focus of the Liberia National Police on effective community policing and
crowd control throughout the electoral process, efforts that should be expanded.
Additionally, police capacity should be reinforced in both strategic and tactical
areas, particularly with regard to improving the managerial structure and command
and control capacities. Building public trust, an essential aspect of maintaining
public order, will require that effective mechanisms be in place to address any
incident of indiscipline by security personnel entrusted with protecting the
population. The credibility of the rule of law also requires greater attention to the
courts and corrections system, including efforts to address the persistently high
incidence of pretrial detention. I call upon the judiciary and all those concerned with
the administration of justice to ensure that justice is administered effectively and in
a fair and prompt manner.
84. I am concerned about the human rights situation in Liberia, especially
continued impunity for sexual and gender-based violence and harmful traditional
practices. I therefore welcome the recent launch of a dedicated hotline to report
violence against children, and call upon the Government to provide the resources
needed to ensure its sustainability. I also welcome the Liberia National Police
hotline dedicated to reporting sexual and gender-based violence. It is essential that
these tools contribute to the effective prosecution of perpetrators.
85. As UNMIL draws down, and with the closure of UNOCI on 30 June 2017
imminent, it is even more essential that the Liberian and Ivorian authorities
coordinate closely to ensure stability along their shared border and to facilitate an
environment conducive to the return of Ivorian refugees remaining in Libe ria.
Important cooperation mechanisms exist in the context of the Mano River Union. I
call upon all Member States to demonstrate ownership and commitment by
supporting the implementation of the joint cross-border security and confidencebuilding units.
86. Simultaneous with the important political period under way in Liberia, the
United Nations engagement in the country is undergoing a major transformation,
with UNMIL entering the final phase of its deployment. While the peacekeeping
operation has been a constant and robust presence in the country for more than
13 years, it has never been the only partner on which Liberia could rely. I therefore
welcome discussions under way aimed at reaffirming regional, bilateral, multilateral
and other support for Liberia during these last months of the UNMIL deployment
and beyond. While my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel and the
United Nations country team will continue to accompany Liberia after the
16/19

17-09487

S/2017/510

withdrawal of UNMIL, I call upon donors to generously support efforts to fill
identified gaps, including for the establishment of a stand -alone OHCHR office.
87. I would like to thank my Special Representative for Liberia, Farid Zarif, for
his excellent and steadfast leadership. I also extend my sincere gratitude to all
United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel, troop - and police-contributing
countries, the African Union, ECOWAS, the Mano River Union and other regional
organizations, multilateral and bilateral partners, United Nations agencies, fund s
and programmes, non-governmental organizations and all other partners for their
invaluable role in restoring peace to Liberia.

17-09487

17/19

S/2017/510

Annex
United Nations Mission in Liberia: military and police strength
as at 1 June 2017
Military component
Military
observers

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Bangladesh

–

–

–

–

2

Benin

1

–

–

1

–

Bhutan

–

–

–

–

1

China

–

1

–

1

Egypt

2

–

–

2

–

Finland

–

–

–

–

3

Gambia

1

–

–

1

4

Germany

–

–

–

–

2

Ghana

1

1

–

2

4

India

–

–

–

–

1

Kenya

–

–

–

–

1

Nepal

1

–

–

1

Nigeria

3

4

230

237

Norway

–

–

–

–

4

Pakistan

1

3

69

73

–

Poland

–

–

–

–

1

Republic of Korea

–

–

–

–

5

Romania

–

–

–

–

1

Russian Federation

1

–

–

1

–

Senegal

–

1

–

1

–

Serbia

1

–

–

1

–

Sweden

–

–

–

–

4

Togo

–

1

–

1

–

Turkey

–

–

–

–

1

Uganda

–

–

–

–

–

Ukraine

1

2

105

108

3

United States of America

–

2

–

2

–

Zambia

1

–

–

1

3

14

15

404

433

Country

Total

18/19

Formed
police units

140

Police officers

1

4
120

360

2

47

17-09487

S/2017/510

17-09487

19/19
