General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

34

under arbitrary security legislation, as well as continued
repression in Namibia,
Reaffirming that increased humanitarian assistance by the
international community to those persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa and Namibia is appropriate and essential,
Recognizing that increased contributions to the Trust Fund
and to the voluntary agencies concerned are necessary to
enable them to meet the increased necJs for humanitarian
and legal assistance,
l. Commends the Secretary-General and tm: Coi,.u,ittee
of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa for their efforts to promote humanitarian and legal
assistance to persons persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa and Namibia, as well
as assistance to their families and to refugees from South
Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments, organizations and individuals that have contributed to the Trust
Fund and to the voluntary agencies engaged in rendering
humanitarian and legal assistance to the victims of apartheid
and racial discrimination;
3. Appeals for generous and increased contributions to
the Trust Fund;
4. Also appeals for direct contributions to the voluntary
agencies engaged in assistance to the victims of apartheid
and racial discrimination in South Africa and Namibia.
97th plenary meeting
9 December I 982

J
OIL EMBARGO AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/172 G of I 7 December 1981 ,
Recalling further the Paris Declaration on Sanctions against
South Africa, 59
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee against
Apartheid, 61
Convinced of the need to ensure the effective implementation of embargoes imposed or policies declared by most
oil-producing and oil-exporting countries with regard to the
supply of oil and oil products to South Africa, and to promote a mandatory oil embargo against South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reiterating its requests to the Security Council to consider
a mandatory embargo on the supply of petroleum and petroleum products to South Africa under Chapter VII of the
Charter,
1. Authorizes the Special Committee against Apartheid
to appoint a Group of Experts on the Supply of Oil and Oil
Products to South Africa, nominated by Governments, to
prepare a thorough study and report as soon as possible on
all aspects of the question as a basis for the consideration
of national and international measures to ensure the effective
implementation of the embargoes imposed or policies declared by oil-producing and oil-exporting countries with
regard to the supply of oil and oil products to South Africa;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to organize. in consultation with the Special Committee, meetings of permanent representatives to the United Nations of the oil-producing
and oil-exporting countries committed to the oil embargo
against South Africa:
(a) To consider the report of the Group of Experts on
the Supply of Oil and Oil Products to South Africa;

(b) To consult on national and international arrangements to ensure the effective implementation of the embargoes in the light of the report;
(c) To decide on all arrangements for an international
conference;
(d) To consider, on the basis of the report of the Group
of Experts, participation of countries concerned in addition
to oil-producing and oil-exporting countries committed to
the oil embargo against South Africa;
3. Requests and authorizes the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the Special Committee and in the light of
the recommendations made at the meetings of permanent
representatives of the countries concerned, to organize the
International Conference on an Oil Embargo against South
Africa for the purpose of considering national and international arrangements to ensure the implementation of embargoes imposed or policies declared by oil-producing and
oil-exporting countries with regard to the supply of oil and
oil products to South Africa.
97th plenary meeting
9 December I 982

37/86.

Question of Palestine
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3376 (XXX) of JO November
1975, 31 /20 of 24 November l 976, 32/40 of 2 December
1977, 33/28 of 7 December 1978, 34/65 of 29 November
and 12 December 1979, ES-7/2 of 29 July 1980, 35/169 of
15 December 1980, 36/120 of JO December 1981, ES-7/4
of 28 April 1982, ES-7/5 of 26 June 1982 and ES-7/9 of
24 September 1982,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,68
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned to it by the
General Assembly;
2. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
contained in paragraphs 114 to l l 9 of its report and draws
the attention of the Security Council to the fact that action
on the Committee's recommendations, as endorsed by the
General Assembly in its resolution 31/20, is long overdue;
3. Requests the Committee to keep the situation relating
to the question of Palestine under review and to report and
make suggestions to the General Assembly or the Security
Council, as appropriate;
4. Authorizes the Committee to continue to exert all
efforts to promote the implementation of its recommendations, to send delegations or representatives to international
conferences where such representation would be considered
by it to be appropriate, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session and thereafter;
5. Requests the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, established under General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, as well as other
United Nations bodies associated with the question of Palestine, to co-operate fully with the Committee and to make
available to it, at its request, the relevant information and
documentation which they have at their disposal;

•• Official Record.,· of the General AssemMv. Thirtv-sevl'nth Srssion,
Supplement No. 35 I A/37/J5 and Corr. I).

II.

35

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

6. Decides to circulate the report of the Committee to
all the competent bodies of the United Nations and urges
them to take the necessary action, as appropriate, in
accordance with the Committee's programme of
implementation;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Committee with all the necessary facilities for the
performance of its tasks.
99th plenary meeting
JO December 1982
B

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, 68
Noting, in particular, the information contained in paragraphs 103 to 111 of that report,
Recalling its resolutions 32/40 B of 2 December 1977,
33/28 C of 7 December 1978, 34/65 D of 12 December
1979, 35/ 169 D of 15 December 1980 and 36/120 B of
10 December 1981,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the action taken by
the Secretary-General in compliance with General Assembly
resolution 36/ 120 B;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat continues
to discharge the tasks detailed in paragraph 1 of General
Assembly resolution 32/40 B, paragraph 2 (b) of resolution
34/65 D and paragraph 3 of resolution 36/120 B, in consultation with the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and under its
guidance;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Division for Palestinian Rights with the necessary resources
to carry out its tasks as urged in paragraph 109 of the
Committee's report;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
continued co-operation of the Department of Public Information and other units of the Secretariat in enabling the
Division for Palestinian Rights to perform its tasks and in
covering adequately the various aspects of the question of
Palestine;
5. Invites all Governments and organizations to lend
their co-operation to the Committee and the Division for
Palestinian Rights in the performance of their tasks;
6. Takes note with appreciation of the action taken by
Member States to observe annually on 29 November the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People
and the issuance by them of special postage stamps for the
occasion.
99th plenary meeting
JO December 1982
C

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237 (XXIX)
of 22 November 1974 and all other United Nations resolutions, including resolution ES-7/2 of 29 July 1980, pertinent to the question of Palestine,
Recalling also its resolutions 36/120 C of 10 December
1981, in which it decided to convene an International Conference on the Question of Palestine for a comprehensive
effort to seek effective ways and means to enable the Palestinian people to attain and to exercise their rights, and
ES-7/7 of 19 August 1982, in which it decided to convene

the Conference at the headquarters of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in Paris,
from 16 to 27 August 1983,
Convinced that a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East can be established, in accordance with
the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, through a just solution to the problem of Palestine
on the basis of the attainment of the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people,
Convinced that the Conference will provide a unique opportunity to heighten awareness of the underlying causes of
the question of Palestine and to contribute actively and constructively to a solution of the question on the basis of
relevant United Nations resolutions,
Stressing the need to assure the participation of all Member States in the Conference and their support for its
preparation,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on the
Question of Palestine, 69
1. Reiterates the responsibility of the United Nations to
strive for a lasting peace in the Middle East through a just
solution of the problem of Palestine;
2. Endorses the recommendations of the Preparatory
Committee for the International Conference on the Question
of Palestine, contained in paragraph 32 of its report, 69 concerning the preparatory activities for the Conference, the
objectives, the documentation, the draft provisional agenda
and the draft provisional rules of procedure of the Confe~ence, the participation in the Conference and the organization of work of the Preparatory Committee;
3. Calls upon all organizations of the United Nations
system to continue to extend their fullest support to the
Conference and to its preparation;
4. Urges all Member States to promote heightened
awareness of the importance of the Conference and to intensify preparations at the national, subregional and regional
levels in order to ensure its success;
5. Calls upon all Member States to contribute to the
achievement of Palestinian rights and to support modalities
for their implementation, and to participate in the Conference and the regional preparatory meetings preceding it;
6. Decides to consider the results of the Conference at
its thirty-eighth session.
99th plenary meeting
JO December 1982
D

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions relevant to the question of Palestine, in particular resolutions 181 (II) of 29 November
1947, 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 3210 (XXIX) of
14 October 1974, 3236 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and
ES-7/2 of 29 July 1980,
Recalling the resolutions of the Security Council relevant
to Palestine,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, 70
1. Takes note of the declaration of the Palestine Liberation Organization of 19 April 1981 of its intention to
pursue its role in the solution of the question of Palestine
69

70

Ibid., Supplemen1 No. 49 (A/37/49 and Corr. l).
Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session, Plenary Meetings. 84th meeting, paras.

I 10-153.

36

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

4. Urges the Security Council to facilitate the process
on the basis of the attainment by the Palestinian people of
of Israeli withdrawal;
its inalienable rights in Palestine, in accordance with the
5. Recommends that, following the withdrawal of Israel
relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
from the occupied Palestinian territoriei,;, those territories
2. Reaffirms the principle of the inadmissibility of the
should be subjected to a short transitional period under the
acquisition of territory by force;
supervision of the United Nations, during which period the
3. Reaffirms once again that a comprehensive, just and
Palestinian people would exercise its right to selflasting peace in the Middle East cannot be established withdetermination;
out the unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Pales6. Urgently calls for the achievement of a comprehentinian and the other Arab territories occupied since 1967,
sive, just and lasting peace, based on the resolutions of the
including Jerusalem, and without the exercise and attainUnited Nations and under its auspices, in which all parties
ment by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights in
concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Palestine, in accordance with the principles of the Charter
the representative of the Palestinian people. participate on
and the relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
an equal footing;
4. Requests the Security Council to discharge its re7. Recommends that the Security Council should take
sponsibilities under the Charter and recognize the inalienearly
action to promote a just and comprehensive solution
able rights of the Palestinian Arab people, including the
to the question of Palestine;
right to self-determination and the right to establish its in8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gendependent Arab State in Palestine;
eral
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the progress
5. Reiterates its request that the Security Council take
made in implementing the present resolution.
the necessary measures, in execution of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, to implement the plan which, inter alia, ·
I I 2th plenary meeting
recommends that an independent Arab State shall come into
20 December 1982
existence in Palestine;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the pro37/IOI. Invasion of Lesotho by South Africa
gress made in implementing the present resolution as soon
The General Assembly.
as possible
Having learned of the invasion of Lesotho by South Af99th plenary meeting
rica on 9 December 1982, resulting in the loss of innocent
10 December I 982
lives and the destruction of property,
E
Noting with deep concern the continued acts of aggression
by South Africa against Lesotho and other neighbouring
The General Assembly,
independent African States in complete disregard of resoHaving considered the report of the Committee on the
lutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council.
Exercise of the Inalienable Right-, of the Palestinian People, 68
Grieved at the tragic loss of human life and concerned
Expressing its extreme concern that no just solution to
about
the damage and destruction of property resulting from
the problem of Palestine has been achieved and that this
the invasion of Lesotho by South Africa,
problem therefore continues to aggravate the Middle East
conflict, of which it is the core, and to endanger international
Convinced that international solidarity with Lesotho, as
a neighbouring State of South Africa, is essential to counpeace and security,
teract effectively South Africa's policy of coercing its neighRecalling its previous relevant resolutions, particularly
bours into not opposing its policy of apartheid and not
resolutions I 81 (II) of 29 November 1947, I 94 (III) of 11
giving sanctuary to South African refugees,
December 1948, 3236 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, ES7/2 of 29 July 1980, 36/ 120 D of l O December 1981 and
I. Condemns South Africa for its unprovoked invasion
ES-7/9 of 24 September 1982,
of Lesotho, resulting in the loss of innocent lives and the
destruction of property;
Recalling, in particular, the principles relevant to the
question of Palestine that have been accepted by the inter2. Commends the Government of Lesotho for its opnational community, including the right of all States in the
position to the apartheid policy of the racist regime of South
region to existence within internationally recognized boundAfrica and for the sanctuary it is giving to South African
aries, and justice and security for all the peoples, which
refugees;
requires recognition and attainment of the legitimate rights
3. Urges the Security Council to take immediate steps
of the Palestinian people,
to deter South Africa from repeating its acts of aggression
Recognizing the necessity of participation by all parties
against and destabilization of Lesotho and other neighconcerned in any efforts aimed at the attainment of a just
bouring independent African States.
and lasting solution,
103rd plenary meeting
l. Reaffirms the inalienable legitimate rights of the Pal14 December /982
estinian people, including the right to self-determination and
the right to establish, once it so wishes, its independent
37/123. The situation in the Middle East
State in Palestine;
A
2. Declares all Israeli policies and practices of, or aimed
at, annexation of the occupied Palestinian and other Arab
The General Assembly,
territories, including Jerusalem, to be in violation of interHaving discussed the item entitled "The situation in the
national law and of the relevant United Nations resolutions;
Middle East".
3. Demands, in conformity with the fundamental prinTaking note of the reports of the Secretary-General. 71
ciple of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
71
N37/169 and Add. l-3-S/14953 and Add. l-3. For the printed text.
force, that Israel should withdraw completely and unconsee Official Records 1,f the Security Council, Thirty-seventh Year, Suppleditionally from all the Palestinian and other Arab territories
ment for April. Mav and June /982, documents 5/14953 and Add. I; and
occupied since June 1967. including Jerusalem. with all
ibid., Supplement fi,r Octobn. November and December /982. documents
S/14951/ Add. 2 and ~.
property and services intact;
