S/PV.9107

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9107th meeting

Monday, 8 August 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun/Mr. Geng Shuang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-45477 (E)
*2245477*

S/PV.9107

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel
and Jordan to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: The past few days witnessed
a deeply worrisome escalation in the Gaza Strip
between Israeli military forces and Palestinian armed
groups, primarily the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ).
Preliminary numbers, which have yet to be confirmed,
indicate that, from 5 August, the Israel Defense
Forces launched 147 airstrikes against targets in Gaza.
Palestinian militants launched approximately 1,100
rockets and mortars into Israel, many of which landed
deep inside Israeli territory. During the escalation,
46 Palestinians were killed and 360 were injured, and
hundreds of residential housing units were damaged
or destroyed, along with other civilian infrastructure.
Seventy Israelis were injured, with damage to residential
and other civilian structures.
Last night, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and the
Israeli Prime Minister’s Office announced, in separate
statements, that a ceasefire had been agreed and
would come into effect at 11.30 p.m. on 7 August. The
ceasefire remains in place as I speak. I welcome this
agreement and I am grateful to Egypt for its crucial role
in securing the ceasefire, alongside the United Nations,
2/20

08/08/2022

and I appreciate the very important support provided
by Qatar, the United States of America, Jordan, the
Palestinian Authority and others to de-escalate the
situation. Together, those combined efforts helped
prevent the outbreak of a full-scale war and, as of this
morning, allowed for the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian relief to the people of Gaza. The United
Nations remains in close contact with all parties to
solidify the ceasefire and ensure that the significant
progress made towards easing restrictions, which we
have seen since the end of the escalation last May, can
be safeguarded and ultimately expanded.
This most recent escalation had its roots in deeper
tensions, which have been rising for months across the
occupied Palestinian territory. Tensions spiked across
the West Bank in March and April, particularly after
five terrorist attacks — the deadliest in years — took
place inside Israel. Following those attacks, Israeli
authorities increased military operations inside the
occupied West Bank, with a significant number of the
operations taking place in Jenin, focused on Palestinian
militant groups operating in the area.
On 1 August, Israeli security forces arrested
Bassem Al-Saadi, a senior leader of Palestinian
Islamic Jihad in the occupied West Bank, along with
his son-in-law. A 17-year-old Palestinian, whom PIJ
claimed as an affiliate, was killed during the operation.
PIJ immediately declared a “state of alert” and raised
the level of readiness of its militants. In response to
the threats, Israel closed the crossings between Israel
and the Gaza Strip on 2 August and implemented
measures restricting civilian movements in the socalled “Gaza envelope”. Tensions mounted amid highly
inflammatory rhetoric by Palestinian militant groups.
The United Nations, Egypt and others began intensive
mediation efforts to avert an escalation.
On 5 August, Israeli forces carried out a series of
air strikes against reported military targets, including
against a senior PIJ commander in Gaza, who was
killed in the attack. Hours later, Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and other militant factions launched more than
100 indiscriminate rockets and other projectiles from
within civilian neighbourhoods inside the Gaza Strip
towards civilian population centres in Israel, including
Tel Aviv, central Israel and the Gaza envelope. Over
the following days, Israeli air and artillery strikes
against militant targets in Gaza and rocket launches by
Palestinian militants into Israel continued intensively.
22-45477

08/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The escalation took a severe toll on the civilian
population. I repeat that the figures we are presenting
are initial and verification is ongoing.
From 5 through 7 August, 46 Palestinians were
killed, including 20 civilians — 15 children and 4
women. According to Israeli official sources, the strikes
killed 21 operatives, mainly affiliated with PIJ. The
Ministry of Health in Gaza reported 360 Palestinians
injured, including at least 151 children and 58 women.
At least 10 houses were completely destroyed and
48 severely damaged and rendered uninhabitable.
According to the Gaza authorities, over 600 housing
units were damaged, displacing 84 families.
Approximately 1,100 rockets and mortars were fired
by Palestinian armed groups, mainly PIJ’s Al-Quds
Brigades. Some 20 per cent of those reportedly fell
short within the Gaza Strip, causing damage and, in at
least three cases, potentially large numbers of civilian
casualties. United Nations monitoring of the incidents
is ongoing. Of those that crossed the border, most were
intercepted by Israel’s Iron Dome, but some caused
material damage. Israeli sources reported 70 injuries,
including nine children.
I condemn the indiscriminate launching of rockets
from highly populated residential neighbourhoods in
Gaza into civilian population centres in Israel, which
puts at risk both Palestinian and Israeli civilians and
violates international humanitarian law. While fully
recognizing Israel’s legitimate security concerns, I
reiterate that, under international law, all use of force
must be proportionate and take all feasible steps to
avoid civilian casualties. Children, in particular, must
never be the target of violence or be put in harm’s way.
Against the backdrop of the Gaza escalation,
tensions remained high in the occupied West Bank.
From the onset of the escalation, Palestinians held
demonstrations in multiple locations, protesting the
Israeli strikes on Gaza. The President of the Palestinian
Authority, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, issued a statement
condemning the Israeli strikes and reiterating his call
for the international community to protect Palestinians.
In addition to loss of life, injuries and destruction
of property, the complete closure of the Erez and Kerem
Shalom crossings for six days had severe humanitarian
consequences for Palestinians in the Strip. Gaza was on
the brink of a humanitarian collapse last evening when
the ceasefire came into effect. As in all escalations,
there are dire humanitarian consequences and a total

S/PV.9107

breakdown of all normal supply lines and essential
services. Basic food, medical supplies and fuel were
unable to enter. As a result, on 6 August, Gaza’s only
power plant shut down, causing rolling power cuts
of over 20 hours per day and severely impacting the
delivery of basic essential services and facilities, such
as hospitals and clinics, schools, water desalination and
distribution, as well as wastewater treatment. Gaza’s
chronic shortages of essential medicines and equipment
were exacerbated by the escalation, and the closure of
Erez prevented the daily crossing of some 50 patients
requiring specialized treatment in Israel. The closures
also worsened the already precarious food security
situation in the Gaza Strip, reducing stocks of basic
foods, particularly wheat flour.
The ceasefire announced last night has allowed
the resumption of essential movements of goods and
people in and out of Gaza, including the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and fuel for the Gaza Power
Plant. I welcome Israeli authorities’ timely reopening
of the Erez and Kerem Shalom crossings after the
ceasefire went into effect. The opening of Kerem
Shalom has allowed a total of 23 trucks of fuel to enter
the Gaza Strip today, enabling the Gaza Power Plant
to resume normal operations from 8 p.m. this evening,
local time.
Ms. Lynn Hastings, Deputy Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and United Nations
Resident Coordinator for the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, entered Gaza this morning and is leading
the United Nations and humanitarian response on the
ground. She has spent the day meeting with United
Nations and humanitarian agencies, families affected
by the escalation and civil society groups, and assessing
the damage and needs. The cost will be steep.
The escalation of recent days came a little more
than one year after the end of the May 2021 escalation
in Gaza. The devastating impact of that conflict is still
with us today. In the months following the hostilities in
May 2021, gradual but significant progress was made
in opening Gaza for the movement of people and goods.
Those steps helped ease living conditions in the Strip. It
is imperative that we see a resumption of the measures
that were in place and continue our efforts to expand
them further. We are committed to supporting the full
implementation of the ceasefire agreement, ensuring
the safety and security of the civilian population and
following-up on the Palestinian prisoners file.

22-454773/20

S/PV.9107

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Yesterday the Secretary-General welcomed the
ceasefire announcement and called on all sides to abide
by the agreement. I echo the Secretary-General’s call.
I want to make the Council aware of the following: the
ceasefire is fragile. Any resumption of hostilities will
only have devastating consequences for Palestinians
and Israelis and make any political progress on key
issues elusive.
Ultimately, the underlying drivers of this and
previous escalations remain. These cycles of violence
will cease only when we achieve a political resolution
of the conflict that brings an end to the occupation and
the realization of a two-State solution on the basis of
the 1967 lines, in line with United Nations resolutions,
international law and previous agreements.
I reiterate my call to the Israeli and Palestinian
leaderships, along with the international community, to
strengthen diplomatic efforts to return to meaningful
negotiations towards a viable two-State solution.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank China for its able
leadership of the Security Council and its convening of
this emergency meeting to address blatant violations of
the Charter of the United Nations and of the Council’s
resolutions. I also thank the United Arab Emirates,
France, Ireland and Norway, together with China,
for requesting, upon our appeal, the convening of
this briefing.
Israel claims for itself a right to security that
would seemingly justify murdering, imprisoning and
oppressing an entire nation. It claims a right to security
that would trump our right to life, our right to selfdetermination and our right to be safe in our homes.
It claims a right to security that supersedes the United
Nations Charter, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. It claims for itself
everything that it denies us. Israel claims it is always
defending itself, even when it keeps attacking the
Palestinian people. If the Council is against violence,
it cannot excuse Israeli violence, justify it or encourage
it. Israel’s so-called “right to security” has become a
license to kill, and it must be revoked.
In an international law-based order, international
law is the measuring stick for anybody’s actions. We are
4/20

08/08/2022

bound by its rules and remain ready to abide by them.
What about the other party? Can it keep rewriting the
rules as it wishes? And can the Council accept such
double standards, which undermine the protection
of the law everywhere? How many more times will
Israel get to justify bombing our people in Gaza until
someone says enough is enough? Is the Council, as the
highest authority responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, ready to say enough is
enough? How many more years does Israel get to impose
its inhumane blockade on 2 million people — half of
them children — until someone says enough is enough?
How many more children do we have to bury until
someone says enough is enough?
Regardless of who is in power in Israel, there are
two constant features of Israeli policy: bombing Gaza
and advancing colonial settlements and the settlers’
agenda. Those are undeniable facts. While Israel was
bombing Gaza this time around, Israeli extremists were
storming Al-Haram Al-Sharif yet again and violating
the historic status quo.
This was an unprovoked and unjustified act of
aggression. Its real reason is barely veiled — the
upcoming Israeli election and the desperation to appeal
to and appease the extremists. Forty-four Palestinians
and counting — 46 according to Mr. Wennesland — were
killed, including 15 children, in a morbid power play
and display. Israel kills our people because it can.
When will the world show them that they cannot? Does
not the Council have a clear position on the protection
of civilians? Are our civilians’ lives less worthy of
protection than other civilians? Are they somehow the
exception to every rule? Are they in a zone where the
United Nations Charter and international law do not
apply? Or is the identity of their aggressor somehow
enough to justify blanket immunity for the perpetrators
and no protection for the victims?
The recommendations of the Secretary-General
presented four years ago and welcomed by the General
Assembly have yet to be implemented. I am referring
to protections. We need protection. Our civilians are
entitled to protection. Our children deserve protection.
Alaa Qaddoum was 5 years old. I am sure everyone has
seen her picture. She was an innocent angel. Does the
Council know how hard it is to speak in the past tense
of those who had yet to experience life? Alaa Qaddoum
was 5 years old, and she was already three wars old.
She survived the first two, not the third.
22-45477

08/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Did the Council hear about the parents who spent
years trying to have a child and finally had a son, only
to have to bury him a few years later? Did the Council
hear about the Al-Nabahin family, another name added
to the long list of Palestinian families who lost four or
more of their members, including three children? Do
Council members know how it feels to be powerless,
to be unable to provide any protection for one’s child,
to know there is no safe haven or shelter anywhere? Do
they know how it feels to survive one war and wait for
the next onslaught? How can I convey these things so
that people finally understand that those who really
need the Council’s support for their security are these
defenceless Palestinian families, not the nuclear Power,
not the occupying Power?
How will Israel answer our calls for protection? By
blaming the victim. Israel is beyond reproach. It kills
Palestinians because it has to, and it always has to. If
it is stealing our land, it is our fault. If it is killing our
children, it is our fault. If it is occupying our country,
it is our fault. If it is besieging our people, it is our
fault. Israel wants peace; that is why it builds Israeli
settlements and demolishes Palestinian homes. Israel
wants peace; that is why it needs to expand and we need
to live in enclaves. When do we say enough is enough?
Should we wait for the next round or the one after? The
next aggression? The next settlement? The next forced
transfer of civilians? When do we finally demonstrate
to the Palestinian people that there is a peaceful path
that leads to freedom, instead of doing everything to
convince them otherwise?
A 15-year-old child in Gaza has survived a
blockade that is older than he or she is and six wars.
How many more wars does he or she need to survive
before acceding to life — a simple and safe life in their
homeland? The Secretary-General stated in his report
on children and armed conflict:
“I am shocked by the number of children killed
and maimed by Israeli forces during hostilities, in
air strikes on densely populated areas and through
the use of live ammunition […] and by the persistent
lack of accountability for these violations.”
(S/2022/493, para.93)
Only weeks after the report was issued, we are
confronted with the same patterns of disregard for
Palestinian civilian life, and specifically Palestinian
children’s lives, fostered by the same impunity.
The Secretary-General further stated:

S/PV.9107

“During the May 2021 escalation of hostilities,
there were substantial air strikes by the Israeli
armed forces, resulting in a significant increase in
the number of cases of violence against children
[…] should the situation repeat itself in 2022,
without meaningful improvement, Israel should be
listed.” (ibid., para.303)
We believe the listing of Israel is long overdue and
that the threshold set by the Secretary-General himself
has been crossed yet again. Mr. Wennesland described
to us a similar situation that took place in a condensed
period of time, three days, during which one third of
the deaths that occurred were of children.
We are deeply grateful to Egypt for its unrelenting
efforts to put an end to this aggression. We also want
to express our appreciation to the United Nations, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Qatar
and all who helped end this violent, abhorrent aggression.
But the situation is profoundly unsustainable. Where do
we go from here? We know the result of the current
equation. We Palestinians know that better than
anybody else. However, another equation is possible.
The Council’s actions need to be determined by the
outcome it is seeking. The international community
and the Council have determined in no uncertain terms
the outcome we aspire to. We have a global consensus
on what the solution should look like. It is an outcome
embedded in countless United Nations resolutions,
including those adopted by the Council. The members
of the Council are not bystanders, praying for that
outcome, they are actors who can decisively affect
the outcome. The Council is the highest authority in
the United Nations system where the maintenance of
international peace and security is concerned. It is not
an organization that makes comments and expresses
opinions. It is a body that can change things, enforce
things and decide that things should be done according
to international law and its collective will, as reflected
in its resolutions.
Fifteen children were killed in the space of a few
days, and many more are traumatized and suffering.
They deserve a better future, a future the Council can
help bring into being. This meeting is for honouring
them. They deserve to be honoured. Every innocent
child killed anywhere deserves to be honoured. In three
days, we lost 15 children.
During his visit, United States President Biden
reiterated that Palestinians and Israelis deserve equal

22-454775/20

S/PV.9107

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

measures of freedom, security and prosperity. By that
he certainly did not mean that Israelis should live with
the abysmal level of freedom, security and prosperity
that Palestinians are currently enduring. We deserve
the same. Those words should be applicable to us,
implemented regarding us and enforced regarding
us, not the Israeli side alone. Gaza is not destined
to go merely from rubble to rubble, and neither is
Palestine fated to remain under occupation forever.
The Palestinian people’s destiny is to live in freedom,
dignity and security in their homeland.
We need to collectively shape a political horizon
that can end the current reality and break the impasse
we are in. In his statement yesterday, the SecretaryGeneral emphasized that point. The Council members
all talk about political horizons, but we need to move
from saying that to implementing it. We should not wait
until the next war or the next election. Peace is never
reached by waiting. The Council needs to seek it out,
with all its strength and determination, and with the
power that it has under the provisions of the Charter.
The Council is very powerful. It can do what has to be
done and enforce it, and we want it to do that, to act
now, to save lives, to save peace. Whatever the price,
peace must be achieved, because the cost of war will
always be infinitely higher. We know. Our people are
the ones who are enduring most of that cost. Peace is
within reach if the will of those seeking peace proves
stronger than the will of those denying it.
We appeal to the Council. Our President always
says that we are extending both hands, not just one, for
peace. Do we have acceptance from the other side? The
Council should make it enforceable. It should not accept
a situation in which we wait until one party decides that
it is ready for peace. The Council decides when peace
should happen and it should drag the two parties to the
peace process today, not tomorrow. That is our message
to the Council, the message of the victims. That is
the message on behalf of the 15 children we lost and
whom we are honouring today in this meeting of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): The debate that we are holding
today has the opportunity to go in one of two directions.
It can either mark a clear win for the international
community against the forces that seek our collective
destruction, or it can be a stain on the history of the
6/20

08/08/2022

Council. This debate must focus on the facts. A terror
organization attempted to murder Israeli civilians,
murdering innocent Palestinian civilians along the way,
and because of the terrorists’ clear and present threat
to our citizens, Israel defended itself. There is no room
for false narratives. The facts are clear. The Palestinian
Islamic Jihad (PIJ) deliberately fired 1,100 rockets at
Israeli civilians, of which roughly 200 landed inside
the Gaza Strip, killing innocent Palestinians, among
them young children. That is not an estimate. It is the
hard truth, and Israel has full proof. Just this morning
I shared proof at a media stakeout clearly showing a
Palestinian Islamic Jihad rocket falling in Jabalia
refugee camp, killing Palestinian civilians, among
them children. We have video footage, radar evidence
and mission logs proving that the tragic deaths of the
children in Jabalia were clearly the result of an Islamic
Jihad rocket. Yet no matter how much hard evidence
Israel has to show, the Palestinians always fall back on
their lies. It is disgraceful and pathetic. If any Council
member is interested in receiving and reviewing our
irrefutable evidence, I will happily share it with them
myself. I will sadly share it with them myself.
The enemy that Israel is facing is one that is willing
to murder its own children while attempting to murder
Israeli civilians and children. That is the reason,
as even the Secretary-General pointed out, that the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad deploys its rockets and terror
infrastructure among civilian populations. The PIJ was
preparing and attempting an imminent and credible
attack on Israeli civilians near the Gaza border, forcing
Israel to close down roads and civilian activity in the
vicinity of the Gaza Strip, essentially paralysing tens of
thousands of Israeli citizens for three days. On Friday,
shortly before the terrorist attack, Israel had to defend
itself. We took action solely to protect our civilians and
defend our country. Any other claim is a flat-out lie.
For those who are still not familiar with Palestinian
Islamic Jihad, allow me to provide some background.
The latter is a radical terror organization armed, funded
and trained by Iran. In fact, while the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad was indiscriminately firing rockets at Israeli
civilians, its leader, Ziyad Al-Nakhalah, was meeting
with his Ayatollah-puppet masters in Tehran and
receiving orders from them — we can all see the photos.
Using proxies to further its ambition of establishing a
radical Shiite hegemony is Iran’s modus operandi.
Over the course of two and a half days, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad rained about 1,100 missiles down on
22-45477

08/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israeli towns and cities. To prevent that fanatical
organization from targeting Israelis, we were forced
to carry out precision and surgical strikes against its
commanders, as well as its operatives’ launch pads and
terror infrastructure. Israel is a law-abiding democracy
and always aims to set an example. That is why we
carried out our operation with astounding accuracy and
extreme precision, taking precautions hardly ever seen
in areas of conflict around the world. This morning, I
also shared footage showing how Israel does everything
possible to minimize civilian casualties. Thanks to those
extensive and documented precautions, Israel — and I
want to stress this — has a lower collateral damage rate
than any other military.
Despite the absurd lies heard here today, our
operation was aimed at targeting PIJ terrorists and
nobody else. In fact, most of the casualties were the
result of PIJ rocket fire. The Israeli air force’s mission
to neutralize Khaled Mansour — a senior Palestinian
Islamic Jihad commander with a lot of Israeli blood on
his hands — had even been aborted three times before
it was carried out, owing to the presence of children in
the area. Is there any other military in the entire world
that goes to such lengths?
PIJ has only one goal: to annihilate Israel and replace
it with an Islamist State. Does that remind anyone here
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham or Al-Qaida?
Of course it does. Those groups are no different — they
share the same horrifying and distorted vision. The way
they attempt to advance their twisted goal of destroying
the State of Israel by firing rockets at Israeli civilians
while using Gazans as human shields. That is a double
war crime. Yes, as I mentioned earlier, not all of the
rockets launched make it out of the Gaza Strip. In the
process of trying to murder innocent Israelis, nearly
20 per cent of PIJ’s projectiles misfired and resulted in
the tragic killing of Palestinians. These evil terrorists
hide behind civilians to murder Israeli civilians and end
up murdering Palestinian civilians along the way. Their
hate knows no boundaries.
I want the members of the Security Council to
consider how they would react if terrorists were
threatening their citizens. How would Norway react to
radical Islamists plotting to fire missiles at civilians in
Oslo? How would Ireland respond if jihadi rockets were
raining down on Dublin in an effort to wipe out the
infidels? I think we all know the answer.

S/PV.9107

Just a week ago, a justified strike neutralized
Al-Qaida’s leader, Ayman Al-Zawahiri. Before leading
Al-Qaida, Al-Zawahiri was a top member of Egyptian
Islamic Jihad. Does that sound familiar? Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and Egyptian Islamic Jihad share more
than just a similar name. They share the same values
of annihilating the free and modern world in which
we live. That is precisely why, when Al-Zawahiri’s
was eliminated, this institution, as well as most of the
world, gave its full sport. It brought us one step closer
to eradicating radical terror from the world. Yet when
Israel neutralizes such terrorists in order to prevent an
imminent attack against its citizens, United Nations
officials are suddenly deeply concerned. It is hard to
explain such double standards.
I want to make one more thing clear. I want to
remind everyone of the Gaza Strip’s history and the
events that led up to the current situation that Gaza
is in. The Palestinians seem to think that, if a lie is
repeated enough, it becomes truth — but that is not
so. No amount of fabrications and libel can change the
facts on the ground. Exactly 17 years ago today, Israel
unilaterally withdrew from the Gaza Strip, dismantling
dozens of Israeli villages and uprooting thousands of its
own citizens. We hoped that step would build trust and
bring calm. Yes despite our goodwill, we did not receive
calm. On the contrary, we received more terror. The
Palestinians chose Hamas and their terror ideologies
over progress and prosperity. Hamas quickly took over
the Strip, literally throwing the Palestinian Authority
representatives off of rooftops — that is why they are no
longer there — and it has since spent most of its efforts
and resources on expanding its terror infrastructure in
Gaza. It has built rocket factories next to hospitals and
weapons storage sites inside schools and, as witnessed
by many Council members in the past, it has dug crossborder terror tunnels underneath Jewish towns.
Hamas also is currently holding two special-needs
Israeli hostages in Gaza, Avera Mangistu and Hisham
Al-Sayed, as well as the bodies of two Israeli soldiers,
Hadar Goldin and Oron Shaul, and we are committed
to doing everything to bring them back home. That
choice of terror and violence over coexistence and
peace is the only reason Gaza finds itself in its current
situation — there is no other explanation. And the only
remedy for the Gazans is for their leaders stop trying to
annihilate Israel and stop investing their resources in
terror infrastructure.

22-454777/20

S/PV.9107

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As we saw in the case of the Abraham Accords,
there is no economic cure-all for Gaza — only the choice
of coexistence over violence. And despite all of the
rockets, threats and attacks, Israel still does everything
in its power to make life better for Gazans — be it
by increasing the number of work permits, allowing
in a daily supply of hundreds of trucks full of goods,
even in times of conflict, or supplying Gaza with
electricity — we still choose goodwill over conflict.
Actions speak much louder than words, and what Israel
does for Gaza eclipses the lip service that the Palestinian
Authority pays to it at these debates. Nevertheless, if
Israel is threatened, we are forced to take action.
Before I conclude, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank President Al Sisi and the other
senior Egyptian officials who were essential in
restoring calm. We deeply appreciate their efforts to
restore stability to our region.
Israel acted only against the terrorists of
Palestinian Islamic Jihad — not against the people of
Gaza, or Hamas or the Palestinian Authority — only
against PIJ. Sadly, this debate can only cause more
harm than good. But rather than making a bad situation
worse, there is one way to bring some good out of this
debate. Today each and every member of the Council
has a critical responsibility. They can either choose to
condemn a murderous terror organization, or they can
make false and immoral comparisons between Israel,
a law-abiding democracy, and radical jihadists. If the
Council truly wants to improve the situation in Gaza,
there must be one outcome and one outcome only: it
must condemn the Palestinian Islamic Jihad and hold
those terrorists fully accountable for the murder of
innocent Palestinians. Holding a Security Council
debate on the Palestinian Islamic Jihad while not using
the opportunity to fully condemn it for its war crimes
will only encourage it to continue its destructive ways.
Any outcome of today’s debate that does not place full
accountability on the shoulders of that radical group
will only make it stronger. I truly hope that the Council
does the right thing.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August, and to thank you for
convening today’s important meeting. I would also like
8/20

08/08/2022

to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.
What we have seen in the past few days in the
occupied Palestinian territory is something that
Egypt and many countries have previously warned
about — the possibility that owing to the deteriorating
conditions on the ground, the situation could spiral into
a new cycle of violence at any moment. The Gaza Strip
witnessed a sudden military escalation between Israel
and one of the Palestinian armed groups in which 43
martyrs were killed, including women and children,
and approximately 300 injured. A large number of
Palestinian facilities and houses were destroyed. This
latest escalation comes at a time when the Gaza Strip
has not yet recovered from that of last year, which
caused widespread destruction. At the same time, Israel
also allowed a number of settlers, under the protection
of the Israeli police, to storm the courtyards of the
Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Al-Aqsa Mosque, which violated
the Mosque’s sanctity, provoked Muslims and was a
stark violation of the historical and legal status of the
holy sites in East Jerusalem.
In view of the tense situation following the latest
military attack, Egypt once again took the initiative
to mediate between Israel and the Palestinian factions
in the Gaza Strip in order to secure an immediate
cessation of the violence and provide protection
to Palestinian civilians in the Strip. Those efforts
succeeded in securing a ceasefire, which came into
effect on 7 August. The mediation is part of Egypt’s
comprehensive efforts to secure calm in the wake of
the previous escalation in May 2021 and to resume the
reconstruction of the Gaza Strip, which is still under
way, with the aim of improving its residents’ living
conditions. Egypt appeals to all the parties to fully
abide by the ceasefire and exercise restraint. We affirm
that whether in the context of ceasefire mediation or
reconstruction, our efforts do not change the obligations
of Israel, which bears full responsibility for the Gaza
Strip, as it continues to occupy the Palestinian territory
based on the 4 June 1967 lines.
This recent escalation comes against the backdrop
of Israel’s continued policy of a blockade of the Gaza
Strip, which makes accessing goods and services
through the Israeli crossings difficult, in addition to
the continuing violations it is committing in the West
Bank through its policy of arrests, settlement expansion
and destruction of Palestinian houses and facilities, as
well as the occupation forces’ use of live ammunition
22-45477

08/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

against civilians, including children, and on top of
the increased levels of violence perpetrated by the
settlers. Egypt has repeatedly stressed that the status
quo cannot continue and that it is crucial that we see an
end to the vicious cycles of violence between the two
sides, for which civilian martyrs are paying the price.
In that regard, Egypt reiterates that in order to stop the
recurring bloodshed of innocent civilians, it is crucial
that the following steps be taken.
First, all of Israel’s practices, especially its
settlement expansion in the West Bank, should be
stopped, because they violate the Palestinians’ most
basic rights. In addition, the blockade on the Gaza Strip
should be lifted, which would contribute to improving
conditions on the ground and rebuilding confidence
between the two sides.
Secondly, urgent action should be taken to
facilitate the delivery of goods and services to the
Gaza Strip and to provide the necessary funding for
its reconstruction in order to ensure decent living
conditions for Palestinians.
Thirdly, the legal and historical status of the holy
sites in East Jerusalem under the custodianship of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan should be respected.
Fourthly, international protection should be
provided to the Palestinian people. We call on all the
parties to stop all targeting of civilians, taking account
of the Palestinians’ particular situation, with the
population density of the Palestinian territory and the
number of civilians, including children, who have been
killed in the recurring rounds of conflict.
Fifthly, we affirm that it is the responsibility of any
party whose actions cause the death of civilians, as well
as the responsibility of the international community,
to investigate, monitor and review, independently
and transparently, the recurring cycles of violence
targeting civilians and civilian facilities, as well as
other violations that run counter to the basic principles
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Sixthly, we stress that the successive cycles of
violence show how important it is for the international
community, especially the Middle East Quartet,
to assume its responsibility for reviving the peace
process, in order to arrive at a just and comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian question and assure the
Palestinian people of their full rights in an independent

S/PV.9107

Palestinian State, along the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
Egypt will never abandon its historical responsibility
towards its brother people of Palestine or its relentless
quest to achieve a better future, something we all hope
for, in which security, peace and stability prevail in the
Middle East.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Council who wish to
make statements.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your prompt response to the request
by my country and several other Security Council
members to hold this urgent meeting to discuss the
current developments in Gaza. I also thank Mr. Tor
Wennesland for his important briefing and commend
his continued de-escalation efforts.
The United Arab Emirates reiterates its deep
concern about the recent violence in the Gaza Strip that
has claimed the lives of dozens of civilians, including
15 children. We stress the need for all parties to abide
by their responsibilities under international law and
international humanitarian law, particularly with regard
to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure,
in order to spare civilians from the harm of violent
confrontations. The deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Gaza cannot bear more shocks. We welcomed the
entry into force of the ceasefire on Sunday evening local
time, following Egypt’s mediation efforts. We express
our sincere appreciation to our brothers in Egypt, led
by President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, for their intensive
efforts and continued engagement, which culminated
in an agreement to halt the escalation and restore calm.
We would also like to stress the importance
of ensuring that all the parties exercise maximum
restraint. We reiterate our rejection of terrorism and
extremism in any form, which create new levels of
violence and instability that must be avoided. We also
note the importance of Egypt’s continued mediation
efforts, with regional and international support, aimed
at ending the recurring cycles of violence that worsen
the Palestinians’ suffering. That also requires the
genuine willingness of both parties to the conflict to
satisfy both peoples’ desire for peace.
We agree with the Special Coordinator’s comments
regarding the importance of maintaining the progress

22-454779/20

S/PV.9107

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

towards the gradual reopening of the border crossings
in Gaza. Such measures have the potential to contribute
to reviving Gaza’s fragile economy and respond to the
humanitarian needs of the population, including through
the restoration of the health and services sectors.
We condemn the storming of the courtyards of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque by groups of extremists, including
their provocative actions. We also recall the importance
of preserving the existing historical and legal status
of the holy places in the city of Jerusalem, including
Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as well as the
importance of respecting sisterly Jordan’s custodianship
of the Islamic and Christian holy sites.
We cannot consider a lasting peace in the region
without a settlement to the Palestinian question based
on the two-State solution. We therefore believe that
it is necessary to resume the international efforts to
find a just, comprehensive and peaceful solution,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, that ensures dignity, security and stability
for all parties. We warn that the situation could remain
explosive in the absence of real political will on the
part of the parties to resume negotiations and break the
deadlock in the peace process.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its readiness to support all regional and international
efforts aimed at advancing the peace process in the
Middle East and achieving the two-State solution
through the establishment of an independent and
sovereign Palestinian State, based on the borders
of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative.

08/08/2022

into Israel’s territory and reiterate our unwavering
commitment to ensuring Israel’s security.
We welcome the ceasefire reached on 7 August
and thank Egypt for its active role in mediating it. We
must make every effort to prevent a new escalation, in
which the civilian population would stand once again
to suffer the most, which is unacceptable. France takes
note of the reopening of border crossings into Gaza,
which had been closed since 2 August, and calls for the
rapid transfer of people in need of care. We reiterate
that the only way to achieve lasting stability in Gaza is
by ensuring the return of the Palestinian Authority and
lifting the blockade, with credible security guarantees
for Israel.
Only a just and lasting peace will make it possible
to put a definitive end to the escalations we have seen.
In the light of the increasing situations of tension in
recent months, France reiterates that both Israelis and
Palestinians have the right to live in peace, dignity and
security. If we do not restore the political framework for
a just and lasting peace, such tensions will unfortunately
continue to spread. We call on all parties to respect the
ceasefire that came into effect on 7 August and to put an
end to this cycle of violence, serves no one. France will
spare no effort, in conjunction with its European and
regional partners, to support the resumption of political
negotiations with a view to settling the conflict within
the framework of international law.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): I would like to thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing and
analysis of the situation on the ground, as well as his
impressive efforts to de-escalate the situation.

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this emergency meeting at the request
of multiple members of the Security Council, including
France. I would also like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland
for his briefing and all his efforts in support of
de-escalation and to assure him of our full support.

We are deeply saddened by the casualties and loss
of lives during the recent escalation in and around
Gaza. Norway strongly condemns all acts of terror,
indiscriminate attacks and attacks against civilians. We
underline the need to protect civilians and fully respect
international humanitarian law, including the principles
of distinction, precaution and proportionality. And
children must be protected and never put in harm’s way.

France is deeply concerned about the escalation
over the past few days, which has resulted in many
victims among Palestinian civilians. We resolutely
condemn the violence and reiterate our condolences to
the bereaved families. All parties have an obligation to
protect civilians and respect international humanitarian
law. We very much regret that children were among
those killed. We also deplore the firing of rockets

Norway welcomes the ceasefire and commends
all actors contributing to restore calm. We urge full
compliance and observance of the ceasefire. We also
welcome the announcement that the border crossings
have been reopened and that the Gaza power plant has
restarted. For the past week, border crossings into Gaza
had been closed, electricity was cut and Gaza’s sole
power plant was shut down due to a lack of fuel, with

10/20

22-45477

08/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a serious impact on the functioning of hospitals and
emergency services.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is fragile
and was already dire before this recent escalation. As
Special Coordinator Wennesland has emphasized, the
recent use of violence may undermine the efforts to
develop Gaza. We must do all that we can to prevent
the situation from getting any worse. Over the past
year, we have seen significant improvements in Gaza,
including increased work permits, expanded fisheries
zones and eased restrictions on trade. We must secure
those improvements so that they are not lost.
It is also important to have a holistic perspective.
The situation in the West Bank remains volatile and
needs continued attention. Israel must contain the
drivers of conflict stemming from the occupation.
We have pointed on several occasions to the need to
stop illegal settlement building and forced evictions
of Palestinians from their homes, as well as to refrain
from taking actions that fuel tensions. Similarly, it is
important to avoid increasing tensions in Jerusalem.
Radical elements must not be allowed to escalate the
situation around the holy sites, and their historic status
quo must be upheld. If the tensions and underlying
drivers of the conflict are not addressed, there is a risk
of new escalations, terror and violence. We urge the
parties to return to the negotiating table and put an end
to the conflict.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting at the request
of a number of members of the Security Council,
including Ireland. My thanks also go to Mr. Tor
Wennesland for his briefing and his continued efforts.
Ireland welcomes the ceasefire announced on the
evening of 7 August, and we call on all parties to ensure
that it remains in force. We thank Egypt, along with the
United Nations, Jordan, Qatar and others in the region,
for its efforts in brokering the ceasefire. We share
the deep concern at the violence in recent days. The
impact of Israeli strikes on civilians in the Gaza Strip is
unacceptable. A total of 46 Palestinian lives were lost,
including 15 children. The impact on children, in an
already difficult humanitarian situation, is especially
worrisome. Ireland extends its condolences to the
families of the victims and expresses solidarity with
the injured.
Ireland condemns the launching of rockets
from Gaza. Attacks and the threat of attacks against

S/PV.9107

Israeli citizens are unacceptable. The protection of all
civilians across the occupied Palestinian territory — in
Gaza and the West Bank — and Israel is of paramount
importance and is required under international law.
Indiscriminate attacks against civilians and civilian
objects are prohibited under international humanitarian
law, and constant care must be taken to spare them.
Accountability must be ensured for all attacks
against civilians.
As Mr. Wennesland pointed out, the slow progress
made in gradually opening Gaza since the end of
the May 2021 escalation risks being undone, leading
to even greater humanitarian needs when global
resources are so stretched. As the occupying Power,
Israel is duty-bound to ensure unimpeded access to
humanitarian assistance. There is an urgent need to
ensure an adequate supply of fuel, power and medical
supplies. It is also vital to ensure that patients can
leave Gaza for medical care. Civilians in the Gaza
Strip are bearing the brunt of the military escalation,
especially the children of Gaza, many of whom have
endured four bombardments in their short lives. Some
800,000 of the 1 million children in Gaza are in need
of psychosocial support and care. It is incumbent on
all parties, including those in the Council, to restore
hope for a meaningful peace process that addresses the
needs of all Palestinians and Israelis, including women.
We fully support Mr. Wennesland’s ongoing efforts and
share his assessment of the situation.
We have yet again witnessed a repeated cycle of
violence on the back of two major military escalations
in 15 months. Those events are not happening in
isolation. They are just the latest cycle in a long and
brutal conflict. The cycle of reducing tensions when
violence boils over is not enough. Proactive, firm
and direct engagement is required by the parties and
the international community. Ireland emphasizes that
without addressing the root causes of the conflict with
a view to ending the 15-year Gaza blockade and 55-year
occupation of the Palestinian territory, further violence
is inevitable and the threat of extremism will remain.
This ceasefire must not become a pause between
cycles of violence. What is needed are genuine efforts
to revive a political engagement between the parties.
There can be no military solution to a political conflict.
Ireland will continue to be forthright in expressing its
concerns regarding the actions and policies of Israel in
the occupied Palestinian territory.

22-4547711/20

S/PV.9107

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Ireland stands
ready to support all efforts to help resume credible
negotiations aimed at achieving a just and lasting twoState solution based on international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions and agreed parameters.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil would like
to thank Mr. Wennesland for his detailed and valuable
briefing. We express our condolences to the families of
those who were killed and injured in the recent cycle
of violence.
At the outset, Brazil joins others in welcoming
the Egypt-brokered ceasefire announced yesterday.
We thank Egypt for its crucial efforts, as well as all
those — especially Mr. Wennesland — who have
worked to bring some calm and de-escalate the situation
on the ground. It is now imperative that the ceasefire
be fully implemented and respected by all parties. The
ceasefire must ultimately be accompanied by an easing
of tensions throughout the Palestinian territory and in
Israel. All provocations and all incitement to hatred
and violence must stop. Brazil condemns all attacks
against civilians. This latest escalation of violence
underlines the urgent need to make progress towards
a just and sustainable political solution to the conflict
and address its driving forces. While the challenges
in Gaza and the conflict as a whole require political
solutions, economic growth also remains vital to give
hope to the Palestinian people, while intra-Palestinian
reconciliation is a crucial step towards stabilization and
a resumption of genuine dialogue within the framework
of the peace process.
The safety and security of religious sites are an
essential component of freedom of religion and belief
and should be preserved at all costs. Upholding the status
quo of the holy sites is fundamental, as is maintaining
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’s special role as
custodian of Muslim holy places. Brazil reiterates its
agreement with the assessment that merely managing
this conflict in perpetuity is not a viable option. We
can no longer afford the high costs of perpetual cycles
of violence. Without a political perspective and respect
for international law, the same causes will produce
the same effects, the cycles of violence will continue
to follow one another and the civilian population will
continue to bear the brunt of it all. The Security Council
bears a heavy responsibility to live up to its mandate
and the expectations of people affected by the conflict.
Brazil will continue its efforts to contribute to Security
Council action and to finding solutions. The Council
12/20

08/08/2022

must now engage in support of the efforts to relaunch
the political process and address urgent questions such
as the issue of detainees. Brazil reiterates its resolute
support for a two-State solution, within the framework
of international law and the resolutions of the Council.
That is the only way to meet the aspirations of the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples and to ensure the security of all.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): The United States welcomes the ceasefire
that was reached last night. Our thanks go to Special
Coordinator Wennesland, as well as Egypt, Qatar,
Jordan and other regional partners, for facilitating an
end to the recent hostilities. We call on all the parties
to fully implement the ceasefire, including through the
consistent delivery of fuel shipments to Gaza to ensure
that hospitals and other public services can operate.
We are deeply saddened by the reports of civilian
casualties and need to swiftly and thoroughly
investigate each of them. We should refrain from
jumping to conclusions until we can determine the
facts. To give just one example, Israel was originally
blamed for an attack that inflicted civilian casualties in
Jabalia refugee camp, which now appears to have been
caused by a Palestinian Islamic Jihad rocket. So let us
be sure to follow the facts and see where they lead us.
We are of course also concerned about the
humanitarian impact of the recent violence. Residents
of Gaza have seen their access to electricity reduced
at one of the hottest times of the year. Medical
facilities and other public services were shuttered. The
resumption of fuel deliveries today comes not a moment
too soon. Speaking more broadly, our position is clear
to everyone in this room. We fully support Israel’s right
to defend its people against terrorist threats, including
rocket fire aimed at civilians or without regard to them.
We also believe that Israelis and Palestinians equally
deserve to live in safety and security, and we are
working assiduously to that end.
The United States will remain engaged with
senior Israeli officials and the Palestinian leadership
in the days ahead to continue implementing the many
new initiatives that President Biden has launched to
improve the quality of life for Palestinians. But let us
be clear. The Palestinian Islamic Jihad is designated a
terrorist organization in the United States and many
other nations. It is also an Iranian proxy group that has
conducted attacks on innocent civilians for years. It is
telling that Palestinian Islamic Jihad leaders were in
22-45477

08/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Tehran over the past several days while the people they
claim to be protecting were left in harm’s way.
I would also note that it was Palestinian Islamic
Jihad, not Israel, that held up agreement on a ceasefire
designated to save lives and resume shipments into
Gaza, thereby callously prolonging those hostilities.
We commend Prime Minister Lapid for his leadership,
which ultimately prevented further casualties and
suffering.
The Council should be able to come together and
unconditionally repudiate the terrorism of Palestinian
Islamic Jihad, whose reckless actions have put the lives
of civilians on both sides at risk. Their actions must be
condemned by all countries in no uncertain terms, and
no country should be expected to tolerate or passively
accept such brazen attacks on its civilians.
Even as this conflict in Gaza brings new lists of
families devastated by loss, we recall the two Israeli
civilians still being held in Gaza, along with the remains
of two Israeli soldiers killed in action in a previous
conflict. Every family, irrespective of nationality,
religion or creed, deserves to bury its loved ones in a
dignified and unimpeded manner.
We hope that the ceasefire holds, and we will
continue working to prevent further violence. We
all know that the best way to achieve lasting peace
is through a comprehensive solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. As President Biden affirmed
during his visit to the region in July, the United States
remains deeply committed to the two-State solution.
To that end, we strongly urge all parties to refrain
from any unilateral steps that would imperil progress.
Building towards a durable solution means refraining
from provocative actions, rhetoric or other measures
that would disrupt respect for the historic status quo at
holy sites in Jerusalem.
We call on all Member States to join us in supporting
steps that can stabilize the situation on the ground,
deliver economic benefits to the Palestinian people and
revitalize political horizons that meet the needs of both
Israelis and Palestinians.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting. We also thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
As we have heard, the situation in the Middle East is
a very delicate one that compels the Security Council to

S/PV.9107

convene. However, we hope that it meets not to merely
deplore the situation, but to take action to re-establish
dialogue between the parties that would lead to lasting
peace.
What will the Council do? That is the question
being asked in several parts of the world in the light
of the recent escalation. We hope that we can find
an answer of some kind. The escalation of violence
that occurred at the end of last week is indeed very
worrisome. We have already been informed about the
toll of the violence — dozens of people dead, including
children, and hundreds injured, along with major
damage to civilian infrastructure.
The Council’s calls for the parties to show maximum
restraint and act in line with international humanitarian
law are not enough, in particular when principles such
as precaution, proportionality and distinction are
disregarded. Mexico condemns the disproportionate
actions by the Israel Defense Forces. We also condemn
the launching of rockets by Palestinian Islamic Jihad,
which has resulted in the loss of civilian lives. However,
as has been said here today, a thorough, independent
investigation must be conducted into the attacks that
resulted in civilian victims. If not, we will continue to
hear reciprocal accusations that do not necessarily shed
light on the events.
Of course, we would like to acknowledge Egypt’s
timely and effective diplomatic efforts, as well as the
participation of other regional actors, which led to the
ceasefire — albeit fragile but, ultimately, functional.
However, the recent escalation of violence again
underscores that, so long as lasting peace has not been
achieved, the violence will continue.
Israel must lift the blockade on Gaza and put an
end to the collective punishment. Pursuant to resolution
1860 (2009), the freedom of movement in the Gaza Strip
must be sped up, including of people and basic goods
such as food, medicine and fuel — and we are glad
that the latter has already resumed, as it is essential for
supplying electricity and drinking water, among other
things There must also be free and unhindered access
for urgent humanitarian assistance, and the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East must be supported.
The launching of missiles from Gaza is also
unacceptable. Perhaps lifting the blockade will stop
missile launches.

22-4547713/20

S/PV.9107

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mexico reiterates its commitment to the solution of
two independent States as the only viable way to resolve
the conflict. It is a solution that would ease Israel’s
legitimate security concerns and enable the creation
of a sovereign, politically and economically viable
Palestinian State, pursuant to the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations. However, we should not wait any
longer to put an end to the cycles of military clashes and
destruction. The underlying causes of the conflict must
be addressed.
Although it is clear that it is primarily up to the
parties to the conflict to resume the dialogue, the
international community, and the Security Council
in particular, is obliged to ensure that such dialogue
occurs as soon as possible, without further delay.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing to
the Security Council.
For more than seven decades, the Council has
struggled with the question of Palestine and has been
unable to deliver a just and fair solution that assures for
the people of Israel and Palestine an opportunity to live
side by side in peace and security. We are dismayed by
the perpetual cycle of violence that makes the vision
of the two-State solution fade with each passing day,
which makes the prospect for peace and stability in the
region a mirage.
We welcome the present agreement reached
under the auspices of Egypt and other friendly
regional partners for the restoration of the ceasefire.
Nonetheless, we count with regret the many ceasefires
that have been crafted and broken and have had to be
restored. We believe that, until both Israel and Palestine
understand that neither of their narratives is a complete
picture of reality, the seemingly intractable conflict
could persist at great cost to all of us for many years
to come. We hope, therefore, that the positions of both
sides can be adjusted peacefully. We believe that it is
only through a sober return to the negotiating table
that the strong emotional feelings of dispossession,
prolonged occupation and denial of full statehood by
Palestinians can be reconciled with Israeli fears of
terrorism and existential threats from its neighbouring
brothers in Palestine and the region.
As a country with pacific intentions, Ghana does
not accept the pre-emptive use of force under any
circumstances, since it risks the proliferation of the
lawless use of force. That is a position we have held for
14/20

08/08/2022

many years. While acknowledging the State of Israel
and its citizens’ right to equal measures of security,
freedom, opportunity and dignity, we are deeply
concerned about the violence in the Gaza Strip, which
came on the back of escalatory attacks in the West
Bank. We condemn in no uncertain terms the violent
attacks that have so far resulted in the deaths of at least
46 Palestinians, including 15 children, with many more
injured. We also condemn the more than 1,100 rockets
fired by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad into Israel.
Those attacks only escalate tensions and prejudice
the possibility for the peace that is urgently needed on
the ground. Non-violence is a principle that we expect
the Palestinian authorities to impress on all militant
groups if the peace process is to have any chance of
resuscitation. We join the Secretary-General and others
in calling for full respect for the agreement reached for
the cessation of hostilities for the sake of the civilian
population on both sides. They have suffered terrible
destruction, unnecessary pain and irredeemable loss.
Ghana is also deeply concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation caused by the recent border
closures in the West Bank and the 15-year blockade of
Gaza, with its adverse impact on women and children.
We call on Israel to offer real guarantees of safe passage
and access to humanitarian convoys and relief workers
to provide needed assistance. We believe that there
is no legal or moral justification for indiscriminate
attacks targeting civilians and non-combatants, the
majority of whom are children and women and who are
the most vulnerable. We call for urgent international
investigations of the civilian casualties that have
occurred and for establishing accountability for them.
In conclusion, I want to say that as the Council,
we have a duty not turn our backs on the bloodshed,
suffering and hardship that have continued to afflict
Palestinian civilians in Gaza and the West Bank, or on
the danger from the rockets that continue to threaten
the Israeli communities bordering the Gaza Strip. As
a matter of urgency we must therefore reinvigorate the
tracks of engagement for the Middle East peace process
without delay.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing on the developments in the Middle East. We
are grateful to the Chinese presidency for convening
today’s meeting to consider the worsening crisis in
22-45477

08/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian-Israeli relations, the danger of which is not
limited to the region.
We are very concerned about the rapid deterioration
of the situation in the conflict zone, which resulted
in an armed confrontation and numerous human
casualties. The latest escalation was provoked by Israeli
air strikes on the Gaza Strip on 5 August, in response
to which Palestinian groups launched a large-scale
indiscriminate shelling of Israeli territory. As we have
heard today, according to the latest information at least
44 Palestinians were killed, including 15 children, with
more than 300 injured, as a result of Israeli attacks. We
would like to express our condolences to the families of
all those killed or injured. We strongly condemn the use
of force and exhibitions of violence against the civilian
populations of both Palestine and Israel.
We are deeply concerned about such events, which
could lead to a resumption of a full-scale military
confrontation and a further deterioration in the already
dire humanitarian situation in Gaza. We call on all the
parties involved to exercise maximum restraint, uphold
the norms of international humanitarian law and work
to prevent a new escalation of hostilities. Against that
background, we were relieved and pleased to note
the agreement reached on a cessation of hostilities
in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict zone. For our part,
from the very outset, we have engaged in energetic
efforts in the interests of a ceasefire and maintained
intensive contacts with key regional partners. We note
in particular the mediation efforts of the Egyptian and
Qatari leadership, which ultimately made it possible to
reach an agreement on a ceasefire. The United Nations,
including Special Coordinator Wennesland, also made
an important contribution to resolving the situation.
The recent exacerbation of the situation is the result
of a combination of factors, primarily the absence of
a direct negotiation process between the Palestinians
and Israelis. It is in those negotiations that the parties
must work out solutions to all the fundamental issues
pertaining to the final status of the illegally occupied
Palestinian territory. The stagnation in the peace
process, compounded by provocative unilateral steps
such as we are currently witnessing, could detonate the
situation on the ground at any moment, leading to a new
cycle of violence.
We reaffirm Russia’s principled and consistent
position, as reflected in the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, in support of

S/PV.9107

a comprehensive and long-term settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict in accordance with the
principle of a two-State solution. The outcome of that
process should be the realization of the legitimate
national right of the Palestinian people to establish an
independent State within the 1967 borders. We believe
that a direct dialogue between the parties should be
conducted with dynamic support from the Middle
East Quartet, as the only internationally recognized
mechanism for accompanying the Palestinian-Israeli
peace process. In that connection, we once again
reaffirm our intention to cooperate with our partners in
the Quartet with a view to increasing the effectiveness
of the work in that format, which is endorsed by the
Security Council.
At the same time, we would like to note the
importance of coordinating the international mediators
with regional partners. That was what prompted
Russia’s initiative to hold an expanded ministerial
meeting of the Middle East Quartet with key members
of the League of Arab States. We regret that due to the
unconstructive approach of our American colleagues,
the issue of resuming the Quartet’s activities is still
pending. Washington’s stance is aimed at eroding
the internationally recognized foundations of the
settlement and negotiation formats in the Middle East
and does nothing to contribute to a detente but rather
leads to further escalation. It cannot serve as a source
of confidence for the parties concerned, first and
foremost the Palestinians, who as we know are in a far
more vulnerable position.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for updating us on the latest
developments in and around Gaza.
We join others in welcoming the ceasefire reached
through the mediation of Egypt. We commend Egypt for
its engagement and efforts. We consider the ceasefire
to be a step in the right direction for ending the
bloodshed and urge all sides to honour it. Nonetheless,
we remain very worried by the latest escalation and its
consequences. I would like to make the following points.
First, our position has been and will remain clear.
Albania firmly condemns all forms of terror attacks
on Israel and its population. Terrorism cannot and
will never be justified. It can only be condemned in
the strongest terms as unacceptable behaviour. Terror
cannot promote any cause. Indiscriminate rocket
launches from Gaza on populated areas of Israel will

22-4547715/20

S/PV.9107

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

not lead to any solutions. They can only make a bad
situation worse, as is always the case. Those who
believe in violent solutions will have only themselves
to blame for the consequences.
Secondly, Israel has a right to protect itself from such
attacks, because no one should live in fear, but it should
always use proportionate force and protect civilian
populations and civilian infrastructure. The protection
of civilians is an obligation under international law for
all parties to a conflict, and they should always exercise
maximum restraint. Civilians should be kept away from
any violent acts. We are deeply troubled by the deaths
of innocent civilians, including children. They should
never be a target and cannot be collateral damage.

08/08/2022

that there is possibility to work for and produce results
for all.
The political horizon that is now clouded and,
ultimately, the desired lasting solution of the most
complex geopolitical situation in modern times will
not come as a heavenly gift and will not be born while
waiting. It will not come through fear or by force. It
will not come through threats or powerlessness. It will
not come through violence or by denying the existence
of others. It may and will come through hard work,
continued dedication and trust. That will trace the path
to lasting peace, development, a decent and dignified
life without fear and with clear prospects for the future
of all Israeli and Palestinian youth.

Thirdly, we know that it is all too easy to stoke
conflicts in the Middle East. It is harder but better to
resist, contain the conflict and seek peaceful solutions.
That makes Egypt’s mediation even more laudable.
Albania reiterates its call to all concerned to refrain
from any kind of provocation or violence and from
the use of unnecessary force, which can exacerbate
an already fragile situation. We have seen it so many
times — violence will instil more fear and create
more casualties and destruction. It will only undo the
achievements and positive steps that have been made,
including the opening of Gaza in May 2021, and it will
render a path towards peace even more difficult to find.
It will not help to heal the wounds of the conflict over
the years — it will only add to them.

Mrs. Kamboj (India): I also thank Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing on the
situation in Gaza.

Israelis and Palestinians have seen everything in
the course of the past 74 years. There has been enough
war and too many victims. Entire generations have
been raised without clear prospects of a solution and
populations are living in fear of the next escalation.
There is no alternative to dialogue and negotiations,
and we do not see any other possible path than through
the two-State solution, with the State of Israel and an
independent, democratic and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security and mutual
recognition and with Jerusalem serving as the future
capital of both States. We hope that the humanitarian
channels with Gaza will remain open and functional to
the benefit of all those in need.

We support the diplomatic efforts of the United
Nations, members of the international community and
the countries of the region, especially Egypt. Those
efforts have led to a ceasefire to calm the situation
further and seek to achieve durable peace. We urge all
parties to de-escalate the situation in order to ensure
that it does not spiral out of control.

Solutions to such complex issues will not come
easy. They need trust among the parties, goodwill and
continuous efforts by the parties and all actors who can
help. We have seen progress and timid success before.
They should serve as templates for the future, proof

Even as the Council focuses on the cessation of
hostilities in Gaza, we must also underline the urgent
need for resuming dialogue between Israel and Palestine
for a two-State solution. The absence of direct and
meaningful negotiations between the two parties will

16/20

After a year of relative calm, tensions have risen
again in Gaza. It is a matter of grave concern that the
violence has not completely subsided despite hectic
diplomatic parleys, development initiatives and efforts
by the international community to hold together the
fragile ceasefire negotiated in May 2021.
The latest cycle has once again caused immense
suffering and resulted in the loss of precious civilian
lives, including children, and has left several injured
and traumatized. We extend our deepest condolences to
all those affected and to their families.

The recent developments can also challenge the
incremental gains made in the past year in addressing
Gaza’s humanitarian and economic situation. The
delivery of human humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza must therefore
remain the focus of the international community.

22-45477

08/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9107

only widen the trust deficit, which in turn increases the
chances for similar escalations in future.

respect for the principles agreed upon by the parties
and the application of the rules of international law.

Long term peace in Israel and Palestine can be
achieved only through a negotiated two-State solution
leading to the establishment of a sovereign, independent
and viable State of Palestine living within secure and
recognized borders side by side and at peace with
Israel, taking into consideration the legitimate security
needs of Israel.

Finally, we support the work of the Special
Coordinator and his statement on the urgency of ending
the escalation, ensuring the safety and security of the
civilian population and following up on the issue of
Palestinian prisoners.

India has consistently called for the resumption of
direct peace negotiations between the parties, which
we believe is the best path towards achieving the goal
of a two-State solution. The United Nations and the
international community must prioritize the revival of
those negotiations.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this urgent meeting. I also
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Tor Wennesland, for his inspiring briefing and
for his efforts.
The escalation of violence in recent days in the
Gaza Strip remind us of the scope of the journey
towards peace in the Middle East. It is clear that the
logic of clashes is synonymous with instability and
insecurity for all parties. It will not yield any viable
political prospects.

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the representatives from the United Arab
Emirates and others for calling this important Security
Council meeting.
The United Kingdom joins fellow Council Members
in welcoming the ceasefire in Gaza announced last
night. We express our thanks to Egypt, Qatar and the
Office of Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for
their mediation efforts. We now urge all parties to do
their utmost to ensure that the ceasefire is durable and
prevents further violence. These past few days we have
once again seen tragic scenes in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories.
We strongly condemn the firing of over 1,100
rockets at civilians by Palestinian Islamic Jihad and
the ongoing campaign of terror attacks by that group,
which has resulted in the deaths of innocent civilians,
Israelis and Palestinians alike.

Gabon is committed to the peaceful resolution
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and welcomes the
ceasefire agreement signed in Gaza, mediated by Egypt
and several other countries of the region. We remain
attentive to the evolving situation on the ground in the
aftermath of the entry into force of this fragile truce
and call on all parties to show restraint. Of course, we
call for accountability. Independent investigations must
be conducted and those responsible for the violence on
both sides must be held to account for their actions.

As my Foreign Secretary has been clear, the
United Kingdom stands by Israel and its right to defend
itself in the face of such terrorism and violence. The
United Kingdom expresses its deepest condolences to
the families of innocent Palestinian civilians killed
over the past three days, particularly the tragic deaths
of children. The United Kingdom supports a timely
and thorough investigation in that regard. The Israeli
Palestinian conflict and the cycle of violence have
taken too many lives.

My country reaffirms its commitment to the twoState solution, with two States living side by side on
the basis of the 1967 borders. Terror on the ground
against civilians, including children, is unacceptable.
The Council must uphold international law in order
to protect the rights of the Palestinian people, while
guaranteeing Israel’s security. That is the only way to
ensure the viability of the two-State solution.

We remain deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Gaza, including the lack of movement and
access, damage to civilian infrastructure and critical
supplies, such as fuel for power plants to supply
electricity, including for hospitals. We welcome Israel’s
announcement that it is allowing humanitarian aid
through to Gaza. Immediate access for humanitarian
relief is essential, and we expect that the ceasefire
agreement will now allow for prompt restoration of
movement and access for people and goods via the Erez
and Kerem Shalom crossings.

We therefore call on all parties to relaunch
negotiations in order to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis and achieve a real and lasting peace based on

22-4547717/20

S/PV.9107

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This escalation is yet another reminder of the
urgent need for progress towards a two-State solution
that ensures a safe and secure Israel living alongside a
Palestinian State, based on 1967 lines, with Jerusalem
as the shared capital of both States.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing on the
current developments.
The escalating acts of violence over the past few
weeks in and around Gaza are deeply concerning.
These tragic incidents, which have resulted in the loss
of civilian lives, including the lives of children, are
deplorable. We convey our condolences to families of
those who lost their loved ones and quick recovery to
the injured.
We are concerned at the disproportionate use
of force, and we reiterate the need for fulfilling
obligations under international humanitarian law,
especially with regard to the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Kenya also condemns all acts
of violence, particularly the indiscriminate launch of
rockets from populated locations in Gaza into Israeli
territory by the Islamic Jihad militants.
These hostilities compound an already dire
humanitarian situation, and, if not urgently contained,
they will, beyond their already high human cost, reverse
any progress made towards achieving a permanent
and secure peace. We therefore commend the Special
Coordinator and the countries in the subregion, in
particular Egypt, which immediately stepped in to play
an urgently needed mediating role, for their efforts
to de-escalate the situation and restore calm. In this
regard, we welcome the announcement of a ceasefire,
and we encourage all sides to adhere to it, exercise
restraint and refrain from any acts of provocation,
thereby preventing any further loss of life or destruction
of property. We also take note of and welcome the
announcement by Israel of the resumption of access for
humanitarian personnel and essential goods, including
medical supplies, food and fuel, into Gaza.
It is our sincere hope that the ceasefire will hold
and that the parties will commit to a resumption of
direct negotiations to achieve the two-State solution,
where Israel and Palestine dwell side by side in peace
within the 1967 borders.
18/20

08/08/2022

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I would like to thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing and express appreciation
for his efforts aimed at de-escalating the situation. I also
thank the United Arab Emirates and other countries for
their initiative to convene today’s meeting.
Yesterday afternoon, Israel and Palestinian Islamic
Jihad put a pause in the fierce clashes that took place
in the Gaza Strip over the past few days by reaching
a ceasefire agreement. Egypt, Qatar, Jordan and other
countries of the region have played a key role in reaching
the ceasefire through mediation and promoting talks.
Special Coordinator Wennesland has also carried
out fruitful endeavours in this regard, which China
highly appreciates.
The current situation on the ground remains very
fragile. Undoubtedly, the Security Council is duty
bound to pay close attention to the situation and prevent
its further escalation. Reaching a ceasefire agreement
is only the beginning. The key to a ceasefire and
stopping violence lies in the ceasefire’s implementation.
Relevant diplomatic efforts should continue, and parties
with influence should persist in playing their roles in
urging parties to the conflicts to earnestly observe the
ceasefire and exercise restraint so that calm can be
restored in Gaza as soon as possible.
The clashes in the past few days have killed 41
Palestinians and injured more than 300. Among the
dead were 15 children, the youngest of whom was only
five years old. I have listened to the briefings by the
Special Coordinator, as well as that of our colleague
from Palestine. The relevant situation is heartbreaking
and saddening indeed.
Civilians were also injured on the Israeli side.
China condemns indiscriminate attacks on civilians and
the disproportionate use of force and grave violations
against children. The protection of civilians and
civilian facilities in armed conflicts is an international
obligation that must be fulfilled. There should be no
exceptions or blind spots.
The security of Israel and the security of Palestine
are inseparable. We should pay equal attention to the
legitimate security concerns of both sides, break the
cycle of violence and achieve common security.
22-45477

08/08/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The relevant military operations have also led
to the destruction of a large number of houses and
infrastructure and the disruption of power supplies in
the Gaza Strip, further aggravating the plight of the
people in Gaza. The international community should
speed up its humanitarian response, increase support
for the recovery and reconstruction of Gaza and spare
no efforts to prevent a large-scale humanitarian disaster.
We call for the immediate lifting of the blockade on
Gaza and an end to the collective punishment of the
Palestinian people.
The situation in Gaza is closely related to that
of the West Bank of the Jordan River. We are deeply
concerned about the tense situation observed around
the Al-Aqsa Mosque in the past two days. We call on all
parties concerned to learn from history to effectively
safeguard the historical status of the religious holy
sites in Jerusalem, respect Jordan’s custodianship of
the holy sites, avoid any unilateral act of changing the
historical status quo and prevent violence, threats and
provocations against Muslims. Not only should the
international community prevent the crisis in Gaza
from spreading to the West Bank, but it should also
prevent the frictions in East Jerusalem from rekindling
the war in Gaza and turning it into a conflict of larger
scope and intensity.
In addition, in recent years, the Security Council
has held several emergency meetings on the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. However, the problems and the
crisis continue to fester unabated. The root causes
of the upheavals in the Israeli-Palestinian situation
are that the Middle East peace process has deviated
from the right track. The foundation of the two-State
solution has been eroded, United Nations resolutions
have not been followed through effectively, and the
Palestinians’ right to independence and statehood has
been repeatedly violated.
Facts have proven time and time again that piecemeal
crisis management cannot replace a comprehensive
and fair solution. Limited economic and humanitarian
measures cannot erase political and security debts.
Individual national policies cannot replace long-term
international consensus and multilateral processes.
The international community must adopt a long-term
view, tackle the root causes of the problem, conduct
diplomatic efforts with a sense of urgency, reverse
the negative situation on the ground by restarting the
peace process as soon as possible, and take substantive
steps to advance the two-State solution so that the

S/PV.9107

Palestinian people can fully enjoy their rights and so
that a comprehensive just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian issue can be achieved at an early date.
The Council should carefully heed the voices of the
Palestinian people, adopt effective measures against
all disruptions and bring hope and justice back to the
Palestinian people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on the People’s
Republic of China’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would also like to
thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his valuable briefing.
I would now like to read out the following statement
on behalf of the Group of Arab States:
“The Arab Group welcomes the truce that
halted the recent Israeli aggression on the occupied
Gaza Strip, and we commend the role of the Arab
Republic of Egypt in brokering this truce and its
pivotal role in restoring calm and stability.
“The Arab Group would like also to thank the
State of Qatar and the United States of America
for the role that they played in putting an end to
the Israeli aggression and restoring security and
calm in the occupied Gaza Strip. The Arab Group
also commends the continuous efforts of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to protect the legal
and historical status of the Islamic and Christian
holy sites and addressing Israeli actions that target
them, as well as protecting the Arab, Islamic and
Christian identity of the holy sites in the context
of the Hashemite custodianship of Jordan by His
Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein.
“The Israeli aggression against the Gaza
Strip that caused the current cycle of violation is
a reflection of an unsustainable situation, namely,
the absence of the basic two-State solution,
where there would be a sovereign, geographically
contiguous Palestinian State within 4 June 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as that
is the only way to resolve the conflict and achieve
fair and comprehensive peace.
“The Israeli aggression targeting Palestinian
children and Palestinian homes, as well as civilian

22-4547719/20

S/PV.9107

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

facilities, is condemned in the strongest terms.
The international community must protect the
Palestinian people and seriously act to put an
end to Israel’s contempt for international law and
international humanitarian law and to investigate
violations committed against civilians — 44
Palestinians killed, including 15 children, to date
due to the aggression. Is that the proportionate use
of force? Is that the concept of respect for the law
that is espoused by the occupying Power? I do not
think so.
“Fair and comprehensive peace will never
be achieved by aggression against Gaza. Peace
will never be achieved by undermining the twoState solution through the persistent settlement,
confiscation of lands and displacement of
Palestinians from their homes. Peace and security
will be achieved for all only through effective
and serious negotiations to achieve the two-State
solution, where there would be an independent and
sovereign Palestinian State within the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the resolutions of international legitimacy
and the Security Council resolutions, as well as
the Arab Peace Initiative. As the occupying Power,
Israel is bound to protect the Palestinian people
according to international law.
“The Arab Group calls for putting an end
to all escalatory, provocative, unilateral steps.
We condemn the Israeli violations of the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We reiterate
that the Al-Haram Al-Sharif, whose area is a
144-square-dunums, is an exclusive Muslim place
of worship according to the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy. In that regard, the Arab
Group emphasizes that managing Jerusalem Awqaf
and all Al-Aqsa Mosque affairs is exclusively under
Jordanian supervising pursuant to the provisions of
international humanitarian law, including all the
Al-Aqsa Mosque area. We commend the tireless

20/20

08/08/2022

efforts of His Majesty King Mohammed VI during
Morocco chairmanship of the Al-Quds Committee.
“What we witnessed of the escalation over
the past few days constitutes a message to the
international community that the absence of a
political prospect is no longer sustainable. In that
regard, the Arab Group reaffirms that peace, as
a strategic option, and settling the Arab-Israeli
conflict according to international law and the
relevant international resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515 (2003)
and 2334 (2016), as well as the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative, with all its elements, is the only solution.
“The Arab Group again reiterates the centrality
of the Palestinian question for the entire Arab nation,
as well as the Arab, Islamic and Christian identity
of occupied Eastern Jerusalem, the capital of the
State of Palestine. We also reiterate the right of the
State of Palestine to extend its absolute sovereignty
over the entirety of its occupied territories in 1967,
including Eastern Jerusalem, its air and maritime
spaces, its territorial waters, its natural resources
and its borders with neighbouring countries.
“In conclusion, the Arab Group calls on the
Security Council and the international community
to ensure a complete ceasefire and put an end to
Israel’s violations of international humanitarian
law and its unilateral provocations in the occupied
territories and the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. Prompt international actions should
be taken to put an end to escalation, which will
lead to catastrophic consequences for all. Active
actions should be taken to create a true prospect for
establishing a fair and comprehensive peace.”
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I will now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue its
discussion on the subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

22-45477
