Resolutiom adopted on the reporta of the Sixth Committee

139

Country, if so requested by missions accredited to the
United N ations, cases involving infringements of their
status;

semination and wider appreciation of intemational law,
in particular those activities which are of special benefit
to persons from developing countries,

11. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish all
appropriate assistance to the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country and to bring to its attention
issues of mutual concem relating to the implementation
of the Agreement between the United Nations and the
United States of America regarding the Headquarters
of the United Nations and the Convention on the
Privileges and Im.munities of the United Nations;

Recalling that, in the conduct of the Programme, it
is desirable to use as far as possible the resources and
facilities made available by Member States, international
organizations and others,

12. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-seventh session a report on the progress of its
work and to make, if rit <leeros it necessary, appropriate
recommendations;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session an item entitled "Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".

2019th plenary meeting,
15 December 1971.
•

* *

At the 2029th plenary meeting, on 21 December 1971, the
President of the General Assembly announced that, in
pursuance of paragraph 5 of the above resolution, he had appointed fourteen members of the Committee on Relations with
the Host Country.
As a result, the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country is composed of the following Member States:

l. Authorizes tbe Secretary-General to carry out in
1972 and 1973 the activities specified in bis report
to be financed from budgetary provisions in the regular
budget, including the provision of:
(a) A minimum of fifteen fel1owsbips in 1972 and
1973 at the request of Govemments of developing countries;

( b) Assistance in the form of a travel grant for
one participant from each developing country who will
be invited to the regional training and refresber course
to be beld in Latin America in 1972 and to tbe regional
symposium to be beld in Asia in 1973;

2. Expre$es its appreciation to the Secretary-General for bis constructive efforts to promote training and
assistance in intemational law within the framework of
the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law in 1971 ;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
its participation in the Programme, in particular for
the efforts made to support the teaching of international
law;

ARGENTINA, BULGARIA, CANADA, CHINA, CYPRUS, FRANCE,
GUYANA, IRAQ, IVORY COAST, MALI, SPAIN, UNION OF SovraT
SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
ANO NoRTHERN IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA and
ÜNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
!nstitute for Training and Research for its participation
m ~he Programme, particularly in tbe organization of
reg10nal meetings and in the conduct of the fel1owship
programme in international law sponsored jointly by
the United Nations and tbe Institute;

2838 (XXVI). United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemi•
nation and Wider Appreciation of Inter•
national Law

5. Expresses its appreciation for the offer of the
Govemment of Venezuela to provide host facilities for
tbe regional training and refresber course to be beld
in 1972;

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of lntemational
Law12 and the recommendations made to the SecretaryGeneral by the Advisory Committee on the United
N ations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in that report,
Considering that rinternational law should occupy an
appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines at
all universities,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States
at the bilateral level to provide assistance in tbe teaching and study of international law,
Convinced nevertheless tbat States, international
organizations and institutions sbould be encouraged to
give furtber support to the Programme and to increase
their activities to promote tbe teacbing, study, dis12 A/8508 and Corr.1.

. 6. Urges all Govemments to encourage tbe inclus1on of courses on intemational law in the programmes
of legal studies offered at institutions of bigber leaming;
7. Requests tbe Secretary-General to continue to
publicize tbe Programme by periodically inviting Member States, universities, pbilanthropic foundations and
other interested national and international institutions
and ?rga_nizations, and individuals to make voluntary
contnbutI~ns towards tbe financing of tbe Programme
or otherw1se towards assisting in its implementation
and possible expansion;
8. Reiterates its request to Member States and to
interested organizations and individuals to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the Programme and expresses its appreciation to those Member
States whicb bave made voluntary contributions for
this purpose;
9. Decides to appoint the fol1owing thirteen Member States as members of the Advisory Committee on
the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teacbing, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, for a period of four years

140

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

beginning on 1 January 1972: Barbados, Belgium,
Cyprus, El Salvador, France, Ghana, Hungary, Iraq,
Mali, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the Programme during 1972 and
1973 and, following consultations with the Advisory

Committee, to submit recommendations regarding the
execution of the Programme in subsequent years;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its twenty-eighth session an item entitled "United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law".
2025th plenary meeting,
18 December 1971.
