A /70/PV.90

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

90th plenary meeting

Friday, 1 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Tommo Monthe
(Cameroon), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: The Assembly is today to
consider a report of the Fifth Committee submitted
under sub-item (a), entitled “Appointment of members
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions”, of agenda item 114, entitled
“Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments”, as contained in document
A/70/539/Add.1.
In order for the Assembly to consider the report
of the Fifth Committee, it will be necessary to reopen
the Assembly’s consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 114.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen its consideration of sub-item
(a) of agenda item 114 and proceed immediately to
its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/539/Add.1)
The Acting President: In paragraph 3 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General

16-09154 (E)

Assembly appoint Ms. Carmel Power of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as a
member of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions for a term of office beginning
on 16 May 2016 and ending on 31 December 2016.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint Ms. Carmel Power as a member of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
for a term of office beginning on 16 May 2016 and
ending on 31 December 2016?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 114.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on
agenda items 131, 132, 134, 139, 140 and 146.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Gert Auväärt of Estonia, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee before
the Assembly today.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour today to present to the
General Assembly the reports of the Administrative and
Budgetary Committee containing recommendations on
issues considered during the first part of the resumed
seventieth session of the General Assembly.
The Fifth Committee met from 29 February to
24 March and held nine plenary meetings, as well as
numerous rounds of informal and informal informal
consultations. Considering the Committee’s heavy
schedule, it was particularly satisfying that it was able
to finish its work on time.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1609154*

A/70/PV.90

On agenda item 131, entitled “Financial reports
and audited financial statements, and reports of the
Board of Auditors”, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/70/624/Add.1, the adoption of
a draft resolution on the reports of the Board of Auditors
on the strategic heritage plan of the United Nations
Office at Geneva and on progress in the handling of
information and communications technology affairs in
the Secretariat, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
On agenda item 139, entitled “Human resources
management”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/70/800, the adoption of a draft
resolution on amendments to the Staff Regulations and
Rules, which the Committee adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 140, entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/70/801, the adoption of a draft resolution,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 146, entitled “Financing of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/70/634/Add.1, the adoption of a draft
resolution on the construction of a new facility for
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Arusha Branch, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 134, entitled “Programme budget for
the biennium 2016-2017”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/70/648/Add.1, the adoption
of a draft resolution entitled “Special subjects relating
to the programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”,
which the Committee adopted without a vote. The draft
resolution covers issues of strengthening property
management; the implementation of the organizational
resilience management system; managing after-service
health insurance liabilities; revised estimates relating
to the programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017
for the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism; special
political missions and the strategic capital review.
On agenda item 132, entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the Committee
2/6

01/04/2016

recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph
8 of its report contained in document A/70/649/Add.1,
the adoption of a draft resolution, entitled “Progress
towards an accountability system in the United Nations
Secretariat”, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
In paragraph 9 of the same report, the Committee
recommends to the Assembly the adoption of a draft
decision, entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
I wish to thank delegations for their cooperation and
flexibility during the Fifth Committee’s negotiations
and to assure them that the actions taken during the
Committee’s 27th, 31st and 32nd formal meetings are
reflected in the reports before the General Assembly. I
would also like to take this opportunity to express my
thanks to the Chair of the Fifth Committee, my fellow
Bureau members and all the coordinators for their
work. Last but not least, I thank the staff of the Fifth
Committee secretariat for their commitment, and all
the translators and interpreters for assisting us.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Fifth Committee.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee
that are before it today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind delegations that under paragraph 7
of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a main committee and in a plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee
or in the plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s
vote in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
May I furthermore remind delegations that, also
in accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of
16-09154

01/04/2016

A/70/PV.90

vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
70/255).

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. This means that where
recorded votes were taken, we will do the same. I also
hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Committee.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft decision, entitled “Questions
deferred for future consideration”. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?

Agenda item 131 (continued)

Agenda item 134 (continued)

Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors

Proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2016-2017

The draft decision was adopted (decision 70/553 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 132.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/624/Add.1)

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/648/Add.1)

The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report.

The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.

We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Special subjects relating to the programme
budget for the biennium 2016-2017”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
70/238 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 131.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/649/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report, as well as a draft decision
recommended in paragraph 9 of the same report.
We will now take action on the draft resolution and
on the draft decision, one by one.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Progress towards an accountability
system in the United Nations Secretariat”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
70/248 B).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes
to speak in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We have already expressed our principled
position on the text contained in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2016/272) on the United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism and have emphasized our commitment to
providing humanitarian assistance to all those affected,
without discrimination. We have also underlined our
willingness to cooperate with United Nations agencies
and the Organization’s partners on a basis of respect
for the guidelines for humanitarian assistance outlined
in the provisions of resolution 46/182, foremost among
them being respect for national sovereignty and the
role of the countries concerned in overseeing the
distribution of humanitarian assistance within their

16-091543/6

A/70/PV.90

territories, as well as for the principles of neutrality,
integrity and non-politicization.
We stress the importance of delivering humanitarian
assistance from within the territory of the Syrian
Arab Republic, noting that we have already informed
the Resident Coordinator of the new Mechanism for
facilitating access for humanitarian aid convoys. We
reiterate our reservations about some of the points
in the Secretary-General’s report, particularly with
regard to the lack of accuracy of the figures it contains
and the lack of positive cooperation on the part of
the Mechanism with the Syrian Government. The
Monitoring Mechanism has no mandate to deliver
humanitarian aid to unstable areas within the country’s
territory. The issue comes under the purview of the
Resident Coordinator, who should cooperate with the
Syrian Government. We have expressed our position
on this matter in various letters and statements on this
humanitarian issue sent to the Secretariat.
My delegation has aligned itself with the consensus
reached on the Assembly’s adoption today of resolution
70/248 B, entitled “Special subjects relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017”.
However, we wish to express our reservations about
section IV of the resolution, entitled “Revised
estimates relating to the programme budget for the
biennium 2016-2017 under sections 27, Humanitarian
assistance, and 36, Staff assessment: United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism”.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 134.
Agenda item 139
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/800)

01/04/2016

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 139.
Agenda item 140
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/801)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
70/257).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 140.
Agenda item 146 (continued)
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/634/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution entitled “Construction of a new
facility for the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch” recommended by
the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
70/258).

The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 146.

We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like
to thank His Excellency Mr. Durga Prasad Bhattarai,
Permanent Representative of Nepal to the United
Nations and Chair of the Fifth Committee, the members
of the Bureau, the Secretary of the Committee and
representatives for a job well done.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
70/256).
4/6

16-09154

01/04/2016

The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it for this meeting.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/70/L.42)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly considered agenda item 15 at its 75th
and 82nd plenary meetings, on 14 December and
23 December 2015, respectively, and adopted resolution
70/110 under this item. Members will also recall that
the Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda
items 15, 116 and 123 at its 52nd plenary meeting, on
13 November 2015. Members will further recall that,
under agenda items 15 and 116, the General Assembly
adopted decision 70/539 at its 81st plenary meeting, on
22 December 2015.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil
to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.42.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): It is an honour
to address this plenary meeting to introduce draft
resolution A/70/L.42, which proclaims 2016-2025 the
United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition.

A/70/PV.90

this is why it has gained such broad support from
Member States, including a large number of sponsors
from various regions.
As requested by the 2014 Rome Declaration on
Nutrition, we will now have a platform within the
United Nations to build synergy among all ongoing
initiatives to end hunger and malnutrition, to give
visibility to the problem and to engage everyone
in finding solutions. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the
World Health Organization (WHO) will coordinate the
implementation of the Decade in collaboration with
the World Food Programme, the International Fund
for Agricultural Development and the United Nations
Children’s Fund. But the decade should not be seen
as a United Nations process only. In order to ensure
food security and proper nutrition for all, we need to
bring together Member States, civil society, the private
sector, academia and the media. We need a collective
engagement towards this coming endeavour.
It is time to tackle the root causes of hunger
and malnutrition, which are, to a large degree, a
consequence of poverty and inequality. We need to
invest in small-scale food producers to reduce trade
distortions, build sustainable food systems, pursue
sustainable consumption and production patterns, and
reduce food loss and waste.

Last year the world committed to ending hunger,
achieving food security, improving nutrition and
promoting sustainable agriculture, which is Goal 2 of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1). The task ahead is not simple. According to
available data, nearly 800 million people worldwide
remain chronically undernourished; 159 million
children under 5 years of age are stunted; 50 million
children under 5 years of age suffer from wasting; over
2 billion people suffer from micronutrient deficiencies,
and a rapidly increasing number of people are affected
by obesity in all regions of the world.

Brazil is deeply committed to ensuring food
security and nutrition, both domestically and through
international cooperation, in particular South-South
and triangular cooperation. In the past few years,
my country has made important strides in increasing
access to income and food, as well as in fighting
extreme poverty. The right to adequate food was
affirmed as a constitutional right in 2010, and we are
proud to no longer figure on FAO’s hunger map. This
achievement is the result of a systematic investment
in cash transfers, public-sector food procurement and
social mobilization, and requires constant attention to
be sustained and deepened.

Today we still live with scenes of brutal starvation
in conflict-affected areas, as well as with the chronic
hunger that affects daily and silently poor populations
in places free from conflict. This reality is even more
unacceptable when we understand that the planet
produces enough food to feed all humankind. Clearly,
not enough is being done to ensure the right to food.
This is what draft resolution A/70/L.42 is about, and

We look forward to engaging in the implementation
of the Decade, sharing information on our national
policies and learning from other countries’ experiences.
A great Brazilian statesman and intellectual, Josué de
Castro, once said that hunger and war do not follow
any natural law; they are rather human creations. The
United Nations Decade on Action on Nutrition has
been designed to raise awareness and to enlist political

16-091545/6

A/70/PV.90

support for the fight against hunger at all levels. I thank
Member States who participated in the negotiations of
this draft resolution, as well as FAO and WHO for their
technical support along the process.
The Acting President: I thank the representative
of Brazil. We shall now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/70/L.42.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.42, entitled “United Nations Decade
of Action on Nutrition (2016-2025)”. I now give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and

6/6

01/04/2016

in addition to those delegations listed in the draft
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/70/L.42: Cameroon,
Indonesia,
Malaysia,
Mongolia,
Mozambique,
Myanmar, Slovenia, Thailand and Turkey.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/70/L.42?
Draft resolution A/70/L.42 was adopted (resolution
70/259).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

16-09154
