S/PV.7343

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7343rd meeting

Tuesday, 16 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mahamat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Peace operations: the United Nations-African Union partnership and its evolution
Letter dated 8 December 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/879)

14-69799 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1469799*

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union (AU).

Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in English)

The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Peace operations: the United Nations-African
Union partnership and its evolution
Letter dated 8 December 2014 from
the Permanent Representative of Chad
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/879)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Brazil, Egypt, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Ireland, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Malaysia, Namibia, New Zealand, the Netherlands,
Pakistan, Slovakia, Sweden, Tunisia, Turkey and
Uganda to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Pierre
Buyoya, African Union High Representative for Mali
and the Sahel, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nick
Westcott, Managing Director for Africa, European
External Action Service of the European Union, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/879, which contains a letter dated
8 December 2014 from the Permanent Representative of
Chad to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I now give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, and the Government of Chad for
organizing this debate on peace operations and the

2/54

16/12/2014

Before addressing today’s formal agenda item, I
should like to say a few words about the blood-curdling
attack today in Pakistan. The hearts of the world go out
to the parents and families who have lost loved ones in
the horrific attack on a school in Peshawar this morning,
which has taken the lives of more than 130 people, the
vast majority of them children. I condemn this heinous
act in the strongest possible terms. No cause can justify
such brutality; no grievance can excuse such horror.
It is an act of horror and rank cowardice to attack
defenceless children while they are learning. Schools
must be safe and secure learning spaces. Getting an
education is every child’s right. Going to school should
not have to be an act of bravery.
I extend my deepest condolences to the people
and Government of Pakistan, and particularly to
those touched by today’s tragedy. The United Nations
will continue to support the efforts of the Pakistani
authorities in their fight against terrorism and
extremism. I urge the Government of Pakistan to make
every effort to bring the perpetrators to justice.
I shall now turn to today’s agenda item.
(spoke in French)
The cooperation between the African Union and
the United Nations in the field of peace and security is
crucial and must be systematically activated at the first
signs of crisis. It is vital that we continue to strengthen
our strategic partnership and that we strive more
effectively together to prevent, manage and resolve
conflicts. I welcome the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Ms. Zuma, for her willingness
to strengthen cooperation, and I stress the important
contribution that African countries make to United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
(spoke in English)
Over the years, cooperation between the United
Nations and its regional and subregional partners has
intensified. The Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council are working together more
closely, and there is increased support for Africanled peace operations and their transition into United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as we have seen in
Mali and the Central African Republic. The United
Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission meet
14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

regularly for the United Nations-African Union Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security, mapping out joint
initiatives and strategies. Through the Regional
Coordination Mechanism for Africa, both organizations
have undertaken joint planning and implementation of
programmes.
Our partnership must be based on a common
understanding of what each organization can do in
any given context, and on a realistic assessment of
each other’s comparative advantages. In the Central
African Republic, for example, cooperation among the
African Union, the United Nations and the Economic
Community of Central African States led to the
signing of the cessation-of-hostilities agreement in
Brazzaville in July. In Somalia, our two Organizations
are working together with other partners, including
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to
support the people and the Federal Government in this
critical phase of peacebuilding and State-building.
We are also working closely with the African
Union and with subregional organizations in the Sudan
and South Sudan. In the Great Lakes region, strong
cooperation among the United Nations, the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Southern African Development
Community has been vital to the progress that has
been made under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region.
However, we need to do more. In Burkina Faso,
there was close cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States in the immediate aftermath of the
uprising that led to the departure of former President
Blaise Compaoré. But that crisis also points to the need
for greater emphasis on preventive action.
We also need to adapt in the face of an evolving peace
and security landscape. Two-thirds of peacekeeping
missions are now operating in areas where there are
significant threats, including well-armed groups of
terrorists and extremists, transnational organized
crime and the trafficking of people and drugs, serious
human rights violations and impunity. In some cases,
the Security Council has responded by approving
robust mandates. However, peacekeeping missions are
now being mandated to advance national reconciliation
and dialogue in the absence of peace agreements, or
even clear identification of the parties to the conflict.

S/PV.7343

Peacekeeping is also becoming a more crowded
field, involving diverse actors and even parallel
missions. In the Central African Republic, for example,
the joint efforts of the African-led International
Support Mission for the Central African Republic, the
French Operation Sangaris, the European Union Force
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
have contributed to a significant improvement in the
security situation, especially in the capital, Bangui.
I have launched a major review of peace operations
as part of my efforts to address some of these challenges.
The review will encompass every aspect of our peace
operations, from mandates to our cooperation with
key partners, including the AU, to peacebuilding and
transition, the protection of civilians, accountability
and the role of special political missions and the United
Nations Police.
We have a responsibility to ensure that all the tools
we have at our disposal are ready to face current and
future demands. In addition to this review, and in line
with resolution 2167 (2014), I am also reviewing the
modalities for hand-over from African Union to United
Nations operations. And in March next year, I will
submit an assessment report with recommendations
on the progress of the partnerships between the
United Nations and relevant regional organizations in
peacekeeping operations.
Whatever the outcome of these reviews, we must
continue to strengthen the role of the United Nations
in conflict prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping,
and ensure the effective functioning of the collective
security system established by the Charter. In order to
do so, we face significant challenges.
First, we must build stronger political partnerships
that are anchored in a clear strategic vision.
Secondly, we need a clear, agreed role for the African
Union and subregional organizations. It is important to
increase the predictability of our cooperation and to
conduct the joint assessment missions and planning
exercises that are critical to enhancing joint peace
operations.
Thirdly, the United Nations, regional organizations
and other partners must cooperate to enhance joint
logistical capabilities. To provide the necessary mobility,
capacity and robustness, we need creative approaches.
These might include multinational cooperation schemes,

14-697993/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

pooled capacities and co-deployments. Member States
with certain specialized capacities, from helicopters
and intelligence to engineering expertise, can make
invaluable contributions. We should also strengthen our
trilateral discussions with the European Union, which,
together with the AU, is an important regional partner
in deploying and managing peace operations.
Fourthly, financing continues to pose a major
challenge to African capability. I have advocated for
further resources from within Africa, but we must find
creative ways to mobilize the international community.
The time has come for us to take our partnership
to a new level of clarity, practicality and predictability.
The Council knows full well that crises in Africa are
far from an African problem. They concern the entire
international community, and they will be resolved
only by all the parts of that community acting as one.
I commend the African Union for doing more than
ever before to meet those operational and political
challenges. I look forward to deepening our ties as we
strive to meet the yearning of the continent’s people for
lasting peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now call on Mr. Buyoya.
Mr. Buyoya (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, who cannot be here
today owing to constraints beyond her control, allow
me to thank the Chadian presidency of the Security
Council for having convened this important meeting on
the crucial issue of the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union on peace and security
and its evolution.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the
appreciation of the African Union (AU) to Chad for its
invaluable contribution to peace efforts throughout the
continent, not least in Mali, where so many Chadian
soldiers have fallen in the line of duty. I would also
like in particular to express the AU’s gratitude to
President Idriss Deby Itno for his personal commitment
and untiring efforts to rid our continent of the scourge
of conflict and violence. The initiative of convening
this debate is yet another illustration of Chad’s strong
commitment to the promotion of a strategic partnership
between the AU and the United Nations.

4/54

16/12/2014

I wish to recognize the presence of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and commend his unflinching
commitment to peace, security and stability on the
African continent, as well as his tireless efforts in
promoting the AU-United Nations partnership in the
area of peace and security.
Today’s debate comes at a time of growing
awareness of the importance of building a strong
partnership between the AU and the United Nations,
with a view to enhancing our efforts to promote peace,
security and stability in Africa. As this is the second
meeting convened by the Security Council this year on
the issue of the partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations, including the African
Union, today’s meeting is also a clear indication of the
sustained attention that the Security Council continues
to devote to the promotion of peace and security on
the continent, as well as of its commitment to build an
innovative and creative partnership with the AU.
The strategic relationship between the AU and the
United Nations has been growing steadily, with the aim
of forging a more coherent and effective partnership in
the context of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations and article 17 of the Protocol relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union. This strategic partnership has in
particular enabled our two organizations to establish
regular consultations on issues of common concern
and interest in the area of peace and security, where
cooperation is most visible.
In that regard, the holding of annual joint
consultations between the AU Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council, as
well as the coordination between the AU Commission
and the United Nations Secretariat through existing
institutional mechanisms such as the Joint Task Force
on Peace and Security and biannual desk-to-desk
meetings, are a clear illustration of the common will
to encourage greater synergy between the AU and the
United Nations.
The new joint United Nations-AU framework for
an enhanced partnership in peace and security, signed
recently between the AU Commission’s Peace and
Security Department and the United Nations Office to
the AU, is a very good initiative that could be refined
and extended across the rest of the AU Commission and
the wider United Nations family.

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The collaborative peacemaking efforts between
the AU and the United Nations have contributed to the
deepening of that partnership. Many examples testify
to the close complementarity that exists between the
African initiatives and those of the United Nations,
including in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region, Mali, Guinea-Bissau and the
Central African Republic. The same applies to a number
of other cross-cutting issues, ranging from mine action
to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security-sector reform, post-conflict reconstruction
and development, and efforts in the areas of counterterrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons.
Despite the progress achieved so far, the African
Union is convinced of the need to further deepen its
strategic relationship with the United Nations in the
area of peace and security. Such an approach is made
more compelling by the fact that, despite the significant
progress made over the past few years, Africa still has
the most conflict situations of any continent. In fact, in
addition to the conventional threats to peace, security
and stability, the continent continues to face a new set
of threats, including intra-State conflicts, violence
related to bad governance, terrorism and transnational
crime, piracy on both the east and west coasts of Africa,
border disputes and the effects of climate change and
environmental degradation.
In order to address those challenges, and in view
of their proximity to and familiarity with the issues,
the African Union and its regional mechanisms have
shown renewed determination to provide the necessary
leadership. The deployment of several peace support
operations in various areas of the continent clearly
illustrates the commitment of the African Union and its
regional blocs to contributing, in complementarity with
the United Nations, to collective security, as provided
for by the Charter of the United Nations.
It is in that context that the African Union has
deployed, beginning in 2002, a number of peace
support operations in response to conflict situations on
the continent, including in Burundi, Darfur, Mali, the
Central African Republic and Somalia. The stabilization
efforts carried out by those missions and the sacrifices
made by their personnel largely paved the way for, and
facilitated the task of, the United Nations missions
that eventually took over. In the case of Somalia, the
African Union Mission in Somalia continues to operate
in a complex and difficult environment with the aim
of stabilizing the country while creating appropriate

S/PV.7343

conditions for a more sustained international
commitment, possibly through a classic United Nations
peacekeeping operation.
Concurrent with the deployment of peace support
operations, the African Union is also building its longterm capacities by operationalizing the African Standby
Force. The Force will enable appropriate responses to
be provided to some of the gaps noted in the recent
operations conducted by the African Union in relation
to planning, force generation, command and control and
mission support. On the basis of the recommendations
of the Gambari report on the evolution of the African
Standby Force and its rapid deployment capability, a
number of steps have already been taken with a view to
attaining full operational capability by the end of next
year. In the interim, the establishment of the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises will
significantly enhance both the speed of our response to
emergency situations and its robustness.
Clearly, the African Union and its regional
mechanisms have demonstrated their determination to
fully play their role and make a significant contribution
to collective security efforts on the continent. In so
doing, they have developed comprehensive architectures
covering the entire range of security challenges facing
the continent, including those related to governance
deficits.
However, the experience of recent years has
amply shown that one of the greatest obstacles facing
the African Union and its regional mechanisms is the
issue of flexible, sustainable and predictable funding
for their peace efforts. Therefore, it is crucial that an
appropriate solution be urgently found to this question,
bearing in mind that the Security Council has the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. Obviously, the African Union
is encouraging its member States to increase their
contributions in that regard, so that outside support,
including that of the United Nations and our partners,
is truly complementary to our own means and efforts.
If the United Nations and the African Union are to
successfully address the peace and security challenges
confronting the continent, it is also critical that they
achieve greater political coherence. Significant efforts
must be deployed to further enhance their partnership
in terms of consultations prior to decision-making,
a shared understanding of the issues at hand,
consistency and support to African-led peace efforts.
More specifically, the African Union and the United

14-697995/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Nations should agree on a set of principles aimed at
clarifying their relationship and anchoring it on a more
solid platform. From the African Union’s perspective,
those principles should revolve around support for
African ownership and priority setting, consultative
decision-making, and a division of labour and sharing
of responsibilities based on our respective comparative
advantages.
Furthermore, practical steps should be taken in
order to enhance the effectiveness of the annual joint
consultative meetings between the Security Council and
the African Union’s Peace and Security Council. The
interactions between their respective presidents must be
held on a regular basis, and joint field missions should
be undertaken. It is equally important for the Security
Council to give due consideration to our legitimate
requests and to address in a more systematic manner
the funding of peace support operations undertaken
with the consent of the United Nations. For their part,
the African Union Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat should continue to work towards greater
cooperation and coordination.
We look forward to the outcome of the review of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations to be
undertaken by the High-level Panel recently appointed
by the Secretary-General, under the very able
leadership of former President José Ramos-Horta. This
review provides an opportunity to further our common
objective of building an innovative and forward-looking
partnership within the context of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Allow me to conclude by expressing our hope that
this meeting of the Security Council will mark a new
step in the enhancement of the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations. The challenging
and increasingly complex situations on the ground
require concerted responses by our two organizations
and a stronger and deeper partnership, based on a
innovative reading of the provisions of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations in order to allow
the African Union and its regional mechanisms to fully
play their roles as integral components of the global
collective security system.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Buyoya for his briefing.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for their

6/54

16/12/2014

valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2014/27.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and African Integration of Chad.
At the outset, I would like to add my voice to that
of the Secretary-General in expressing my condolences
to the people and Government of Pakistan, who once
again have fallen victims to terrorist barbarism.
I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Mr. Pierre Buyoya, High Representative
of the African Union for Mali and the Sahel, for their
statements.
The Charter of the United Nations confers upon
the Security Council the main responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Charter also envisages, in Chapter VIII, partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) has often been discussed
in Security Council debates. It is still relevant — I
would even say strategic. How could it be otherwise
between the Security Council, which is responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and Africa, which unfortunately is the stage for most
conflicts and where many United Nations peacekeeping
missions are deployed?
Chad commends the progress made in the
partnerships between the two institutions. We believe
that the two organizations are complementary and
pursue the same goals with regard to issues of peace
and security. By way of illustration, I would cite
certain axes of the focus of the cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union concerning
peacekeeping operations. At the institutional level, we
note the cooperation on various aspects of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, and specifically the
early warning system, preventive diplomacy, mediation,
electoral assistance, the maintenance of peace and
addressing issues of post-conflict reconstruction. We
would like to strengthen this cooperation in particular

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7343

by improving exchanges of information and joint
assessments.

preparation for the possible transfer of responsibilities
to the United Nations.

We encourage the Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security of the African Union and the United Nations
to step up its efforts in order to establish a common
understanding of the causes and motives of conflict
in Africa and to promote a joint approach to resolving
them. We also encourage the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council to consider
ways to strengthen their partnership in the areas of
conflict prevention, settlement and management and
peacekeeping operations. We propose that they venture
to work together towards an armed conflict-free Africa
by 2020, in accordance with the solemn declaration
made on the occasion of the AU’s fiftieth anniversary.
In the same vein, we urge both Councils to resolve the
conflicts in Libya, northern Mali, Darfur, the Central
African Republic, South Sudan, the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia as a matter of
priority.

We are anxiously waiting to see what lessons may
be learned from the transition of the two African Union
operations to United Nations peacekeeping missions
and the specific recommendations that could provided
to inform future transitions.

Given those conflicts, it is important that we
meet together the new waves of challenges, which are
terrorism, extreme violence and organized transnational
crime, in particular in West and Central Africa, the
Sahel, the Maghreb and the Horn of Africa. In this
regard, the United Nations must consider the possibility
of instituting a five-year plan to support efforts aimed at
achieving those objectives. In addition, it is important to
support the Panel of the Wise of the African Union and
to strengthen cooperation for the good offices among
the envoys of the two organizations. In addition, as the
ten-year programme to strengthen the AU’s capacities
is set to end in 2016, the United Nations and the AU
should accelerate the work carried out in the Joint Task
Force that was established at the fifteenth meeting of
the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa in
order to design a successor programme that could take
on the African Union’s Agenda 2063.
With regard to transitions, we welcome the support
provided by the United Nations, and in particular its
African Union offices for the African-led International
Support Mission for the Central African Republic
(MISCA) and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We urge the offices to continue to support the planning
and management of the onset, deployment and operation
of African Union missions and to make communication
between the two organizations more effective in

We should keep in mind that the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
in the Sudan, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), MISCA and MINUSCA were first
initiated by African regional economic communities
and the African Union. The Security Council
intervened later to take up the baton. Besides this, these
organizations’ approach to imposing peace, unlike
classic peacekeeping, seems to be bearing fruit on the
continent. We all remember the prowess of the Rapid
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and AMISOM’s success in Somalia against
Al-Shabaab. We should also consider ways and means
for bringing peace, since we are beginning to realize
that there is less and less peace to keep. The partnership
between the two organizations should therefore also
be looking at information from the various operations
being conducted in Africa and adapting to the changing
situation.
Concerning the financing of operations undertaken
under United Nations mandate, concrete measures
designed to make their arrangements more predictable,
lasting and flexible have been proposed by the
African Union-United Nations Panel of Experts led by
Mr. Romano Prodi. The fact is that the two financing
mechanisms are based on voluntary contributions,
used for financing capacity-building, and obligatory
contributions levied by the United Nations for financing
Security Council peacekeeping operations. We deplore
the Council’s refusal to take the slightest step forward
in how this is implemented, as demonstrated by
the positions taken by some delegations during the
negotiations for resolution 2167 (2014), introduced by
Rwanda, and the presidential statement we have just
adopted (S/PRST/2014/27). It appears that the Security
Council prefers staying with the status quo to moving
forward. That, in our view, is regrettable.
Regarding deployment when a crisis occurs, we
commend the AU Peace and Security Council for its
efforts to operationalize the African Standby Force and

14-697997/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

its capacity for rapid deployment. We hope the AMANI
Africa II military exercises scheduled for 2015 will
enable it to prove its effective operationalization. Africa
must make good as soon as possible on the commitment
made at the AU Malabo summit of 26 and 27 June by
ensuring that the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crises (ACIRC) is operational. ACIRC’s
purpose is to provide the continent with a speedy
military capacity for intervention in conflict situations
as a short-term measure, creating the conditions for
a broader deployment of AU and/or United Nations
peacekeeping operations, while waiting for the African
Standby Force to become operational.
ACIRC is a significant step towards enabling Africa
to take on the task of providing its own security. It is
based on the willingness of Africa’s leaders to produce
their own rapid response to crises on the continent. As
we speak, a forum is being held in Dakar on security in
Africa at which African leaders are considering ways
and means of activating mechanisms such as ACIRC
that can enable them to deal with multiple challenges.
That willingness has been demonstrated in the wake
of the crisis in Mali. At that time, owing to Africa’s
inability to intervene to fight the drug traffickers,
terrorists and other jihadists who were heading for the
southern part of the country, non-African forces had
to intervene, despite the fact that it is up to Africans
to take on full responsibility for their security. It will
be important to know how the United Nations and its
partners can support that initiative in order to speed up
deployment of our forces during crises on the continent.
We welcome the significant role of the European Union
and the United States of America in their efforts to
support African Union operations, as well as the
China-African Union Strategic Dialogue for Peace and
Security in Africa.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
gratitude to the United Nations, which has spared no
effort to help grow the African Union’s capacity. We
also thank the African Union for its contributions to
the maintenance of peace and security, particularly
in Somalia, the Sudan, Mali and the Central African
Republic, and in the fight against the Lord’s Resistance
Army. We urge the United Nations and the AU to
take measures inspired within the framework of
the declaration of 2014-2024 as the Madiba Nelson
Mandela Decade of Reconciliation in Africa, in order
to put an end to conflicts on the continent. It is in the
international community’s interests to cooperate with
Africa and participate in its rebirth.
8/54

16/12/2014

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation,
I would like to warmly welcome you to New York,
Mr. President. It is a pleasure to see you again only a
few days after our meeting in Nigeria. I would also like
to welcome His Excellency the former President Pierre
Buyoya and thank him for his comments on behalf of the
Chairperson of the African Union (AU) Commission.
The Secretary-General is of course always welcome in
our midst, and it was a pleasure to hear his perspective
on the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. I would like to thank the delegation
of Chad for organizing this important debate and for
the excellent concept note (S/2014/879, annex) it has
provided to guide our deliberations.
We have listened carefully to our briefers and
drawn some lessons from their comments. In November
2013, the Secretary-General and the President of the
World Bank Group made a tour of the Sahel region and
visited some countries, including Chad, where they met
with President Idriss Deby Itno. The nexus between
peace and security and development was extensively
discussed. Central to that was an appreciation of
the critical significance of the partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. Today’s debate is therefore a continuation
of that discussion held in N’Djamena, and we believe it
is crucial for us to deliberate on it today.
The concept note highlights four important
challenges to the efforts of both the African Union
and the United Nations to deliver effectively on their
cooperative peacekeeping tasks. They are, first,
improving institutional collaboration between the
United Nations Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union; secondly,
planning for and managing mission transitions; thirdly,
enhancing the prospects for rapid deployment and
fourthly, financing AU peace operations.
Concerning the challenge of improving institutional
collaboration between the United Nations and the
AU, we believe that moving from context-specific to
more practicable mechanisms for peacekeeping will
enhance their cooperation. The inherent difficulty in
this is the perennial problem of how to operationalize
the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, designed in a different era of global regional

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7343

security collaboration. The ongoing conflicts in the
African region make the case for a strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the AU, in line with
the principles of Chapter VIII of the Charter. Indeed
the challenge of achieving more balanced institutional
collaboration and a more effective United Nations-AU
strategic peackeeping partnership occurs not only at
the organizational level between both institutions but
also, more essentially, at the political level.

S/2008/813), which also recommends the establishment
of a multi-donor trust fund for the purpose of
supporting African Union peacekeeping capacity.
Effecting those recommendations, including enhancing
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
the financial resources of the African Union when it
undertakes peacekeeping activities under Security
Council mandates, will, we believe, avail the AU of
predictable funding to meet its peacekeeping efforts.

In terms of operational challenges in the management
of mission transitions and rapid deployment, we believe
that more could be done to enhance United NationsAU capacity-building programmes, joint assessment
missions and planning exercises to aid the effective
performance of the AU peacekeeping capabilities.
In that regard, it would be appropriate for the Highlevel Panel to Review Peacekeeping Operations to
consult closely with the African Union and to provide
recommendations to further strengthen United NationsAU cooperation in addressing operational challenges in
AU peacekeeping efforts.

In terms of collaboration and coordination, Nigeria
supports the current level of deepened interrelation
between the United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council through the
holding of annual joint consultations between Addis
Ababa and New York. We also see merit in the close
collaboration between the AU Commission and the
United Nations Secretariat, as well as the institutional
mechanisms put in place, such as the Joint Task Force
and the desk-to-desk collaboration. Those mechanisms
help to bring together the senior leadership and focal
points in both organizations to discuss issues of
mutual interest. More attention should also be paid to
information management in order to improve synergy
in the implementation of mandates. Evidence of the
ongoing cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU can be seen in several peacekeeping operations
across Africa, notably the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Support Office
for the African Union Mission in Somalia and the
operations in South Sudan, Mali, Guinea-Bissau and,
most recently, in the Central African Republic.

It is essential that coordinated efforts be
undertaken with the African Union Commission to
develop its military, police, civilian, technical, logistic
and administrative capabilities. A cursory overview
of United Nations peacekeeping operations since 1948
indicates that 32 of the 69 peacekeeping operations
undertaken by the United Nations have been in Africa.
This situation has led the AU to undertake major steps
to enhance its peacekeeping efforts on the continent,
including the establishment of an African Stand-by
Force. A major challenge in those efforts has been
financial resources. That is highlighted in resolution
1809 (2008), which calls for enhanced predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for regional
organizations when they undertake peacekeeping under
United Nations mandates.
The Prodi and Obasanjo Panels both examined
alternative financial sources for the AU’s peace
operations in keeping with resolution 1809 (2008), which
accents the responsibility of regional organizations to
secure financial resources, including through soliciting
contributions from donors to fund their operations. So
far, neither of the recommendations of the two Panels
has produced major results. In its efforts to meet its
financial challenges in the context of peacekeeping
missions, the AU has sought authorization for the use
of United Nations-assessed contributions for AU peace
operations. That is in line with the Prodi report (see

Finally, as the United Nations-AU peacekeeping
partnership continues to evolve, we see a need for
the current collaboration between the two institutions
to be intensified in order to consolidate the gains
already achieved. Constructive interaction among
members of the United Nations Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council on substantive
issues in peacekeeping remains relevant to creating
a cost-effective and mutually beneficial United
Nations-AU peacekeeping partnership. A strategic
framework embodying a common vision for such
cooperation — a lot of which you, Mr. President,
outlined in your statement — and your road map for
its implementation can suitably guide that interaction.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate and for attending it in person today. This is a

14-697999/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

valuable opportunity to take stock again of one of the
most important institutional relationships of the United
Nations, namely, its partnership with the African Union
(AU). I also thank the Secretary-General and President
Buyoya for their contributions this morning.
Let me start by underlining the United Kingdom’s
horror at the Taliban’s cowardly attack on a school in
Peshawar, which killed so many children. Our deepest
condolences go to the families and loved ones of those
killed or injured and to the people and the Government
of Pakistan.
There have been many shared successes of the
United Nations-AU relationship this year. I would like
to highlight four in particular.
First, we have seen close and professional
collaboration between the African Union and United
Nations teams in planning for the transition from an
AU to a United Nations peacekeeping mission in the
Central African Republic. The AU mission stabilized
the security situation, allowing for a smooth handover
to the United Nations peacekeeping mission in
September. That process worked significantly better
than the similar transition in Mali last year, reflecting
a gradually improving partnership between the two
organizations.
Secondly, United Nations-AU cooperation has led
to tangible results on the ground in Somalia this year.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
an African Union mission with United Nations and
European Union logistical and financial support, has
reflected some of the best of African peace operations:
a robust mandate courageously delivered, with real
success in driving back Al-Shabaab. Our shared
challenge now is to extend and preserve those gains.
In that context, we look forward to the joint United
Nations-AU review of AMISOM next year.
Thirdly, we have seen the positive impact of mutually
reinforcing political engagement by the United Nations
and the AU and its subregional organizations. The
United Nations, the AU and the Economic Community
of West African States worked in lockstep in response
to the political crisis in Burkina Faso in November. The
joint visit by envoys from the three organizations at a
pivotal moment showed united support for the transition
and prevented a slide into further instability.
Fourthly, we welcome the AU’s collaboration with
the World Health Organization in deploying healthcare workers to West Africa to tackle the Ebola virus.
10/54

16/12/2014

It is clear that the United Nations-AU partnership
is at its most effective when we have a shared vision
and shared goals, when we build on the lessons learned
from the past, when the two organizations work closely
together in assessments, planning and operational
delivery, and when both bring the appropriate
capabilities and expertise to the task.
I would like to pay tribute to the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the African
Union, Mr. Haile Menkerios, and to the expanded
United Nations Office to the AU. Its members are now
working closely with the AU Commission right across
the conflict cycle, from early warning and conflict
prevention or mediation — the importance of which
you highlighted this morning, Mr. President — to
deploying and sustaining missions and to post-conflict
reconstruction and development. That work can lead
to an even more effective and joined-up approach to
situations of developing instability.
Looking ahead to 2015, there will be major
challenges for the United Nations and the African
Union to surmount together.
First is the growth of asymmetric threats, non-State
actors and increasing collaboration between extremist
terrorist groups, which demands a united response from
us all. Both the United Nations and the AU are stepping
up activity to counter those threats. We welcome, among
other things, the African Union’s strong stance against
kidnap for ransom, and the Nouakchott Process which
brings together the security and intelligence chiefs in
the Sahara and the Sahel.
Secondly, there are opportunities in the months
ahead to enhance further the joint United Nations-AU
partnerships. We look forward to the United Nations
review of the African Union/United Nations Hybrid
operation in Darfur (UNAMID), in collaboration
with the African Union. UNAMID is the only hybrid
AU-United Nations peacekeeping operation, and it
is not working as it should. Important decisions on
UNAMID’s future lie ahead.
Thirdly, 2015 will see several important elections
in African countries. We welcome the African Union’s
long- and short-term monitoring missions, which
help to promote sound elections that are carried out
in accordance with African countries’ constitutions
and the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance. The African Union must not waver in its
commitment to those standards.

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Finally, we need to continue to work together to
surmount the continued obstacles to effective African
Union peace operations, including financing and the
capabilities of troop-contributing countries.
African Union missions need access to adequate,
timely and predictable financing for peace support
operations. The United Kingdom is pleased that
other partners, including the European Union, have
stepped in with support where needed. But in the
long term, and as the presidential statement adopted
today reiterates — and as President Buyoya himself
has highlighted — regional bodies have to assume
their own responsibility to secure human, financial,
logistical and other resources for their organizations
(S/PRST/2014/27). We urge the African Union to act on
that in allocating more African resources for African
peace support operations.
Turning to the capabilities of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) , the African Union and the United
Nations share the goal of well-led, well-trained and
effective missions working flexibly to implement clear
mandates. We need to keep pushing collectively towards
the achievement of that goal, addressing shortfalls in
TCC training and equipment wherever necessary.
We hope that the Secretary-General’s peace
operations review will look at all these issues and
provide recommendations for how best to address
them. In the meantime, we can all look back with
some satisfaction on a year that has seen the United
Nations-African Union relationship become closer,
more experienced, more operational and more vibrant.
We may not always agree, but we understand each other
ever better and remain firmly committed to our shared
goal of an end to all wars and conflict in Africa.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s debate, for your own presence
and for the contribution of Chad to peacekeeping.
I know we all share both shock and repugnance at
the terrible murders in Pakistan, and the empathy of
all Australians is naturally with the people of Pakistan.
I thank the Secretary-General and High
Representative Buyoya for their briefings and their
efforts to strengthen the essential partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU) on
peace and security.
We stand at a critical juncture for peace operations
globally. The landscape has changed profoundly from

S/PV.7343

just a decade ago, with a record number of troops and
police deployed, mostly in Africa, with more robust
mandates, and with new and evolving threats, including
terrorism and asymmetric conflict. Peace operations
are under unprecedented strain, a reality recognized by
the Secretary-General when he commissioned his highlevel strategic review of peace operations. It is clear
today that the United Nations and AU need each other
more than ever.
Time and again the AU is stepping up, not only
to keep peace on the continent, but to enforce it. In
Somalia, troops of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and Somali troops have made
impressive gains in liberating territory from Al-Qaidaaffiliate Al-Shabaab. In Mali and the Central African
Republic, AU deployments have been vital to the
restoration of stability and formed the core of United
Nations missions that followed.
Such African leadership makes sense. The AU
has demonstrated repeatedly its unique comparative
advantages and strengths: knowledge of context, ability
to deploy quickly and, critically, willingness to act
robustly. But these situations have broader implications
and are the responsibility of all of us — of the whole
international community. We should ensure that the
AU has the support it needs when putting African lives
on the line to restore stability and protect civilians in
places no one else can or will.
I will focus on the four challenges defined in the
concept note (S/2014/879, annex).
The first is financing, which is a chronic challenge
that we have not yet resolved. We need to look for
innovative solutions that enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for the AU
missions authorized by the Council. The AMISOM
model — where the United Nations provided a
logistical support package funded from assessed
contributions — has worked well, but there is strong
resistance within the Council to repeating it. So we
need to be creative in seeking solutions, but to respond
to an obvious need. In the Central African Republic,
we employed an innovative model of authorizing
United Nations support to the AU mission in the leadup to transition. A dedicated United Nations support
team was deployed. This model should be replicated.
United Nations trust funds for AU operations failed in
Mali and the Central African Republic. But rather than
dismissing that option, we need to look hard at why
they failed. Would a standing trust fund, with clear,

14-6979911/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

pre-established processes for quick disbursement, iron
out problems?
Direct bilateral support will always be vital,
particularly with airlift, equipment and training. But
such assistance will not provide the required certainty,
uniformity and coordination of support. The long-term
solution lies in the AU enhancing its own ability to fund
its own operations. It has demonstrated its capacity
for innovation in raising funds to fight Ebola through
private-sector contributions and a text messaging, or
SMS, campaign.
My second point addresses managing the transition
of missions from the AU to the United Nations. We are
getting better at this, with a much smoother transition
in the Central African Republic than in Mali. We
consulted better on the mandate. Operational planning
and coordination on the ground was better. But grace
periods to bring personnel up to United Nations
standards were not met. And there have been mixed
results on deploying assets. The coordinated lessons
learned exercise on transitions in those two cases will
be an important resource. More generally, we need more
United Nations-AU joint assessments and field visits.
My third point addresses facilitating rapid
deployment. Speed of deployment is vital to protecting
civilians, stopping human rights violations and halting
descent into chaos. Days lost can be lives lost. Yet no
one has got this right, as we see in the United Nations
struggle to reach authorized strengths in South Sudan
and Mali. The AU has shown that, working with the
subregions, it can get personnel on the ground quickly.
But they need the kit to do their job and better command
and control. We note the potential of the African
Standby Force rapid deployment capacity, which we
must support, and the interim African Capacity for
Immediate Response to Crises.
My fourth point concerns enhancing institutional
collaboration. We very much agree with High
Representative Buyoya’s comment this morning that
we need to anchor United Nations-AU engagement
much more strongly. It should be deepened at all levels:
strategic, operational and tactical. Nowhere is this more
important than between the executive bodies — the two
Councils — that mandate peace operations. We need to
be much more vigilant in following up the outcomes of
our annual joint consultative meetings.
And we need to do more ad hoc interaction. As
Council President last month, I held an extensive

12/54

16/12/2014

discussion with my Peace and Security Council
counterpart on our respective programmes of work
before we took up our roles as President or Chair, so
that both of us had a sense of how we saw the agenda
we share and how to respond to it.
The relationship between the United Nations
and the AU goes far beyond questions of resourcing.
Exchange on such issues as the protection of civilians
and human rights, in which the United Nations has
built up experience over decades, is vital. We need to
deepen intervention on conflict prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding. Today’s presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/27) calls for greater United NationsAU cooperation on policing, which is an area that is
too often overlooked. Police peacekeepers play a key
role in building capacity in the rule of law, which is
essential for the transition out of peace operations. The
adoption of resolution 2185 (2014) during Australia’s
presidency last month highlighted the policing role.
The establishment of a formal AU counterpart to the
United Nations Police Adviser would facilitate greater
engagement, including in guidance and training.
We are confident that the Secretary-General’s
current High-level Review Panel on Peacekeeping
Operations will look creatively, and with fresh eyes,
at the challenges being discussed today. The Panel
should engage closely with the AU and subregions and
make bold recommendations to strengthen the United
Nations-AU partnership on peace operations, which is
so decisive for peace and security in Africa.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): First and foremost, on
behalf of my country I would like to express our deepest
condolences to the people and the Government of
Pakistan for the barbaric terrorist attack that occurred
today.
I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
African Integration of Chad and President of the
Security Council, for organizing this important debate
to further the efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) to forge stronger ties as partners
in peacekeeping. Your presence here today, Sir,
demonstrates the importance that Chad attaches to the
furtherance of partnership between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. Such
partnership builds the possibilities for a prosperous
and peaceful tomorrow, particularly on the African
continent. I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his statement and for his concrete action over the
14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

years to promote United Nations-AU partnerships in
peace operations, and President Pierre Buyoya, the AU
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, for his
briefing.
As Rwanda’s tenure on the Council comes to an
end, we are happy to contribute once again to this issue
of great importance to us. Just this past July, during
Rwanda’s presidency, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2167 (2014), which calls for strengthening
regional partnerships in peacekeeping and stresses the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of financing for regional organizations when
they undertake peacekeeping under a Security Council
mandate. It also requested the Secretary-General to
initiate, in cooperation with the AU, a lessons learned
exercise on the transition from AU to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Mali and the Central African
Republic and to present specific recommendations for
future transitional arrangements by the end of the year.
The presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2014/27) at the initiative of Chad serves to
reinforce resolution 2167 (2014) and other previous
actions by the Security Council. It is an articulate
expression of the Council’s resolve to strengthen
coordination and capitalize on the comparative
advantages of two great organizations. The challenge
we face today is to instil a positive will for partnerships
of this kind so that they move from ad hoc status to a
more structured framework.
Over the past decade, African countries, with
the support of international partners, have engaged
in a collective effort to develop regional capacities
for peace support operations, as per the creation of
the AU Peace and Security Council and the African
Standby Force (ASF). As a result of those efforts and
of bilateral support to Member States, there has been a
steady improvement in African capacities to respond to
crisis situations through the deployment of increasingly
larger and complex peace support operations. In that
regard, Rwanda welcomes the establishment of the
first regional brigade of the African Standby Force,
composed of 10 member States with a strength of 5,200
troops ready to be deployed.
Nevertheless, while much has been achieved
through those and other partnerships, there is still room
for improvement. The fact remains that the AU has
often struggled when it comes to operational capacity,
which highlights the importance of matching resources
to mandates. Mandated missions must have adequate

S/PV.7343

funds and other necessary resources, including troops
that are appropriately prepared. We have learned the
hard way that rapid regional engagement and response
mechanisms are essential in a world where political
will and defence budgets are both declining. There is
an obvious need for rapid responses to violent conflicts,
which are often unpredictable, and partnerships with
regional organizations in Africa and elsewhere are
fundamental in that regard. In accordance with resolution
2167 (2014), we commend the ongoing lessons learned
exercise that is being conducted by the Secretariat and
look forward to concrete recommendations.
Financing is another very important issue, and we
hope to see substantial recommendations on predictable
financing of AU operations from the High-level Review
Panel. Furthermore, as outlined in the presidential
statement just adopted, Rwanda supports the initiative
to secure more financial resources from within the
African continent.
I will conclude by noting that today is another
day and another step towards a better future through
better structuring and better elaborating on the needs
of African States and sharing the needs among those
States, regional and subregional organizations and
partners, including the AU, the European Union and
the United Nations. Today’s presidential statement and
our constructive debate demonstrate the resolve of the
international community to establish more-predictable
frameworks and working relationships when it comes
to integrated peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we would like to add our voice to
the condolences expressed here concerning the horrific
terrorist attack in Pakistan.
We welcome you, Mr. Minister, as the President
of the Security Council. We listened attentively to
the briefings. We would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the African Union High
Representative for Mali and the Sahel, Mr. Buyoya, for
their interesting briefings.
We wish to thank the delegation of Chad for its
initiative in convening this meeting on the important
topic of enhancing the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in the area of
peacekeeping, on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. That cooperation is based
on the principle of the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for maintaining international peace

14-6979913/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

16/12/2014

and security, as well as on the complementarity of the
efforts of the United Nations and regional organizations,
which seeks to maximize their respective comparative
advantages.

the African Union will make possible the effective
resolution of the problems of peace and security in
Africa and will be able to significantly increase global
anti-crisis capacity.

It is an obvious, indisputable fact that regional
and subregional organizations operating in Africa
have better knowledge of the situations and that their
mechanisms are better suited to local conditions for the
prevention and settlement of conflicts on the continent.

As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia makes a significant contribution to the
development of the international community’s strategy
and practical measures on issues of strengthening
peace and security in Africa. Russia participates in
many United Nations peacekeeping operations on the
continent. Our country is one of the leading suppliers
of goods and services for those operations, primarily
in the sphere of civil aviation. We provide consistent
political support to the relevant efforts of the African
community. We will continue to assist in strengthening
the African Governments’ own anti-crisis potential,
including through training African peacekeepers and
representatives of law enforcement agencies of African
countries in Russian educational institutions.

Despite the overall decline in the intensity and
number of conflicts in the last decade, Africa remains
vulnerable to all sorts of crises. With regard to crisis
response, the potential of our constructive cooperation
is especially needed. In that connection, I would like
to note the joint efforts of the two organizations to
stabilize the situations in Darfur, Somalia, Mali and
the Central African Republic and on the inter-Sudanese
track. It is equally important to develop coordination of
actions in relation to the conflict in South Sudan.
We welcome the progress in the establishment of
the African Peace and Security Architecture, with the
assistance of the international community. The central
role in those efforts belongs to the Peace and Security
Council and the continental early-warning system, and
to the African Standby Force and the African Capacity
for Immediate Crisis Response, which are being
developed. The ongoing development of cooperation
in peacekeeping among the United Nations and the
African Union, the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council, as well as between
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, can provide great assistance.
We welcome the most active participation of African
partners in peacekeeping operations in Africa under
the aegis of the United Nations and the African Union,
and we have consistently favoured the peacekeeping
activities of the African Union under United Nations
mandates, fully supported by the authority of the
Security Council. Moreover, it is important to increase
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing, including through the African Peace Fund.
At the same time, we consider it necessary to ensure
mandatory feedback. That concerns, in particular,
adequate periodic reporting by African partners to
the Security Council on the operation of peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Council.
We are firmly convinced that further strengthening
the partnership between the United Nations and

14/54

Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting on a topic to which Argentina attaches
great importance, that is, the partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Your
presence and participation here today, Mr. Minister,
shows how relevant and how substantive this debate is. I
would also like to acknowledge the enormous work and
the quality of the work done by your delegation at the
United Nations and as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, under the leadership of Ambassador
Cherif. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement and for presenting his biennial
report on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations, as well as for
his recommendations on the means to strengthen that
cooperation. We would also like to thank in particular
the High Representative of the African Union for Mali
and the Sahel, His Excellency Mr. Pierre Buyoya, for
his statement.
We all know that the Charter of the United Nations
encourages the Security Council to use regional
agreements in carrying out its primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security. The
future of United Nations field operations is inextricably
linked to the process of regionalization of peacekeeping
operations. Argentina therefore acknowledges the
important contribution of the African Union and of other
relevant organizations and regional and subregional

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7343

arrangements in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

greater knowledge, a specific interest and a relationship
of trust that we have to respect and uphold.

I note that in our first Security Council presidency,
Argentina proposed the issue of the role that we have
with regard to regional and subregional organizations
to contribute to international peace and security. We
focused specifically on the promotion of peace under
Chapter VI of the Charter. I think the topic of this
debate is a common concern and responsibility.

However, I would like to point that this tendency
towards decentralization to regional and subregional
organizations cannot be a recourse that is thought
of in terms of a lesser responsibility for the Security
Council. It is not a delegation of responsibility by the
Security Council, but rather a strategy of cooperation,
trust and joint leadership. Nor can it be a cheaper
solution for peacekeeping operations. It is a matter of
a cooperation that is not thought of as a dispersal of
resources, but rather of proper financing, the necessary
capabilities and the crucial element of cooperation and
complementarity.

In recent years we have seen how new agreements
and subregional organizations are playing a
fundamental role in both the prevention of conflict
and the establishment and promotion of peace. These
are undoubtedly examples of the contributions of
agreements and organizations that have developed new
capabilities to act in the field of international peace
and security, as we have seen in various peacekeeping
operations in the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Southern African Development
Community.
It is true that the contribution of regional
organizations complements the work of the United
Nations by incorporating knowledge of the specific
context, including elements that are important to
know, to understand and to take on in resolving the
deep-rooted causes of conflicts. Moreover, it is those
regional organizations that have a special social and
political interest in the situations, such as geographic
proximity and the confidence that local actors
generate. Those attributes have been recognized as
being extremely valuable and positive, and they are
comparative advantages of great value. The United
Nations, for its part, provides its universal composition
and its legitimacy, along with its operational
capacity and experience. However, it is necessary to
acknowledge that this decentralization tendency is also
a consequence of the need to overcome the structural
or operational shortcomings of the system of collective
security through the use of regional organizations.
The Council has the role of authorizing the
deployment of different types of field operations and
of establishing an operation’s mandate and conditions
of deployment. That means that the peacekeeping
operations led by regional organizations are adapted to
the mandates and goals of the United Nations. But it
also means that the Security Council must be capable
of listening to what regional organizations are saying,
because we have just said that those regional actors have

Furthermore, in our view, it is essential for United
Nations mandates and objectives to be implemented
with respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity, and in keeping with the provisions of
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law. Likewise, regional organizations have
an obligation to keep the Security Council apprised
of their activities not only in order to promote due
accountability but also because this serves as an earlywarning mechanism allowing for corrections to be
made during the deployment and implementation of
a peacekeeping operation, thereby strengthening that
which works.
Relations between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations must be based, therefore,
on established objectives and joint strategies that
provide for, as has been said, genuine cooperation.
The political, operational and financial conditions
must also be established so that regional organizations
and agreements can take on their responsibilities for
the maintenance of peace and security. That includes
the provision of specialized technical assistance by
the United Nations in the planning and deployment
of regional operations as well as in the application of
concepts of operations with a view to strengthening its
administrative and command and control structures,
improving information and communications technology
infrastructure
and
providing
capacity-building
where necessary. The establishment of appropriate
coordination mechanisms between the United
Nations and regional organizations is also necessary.
Finally, financing mechanisms that provide sufficient
predictability and sustainability should be established.
Argentina underscores the need for the three basic
principles that continue to characterize United Nations

14-6979915/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

peacekeeping operations — the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force except for legitimate
self-defence or to fulfil the mission mandate — to be
strictly respected in the process of outsourcing. At the
same time, we believe there is a need to underscore that
the role and responsibilities of the United Nations and
the Security Council with regard to those operations
led by regional organizations that involve establishing
peace have not yet been fully defined, including in terms
of financing, which is among the points included in the
concept note provided by the presidency (S/2014/879,
annex). This is a sensitive discussion, which must take
place in both the Council and the General Assembly,
and which must encompass not only the operational,
logistical and financial dimensions but also, as a
priority, the ethical and political ones. It is unacceptable
to continue indefinitely postponing such a debate and,
at the same time, blurring the lines between the various
types of operations on the ground, which seems now
to have become a repeated and prevalent occurrence.
However, such confusion runs the risk, on the one
hand, of abandoning the principles of impartiality and
the non-use of force that have always guided the work
of the Organization to date, and which must continue to
do so, and, on the other hand, of failing to clearly and
fairly assign responsibilities to the various stakeholders
involved in the maintenance of international peace and
security.
In conclusion, all Members of the Organization — in
particular the permanent members of the Council, while
they retain that status — must assume their responsibilities
for maintaining international peace and security, and
engage in this debate ensuring that, among other things,
any support provided by the United Nations fully
comply with the policy of due human rights diligence
in the context of United Nations support to security
forces outside of the Organization, and the particular
responsibility borne by the permanent members of the
Security Council for maintaining international peace
and security be met effectively.
I would like to express Argentina’s disgust and
our solidarity with the people and the Government
of Pakistan. That horror goes hand in hand with the
commitment we must all make to bring to an end all
forms of extremism and terrorism that are spawning
cruel forms of violence and putting all of us at risk.
In situations of risk and weakness, our system must
respond not with further militarization but with
integrated missions that incorporate the promotion

16/54

16/12/2014

of equality, sustainable human development and the
independence of States to determine their own futures
in the face of all of these challenges. The existence
of such violence extremism and terrorism calls for
strengthening the role of regional organizations with
full respect for the principles of the Organization we
share, the United Nations.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to align myself with previous
speakers in extending my condolences to the victims
of the horrible attack in Pakistan. To the people and
the Government of Pakistan, we emphasize the need
for solidarity between the international community
and Pakistan in confronting this horrible crime and
bringing those who planned and carried it out to justice.
I also thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
important debate. I welcome you to New York, Sir.
I also express my deep gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and to the
African Union High Representative for Mali and the
Sahel, His Excellency Mr. Pierre Buyoya, and I thank
them for their briefings.
The multiplicity of challenges and conflicts
confronting our world today and additional burdens
carried by United Nations peacekeeping activities
confirm the need to put in place updated and
comprehensive strategies and to seek innovative
solutions and methods to deal effectively with these
challenges. That means giving a greater role to
regional and subregional organizations and consulting
with them when it comes to defining the mandates
of peacekeeping operations, on the one hand, and to
improving the mechanisms for dealing with emerging
conflicts in those regions, on the other hand.
Jordan welcomes the strengthening of effective
strategic partnerships between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the field of
peacekeeping, especially with organizations in regions
where there are conflicts, such as the African Union,
the European Unio, the League of Arab States and other
organizations. We also encourage taking advantage of
the geographic, political and cultural advantages of
these organizations in order to enhance the effectiveness
of the implementation of peacekeeping mandates and
in dealing with conflicts. Such organizations have
a particular ability to understand the root causes
and peculiarities of conflict, which allows them to

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7343

participate effectively in conflict resolution, whether
through political efforts or in the protection of civilians.

the maintenance of peace and security on the African
continent.

Jordan welcomes the role of the African Union in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, especially through
joint mechanisms with the United Nations such as the
close collaboration between the Peace and Security
Department of the African Union Commission and the
United Nations Office to the African Union.

Moreover, Jordan reaffirms the need to preserve the
central role of the United Nations throughout all stages
of support for regional and subregional organizations.
Also important is keeping the Charter of the United
Nations, especially Chapter VIII, as a guide, when
considering cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union.

We also appreciate the African Union’s role in
ensuring a smooth transition of tasks from the African
Union to United Nations forces on behalf of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Operation in Somalia.
Cooperation with that important regional organization
is particularly critical, considering the multiple
challenges confronting the African continent and the
many States suffering due to long-term challenges and
conflicts.
We therefore reaffirm the need to support the
African Union and provide the necessary expertise
and resources to maintain its capacities in managing
conflicts and maintaining international peace and
security, especially in Africa, in order to achieve its
desired call to spread peace throughout the African
continent.
The synergy of efforts on the part of the
African Union and other organizations helps in
maintaining collective security and mediation and
confidence-building efforts among parties to any
conflict. African Union forces also have a constructive
role to play in setting the stage for United Nations
peacekeeping operations and determining the nature of
the activities needed to deal with emerging conflicts in
Africa.
We also emphasize the need for continued
coordination between the two organizations and
complementarity in their tasks in relation to postconflict stages. That is embodied in preserving and
reinforcing the ability of the African Union in the
maintenance of peace and security as carried out by
international peacekeeping operations and building
upon that through effective integration and engagement
in political activities among the parties to the conflict
focused on promoting human rights and rule of law
and developing the electoral and party system; because
each of those tasks represents an important pillar in

Through those effective partnerships, the United
Nations can provide support to the efforts of African
States to assist them in shouldering their responsibilities
to overcome the challenges before them with greater
effectiveness, in addition to providing assistance to those
States in developing and implementing programmes in
development and capacity-building in Africa, in line
with United Nations development programmes.
Jordan welcomes the comprehensive review of
peacekeeping operations over the past 15 years, which
will be further developed in 2015. We also consider
it very important that the initiative should include an
assessment of the activities and participation of regional
and subregional organizations in peacekeeping.
Jordan looks forward to the recommendations to be
provided by the Secretary-General in the first quarter
of the next year regarding progress in consultation
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in peacekeeping operations, on
the basis of which we would then be able to study the
effectiveness of the partnerships and ways to improve
them and to restructure peacekeeping operations on a
case-by-case basis.
Mr. Barros Melet (spoke in Spanish): We thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration of
Chad, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for convening this
important open debate under the Chadian presidency.
We welcome and thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and the African Union High Representative
for Mali and the Sahel, President Pierre Buyoya.
At the outset, we wish to align with other States in
rejecting the barbaric attack on the school in the city
of Peshawar. We express our sincere condolences to
the families of those affected and to the Government
of Pakistan.
For Chile collective action is crucial in tackling
traditional and emerging threats and is enhanced by the
involvement of regional and subregional organizations.

14-6979917/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

It is very difficult to implement universal measures
without a regional contribution. That is the sense in
which my country interprets Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which leads us to promote
efficient multilateralism capable of incorporating the
contributions of regional and subregional organizations,
in line with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.
We believe that the active participation of regional
organizations and of the countries affected by conflict
is crucial to resolving the conflicts, because they have
a particular knowledge of the local reality, the contexts
and the conditions that generate those cycles of
instability and obstacles affecting peace and security.
Moreover, regional organizations can facilitate
ways of taking action in conflict situations, incorporate
the vision of local actors which provide differing views
on the analysis of the origin, form and resolution of
conflicts and promote local ownership on the part of
missions and in implementing solutions to the conflict.
We value agreements we have seen involving the
African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations to promote peace and security. We
encourage such possible interactions among those
organizations and the United Nations system. In that
respect, we encourage the establishment of regional
agreements with a primarily holistic approach and the
participation of local stakeholders in defining problems
with interaction between regional organizations or the
United Nations system, exchanging good practices and
lessons learned in comparable situations and where
there is economic independence for implementation.
We must stimulate predictability, sustainability
and flexibility in the funding of peacekeeping
operations carried out by the African Union under a
United Nations mandate to facilitate rapid and effective
responses to conflict. That is crucial for comprehensive
rehabilitation processes that allow a swift return to
political and institutional normalcy and the protection of
the population, particularly women and children. Such
deployment will require well-equipped contingents,
including procedures defined on the ground concerning
standardized training of the contingents, with a
particular emphasis on human rights.
Likewise, it is necessary to simplify and
standardize the forms of institutional collaboration
among the United Nations system and regional bodies.
The development of effective partnerships among

18/54

16/12/2014

the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations is crucial, particularly in the relationship
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council. Coordinated efforts on the
ground are important in tackling the various challenges
when such efforts involve other multilateral and
bilateral actors on the ground.
The role of preventive diplomacy will be vital
during the so-called Madiba Nelson Mandela Decade
of Reconciliation in Africa, which can only be achieved
by way of truth, justice and inclusive development.
We believe that this issue requires ongoing attention
at different levels of the system, which should be based
on appropriate mechanisms to facilitate coordination
and complementarity between the regional and
universal spheres.
To conclude my statement, my country would like
to acknowledge the efforts and commitment on behalf of
the African Union in seeking solutions to the challenges
facing the continent and the important contributions to
peacekeeping operations on their own continent and
elsewhere in the world. As the international community,
we must value and support these efforts. We would like
to take advantage of this opportunity to pay tribute to
those who have sacrificed their lives in defence of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank the Chadian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
this open debate on cooperation between regional and
subregional organizations on peace operations, with a
focus on the United Nations and African Union (AU)
partnership.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union (EU).
This is the third debate this year in which we discuss
in the Council the issue of cooperation between regional
and subregional organizations, which only confirms
the relevance and importance of this cooperation.
Some 70 per cent of the United Nations special
political missions and peacekeeping operations are
deployed in Africa. The continent’s regional and
subregional organizations have been actively involved
in addressing the multilayered challenges facing
the continent, and their cooperation with the United
Nations and other regional partners, such as the EU,
has evolved significantly over the years. Many AU

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

operations have been rehatted into United Nations
peacekeeping missions.
African capacities are a critical resource for United
Nations peacekeeping, and United Nations support is
a critical enabler for AU operations. The effectiveness
of the United Nations and AU peacekeeping efforts
is therefore interdependent on many levels. The EU
also plays an important role by providing funding, as
in the case of the African Union Mission in Somalia,
bridging missions, as in the Central African Republic,
or contributing to capacity-building and training, as
in Mali, where Lithuanian trainers are part of the EU
training mission in Koulikoro. the EU’s anti-piracy
mission off the coast of Somalia, where Lithuania
has participated since 2011, has been instrumental in
reducing the threat of piracy in the region.
At the fourth EU-Africa Summit, earlier this
year, EU leaders reaffirmed their commitment to
strengthening the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture and to supporting
training and capacity-building of African forces. The
EU is working, through its African Peace Facility
capacity-building component, to increase the capacity
of the AU and of regional economic communities in
the planning and conduct of peace operations. Such
synergies are critical for the overall success of peace
operations and need to be further developed. Enhancing
this collaboration, including and based on the lessons
learned from recent transitions of authorities from
AU peace support operations to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, is crucial.
As other representatives have noted, owing to their
knowledge of the region, regional and subregional
organizations are best positioned to understand the root
causes of a conflict and to take early preventive action,
which is a key advantage in seeking to defuse a crisis
before it explodes. Effective and timely partnerships
can help prevent a conflict at its early stages, as
recently demonstrated in the Burkina Faso crisis, where
the joint mediation efforts of the United Nations, the
AU and Economic Community of West African States
proved to be useful to push the military back to the
path of constitutional legality. That only reinforces the
importance of strengthening AU and United Nations
capacities for early warning, conflict analysis, dialogue
and mediation, and the need for increased AU-United
Nations collaboration in the area of good offices
between the envoys of the two.

S/PV.7343

The strengths of regional bodies as first and rapid
responders to African crises must be acknowledged
and further developed. We welcome the AU’s progress
in rapid deployment in response to emerging crises,
especially those that endanger civilians, and the
commitment made by African leaders to operationalize
the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises.
The development of policies and guidelines, as well as
training for the African Standby Force, as part of the
African Peace and Security Architecture, should be
further supported.
Getting the partnerships right at the political,
strategic, institutional and operational levels is
important in order to increase actual success in the
field. Better understanding of each other’s working
methods and procedures and decision-making processes
would improve cooperation and increase transparency.
Deepening the strategic dialogue between the United
Nations and regional organizations, as well as
identifying concrete opportunities for joint planning at
both the strategic and operational levels, would greatly
benefit the collective action on the ground.
Further strengthening relations between the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council, including through truly interactive substantive
annual consultative meetings, timely consultations
and collaborative field missions, would enhance the
strategic partnership and help to formulate coherent
positions and strategies to address current crises. More
effective and frequent communication between the
Presidents of the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council would also contribute to a timely
exchange of information on decision-making processes.
A strong partnership with the African Union is
fundamental in mainstreaming protection-of-civilians
mechanisms in all peace and security activities,
including through the framework of cooperation
between the United Nations Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the African Union Commission
Concerning the Prevention and Response to Conflictrelated Sexual Violence in Africa, the designation by
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for a Special Envoy for Women, Peace and Security;
enhanced collaboration between the Peace and Security
Department of the AU Commission and the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflicts.

14-6979919/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Today we express our condolences to the people
of Pakistan after the savage attack on a school in
Peshawar. African States, too, have seen their share
of attacks against schools and children. The shocking
abduction of the Nigerian girls by Boko Haram earlier
this year is just one of the many cases of such attacks.
Closer United Nations cooperation with Africa’s
regional and subregional organizations is essential for
tackling terrorism and other trans-boundary threats.
Enhanced intelligence information-sharing and
effective sanctions implementation are important tools
in countering terrorism. The role of the Committee of
Intelligence and Security Services of Africa and the
efforts of the African Centre for Studies and Research
on Terrorism should be commended in that regard. To
stem terrorist financing, strengthening joint efforts in
tackling human trafficking, illicit flows of arms, illegal
trade in natural resources and poaching, among others,
is required.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
assessment report and recommendations on ways to
strengthen regional partnerships in peacekeeping
operations and further discussions on the issue. We
also look forward to the report by the High-level
Independent Panel to Review Peace Operations.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
must begin by expressing the United States profound
condolences to the victims of the horrific Taliban
attack on a school in Pakistan. This gruesome attack
deliberately targeted Pakistan’s — indeed all of
our — most precious and sacred resource, our children.
Cowardly and senseless violence like this only increases
our resolve to fight terrorism and violent extremism.
I thank you, Mr. President, for being here and for
convening this important debate. We would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and High Representative
Buyoya for their briefings.
Enhancing the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) is critical for
advancing peace and security in Africa. From the
Central African Republic to Mali, to Somalia, every
improvement in the important partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union has very
real impacts on regional stability and on security. The
African Union and its member States have demonstrated
important leadership in responding to African conflicts
through peacekeeping and preventive diplomacy to
stop potential conflicts from becoming actual ones.
Peacekeeping, whether it is done by the United Nations
20/54

16/12/2014

or the African Union, or in some cases both, is only
as strong as its troop and police contributors. Member
States must be willing to contribute the needed
troops and resources, and troop contributors must be
willing to robustly carry out difficult mandates. We
commend the African troop-contributing countries
that have answered the call again and again to serve
in peacekeeping operations and that have demonstrated
a commitment to implement their mandates, including
the protection of civilians.
While Blue Helmet United Nations peacekeeping is
a critically important tool, it is not always the best tool
to respond to a particular conflict. That is why so many
of us have redoubled our efforts to support regional
organizations’ capacities, including that of the African
Union, to launch and support peace operations when
they are needed and consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations. The Security Council has a unique role
under the Charter, but our decisions and actions should
be taken in close consultation with all stakeholders,
including Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and potential troop contributors.
Decisions related to the deployment of United Nations
or African Union peacekeeping missions must be made
on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the unique
circumstances of each particular situation. Enhancing
the capacity of regional forces to respond is critical,
but the ability of regional organizations to deploy peace
operations must be seen, of course, as a complement to,
not a substitute for, the United Nations own ability to
carry out robust peacekeeping operations.
We continue to be immensely grateful for Africa’s
contributions to peacekeeping. In September of this
year, Vice-President Biden joined other leaders at
a summit focused on generating new commitments
to peacekeeping to ensure that the whole of the
international community does more to share the
burden. We have made demonstrable progress in
our cooperative efforts to deploy troops quickly to
crisis areas when the need arises, but we are still too
slow. Delay in our crisis response often means more
unnecessary deaths. To be quicker and better, we must
work more closely and collaboratively. That is why the
United States is committed to improving the Security
Council’s engagement with the African Union Peace
and Security Council.
In our effort to do better, to do more and to do so
more quickly, we should learn from the past. The recent
transitions from African Union-led peacekeeping

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

operations to United Nations-led operations in Mali and
the Central African Republic demonstrate once again
that the African Union is sometimes in a position to
deploy troops to trouble spots much more quickly than
others. Without the initial leadership of the AU and the
contributions of African, French and other European
troops in Mali and the Central African Republic, far
more civilians would have died over the past year in
both countries. That is why the United States has created
the African Peacekeeping Rapid Response Partnership,
which envisions a new investment of $110 million
per year for three to five years to build the capacity
of African forces to rapidly deploy peacekeepers in
response to emerging conflict.
Under this programme, African partner nations
will receive additional support and will commit to
maintaining forces and equipment ready to rapidly
deploy as part of United Nations or AU missions to
respond to emerging crises. The United States is also
prepared to provide additional support, including
training for headquarters staff in key enabler functions
such as engineers, to catalyse the AU’s efforts to
establish its African capacity for immediate response to
crisis, which is intended to facilitate the deployment of
tactical battle groups of approximately 1,500 military
personnel deployed by a lead nation or group of AU
member States.
There has been some discussion today about the
financing of peacekeeping operations. In order to be
effective, peacekeeping operations must be accountable,
and they must be accountable to the organization that
has authorized and funded them. That is why we do
not support assessing States Members of the United
Nations for the expenses of regional organizations.
Such arrangements do not allow the United Nations
to exercise critical, and indeed essential, oversight of
complex operational undertakings.
However, it is also why we continue to champion
and invest heavily in support for AU operations through
voluntary contributions and bilateral assistance. Since
2009, the United States has committed to providing
nearly $892 million to develop African peacekeeping
capacity and strengthen African institutions. Most
recently, in 2013 the United States committed nearly
$200 million towards training, equipping, sustaining
and airlifting African peacekeepers of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali.

S/PV.7343

In the Central African Republic, we provided
critical equipment and airlift to both AU troops and the
French forces operating alongside them. In Somalia we
have obligated more than $680 million to the African
Union Mission in Somalia on top of the more than
$455 million in United Nations assessed contributions
for the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia that are attributable to the
United States. Other partners such as the European
Union, through its African Peace Facility, have
similarly provided very robust support, and we look for
other partners to do the same.
In closing, I want to reiterate the depth of my
Government’s commitment to strengthening African
responses to crises on the continent, both bilaterally and
through the Council. Today there are more than 67,000
African peacekeepers serving with the African Union
and the United Nations in Africa. Their contributions
to peace cannot be overstated. They deserve more
support from all of us to train, equip and enable their
deployment.
As President Obama said during our United StatesAfrica leaders’ summit held in August,
“The United States is determined to be a partner in
Africa’s success — a good partner, an equal partner
and a partner for the long term.”
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin this morning by firmly condemning, as
was done this morning by the President of the French
Republic, François Hollande, the appalling attack
against a school in Peshawar. We express our solidarity
and convey our condolences to the Pakistani authorities
and to the families of the victims. Indeed, what could
be more cowardly than to attack children?
I wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
and Mr. Pierre Buyoya, High Representative of
the African Union for Mali and the Sahel, for their
briefings, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad,
Mr. Moussa Faki, for his initiative and for presiding
over our open debate today.
I wish also to associate myself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union.
I wish to begin by paying tribute to African
Union peacekeepers, in particular today Chadian
peacekeepers, who have died in the line of duty, as well
as to their United Nations comrades.

14-6979921/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The role of regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of peace is fully recognized by the
Charter and makes a decisive contribution to collective
security. Because of their geographic proximity, their
knowledge of local situations and their partnerships with
the countries affected by crises, the countries of a region,
structured into regional and subregional organizations,
are in a position to provide a useful value-added
to the understanding, prevention, management and
consolidation of situations. This partnership is foreseen
by the Charter in its Chapter VIII, without prejudice
to the Security Council’s primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Since the early 2000s, the African Union,
subregional organizations and their member States
have been mobilizing to develop their own structured
capabilities in terms of peacekeeping. France fully
recognizes this effort and encourages it. The growth of
the African Peace and Security Architecture is part of
an expansion of peacekeeping operations, in particular
on the African continent. As a result, it quickly led to
the establishment of a partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, namely, in terms of
operational coordination: annual consultations between
the United Nations Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council; the establishment of
liaison offices in New York and Addis Ababa; and the
creation of a Joint Task Force on Peace and Security, to
name but a few. I will note, however, that the partnership
is now operating at several levels, from the exchange
of information to operational cooperation, and is also
working in the context of the various dimensions of
situations, from prevention to peacebuilding, including
the arduous phase of peacekeeping.
Recent events provide an illustration of the
effectiveness and efficiency of this partnership. I am
thinking, of course, of the cases of Mali and the Central
African Republic, where a United Nations intervention
was preceded by that of an African Union one. We
will know more at the conclusion of the lessonslearned exercise requested by the Secretary-General in
resolution 2167 (2014), but we can already at this stage
welcome that experience and also acknowledge once
again that undeniable progress has already been made
in Mali and the Central African Republic.
I would add that France, in keeping with its
responsibility as a Security Council penholder for
several African crises, will ensure coordination with

22/54

16/12/2014

the African members of the Council and the African
Union representation in New York.
In the context of its efforts to develop its own
peacekeeping capabilities, the African Union receives
significant support from several partners, primarily
the European Union. The European Union early
on made this a key focus of its partnership with the
African Union. The observer of the European Union
will elaborate further on this point, but I would recall
that that intention has been put into practice through
education and training programmes supported by a
financial commitment of €750 million for the period
from 2014 to 2016 and very substantial financial support
to the African Union’s peace support operations.
France fully supports that European Union policy
and provides, in a national capacity, support for
building and strengthening African peace capabilities.
That priority was highlighted by the President of
France, François Hollande, at the Elysée summit held
in December 2013. France thus contributes to training
25,000 African soldiers. France also welcomes efforts
by other African Union partners, including in particular
the United States and China, that have undertaken or
recently announced their intention to undertake African
peace capacity-building programmes.
We must ensure, however, that those contributions
are coordinated and serve a shared vision of
peacekeeping. The European Union is committed to
that purpose as part of its tripartite cooperation with
the United Nations and the African Union, which is
undoubtedly a factor in the good cooperation that has
been observed between missions in which the African
Union, European Union and United Nations cooperate,
for example, in Mali and the Central African Republic.
That effort should be pursued in several areas, as the
presidential statement adopted today (S/PRST/2014/27)
clearly notes.
First of all, in terms of funding, the financial
sustainability of the system has become a major issue.
The African Union has a lot of support from external
partners who support the strengthening African
peacekeeping capabilities. As recognized by the
presidential statement we adopted today, the challenge
is to also secure financial resources that come from the
African continent to support the political willingness
displayed by its leaders.
Rapid deployment capability is an essential
condition for the success of international interventions

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

in situations in which time is limited. As we have
seen in Mali and the Central African Republic, the
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic were
essential to ensuring initial stabilization, paving the
way for a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
The transition between missions in particular is
a question of increasing importance as the modalities
of intervention diversify and succeed each other and/
or overlap. In that regard, the exercise on lessons
learned will be instructive. An additional dimension
to transitions, when interventions are being completed
within the same theatre, is that of coordination in
interventions, so that everyone provides the best of
their capacities to settle the crisis. How do missions
cooperate? What synergies are there to develop? That is
also a field to explore in the light of recent experience.
The questions before us today are crucial and
contribute to the broader discussion on the evolution
of peacekeeping. We will soon receive several reports
laying out the problems and, no doubt, formulating
recommendations, including the two reports requested
by the Council in paragraphs 13 and 28 of resolution
2167 (2014) and the report of the High-level Independent
Panel to Review Peace Operations led by Mr. RamosHorta. However, none of them will be specifically
devoted to the question of the African Union’s capacity
and its partnership with the United Nations. The
request has now been made in the statement that we
just adopted, which gives rise to an annual report. We
welcome that, and France is grateful to Chad for putting
that partnership at the top of the agenda of the United
Nations and the Security Council.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China is
deeply shocked and saddened by the terrorist attack on
a school in Peshawar, Pakistan, on 16 December, which
resulted in many casualties, including many children.
China condemns this terrorist attack in the strongest
terms and expresses its deep condolences to the victims,
the injured and the bereaved families. China is against
all forms of terrorism and will continue to resolutely
support the Government and people of Pakistan in
their unrelenting effort to fight against terrorism and
maintain the stability of the country and safety of its
people.
The Chinese delegation thanks Chad for its
initiative to convene today’s open debate. I thank you,
Mr. President, for coming to New York to preside

S/PV.7343

over today’s meeting. I thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing, and I have listened carefully
to the statement made by Mr. Buyoya on behalf of the
African Union (AU).
The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Chapter VIII of the Charter encourages the pacific
settlement of regional conflicts through regional
arrangements. In today’s world, we face many problems
and challenges that require robust responses at the
international, regional and national levels. Currently,
almost 70 per cent of the items on the Security Council’s
agenda are related to Africa. Two thirds of United
Nations peacekeeping operations are also deployed in
Africa.
As the largest and most representative regional
organization in Africa, the African Union plays an
increasingly important role in regional peace and
security. Strengthened cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU is required in order to promote
multilateralism. It is also an important development in
terms of international collective security mechanisms.
China commends the United Nations for establishing a
stable cooperative relationship with the African Union,
strengthening its communication and contacts with the
AU on the resolution of hot spot African issues and
further strengthening coordination and cooperation in
the field of peacekeeping. I would like to make four
points on furthering the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union in the field of
peacekeeping.
First, the United Nations should respect the will
of Africa and actively support the African Union’s
peacekeeping efforts. In dealing with issues in
the region, the African Union has more in-depth
understanding and knowledge, and is in a position
to put forward African solutions to solve African
problems from an African perspective. The Security
Council should consider supporting the AU’s key role
in resolving regional conflicts on a priority basis and
heed the AU’s opinion and suggestions effectively.
Secondly, the United Nations should engage in
comprehensive cooperation with the AU. That should
cover many areas, including security and development,
and the various stages of confidence-building, conflict
prevention, the maintenance of peace, peacebuilding
and sustainable development. Advocating for a culture
of reconciliation and comprehensive development not

14-6979923/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

only helps in addressing the root causes of conflicts,
but also lays a more solid basis for peace in Africa.
China supports the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Secretariat in their efforts to build
a multidimensional coordination mechanism with the
AU.
Thirdly, the United Nations should assist the AU
in building its peacekeeping capacity. Due to capacity
and resource limitations, the AU needs to strengthen
its capacity-building in crisis response and conflict
resolution. The United Nations should proceed from the
overall goal of maintaining African and international
peace and security; mobilize more resources to
support Africa in its related efforts for early warning
systems, peacekeeping deployment, good offices and
mediation or dialogue; and effectively enhance the
AU’s peacekeeping capacity through a multitude of
channels, such as personnel training, logistical support,
information sharing and exchanges of experiences.
Fourthly, the United Nations should pay more
attention to the transition of peacekeeping operations
from the AU to the United Nations. Starting last
year, with the vigorous support of the AU and other
subregional organizations, the African peacekeeping
operations in Somalia and the Central African Republic
were transitioned to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. China supports the Secretary-General
in his effort to summarize experiences and put
forward proposals on issues related to transitioning
peacekeeping operations and further sorting out the
cooperative relationship between the United Nations
and the AU.
China has consistently been a constructive
participant in Africa’s peace and security affairs. To
date, China has deployed a total of 2,000 peacekeepers
to seven peacekeeping operations in Africa, including
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Liberia.
China wishes to increase the number of its peacekeepers
participating in the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, and has provided the African Union Mission in
Somalia with multifacted assistance.
In October, China held its first round of strategic
dialogue with the African Union in the context of
the peace and security sub-group. We are committed
to implementing the China-Africa Security and
Cooperation Partnership initiative, supporting the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises,
continuing to provide training to African troopcontributing countries, and helping Africa to strengthen
24/54

16/12/2014

its peacekeeping capacities. We will continue to strive,
alongside the international community, to contribute to
strengthening peacekeeping cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union and to promoting
its sound development.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to join those who have condemned in
the firmest possible manner today’s cowardly terrorist
attack on a school in Peshawar, Pakistan, which killed
many innocent children and wounded numerous others.
Our thoughts and condolences go out to the families
of the victims and to the people and Government of
Pakistan.
I thank the Chadian presidency for organizing
this public debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
particularly the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. Your presence, Sir,
demonstrates the centrality of this partnership and
Chad’s commitment to strengthening it. I thank the
Secretary-General and the High Representative of the
African Union for Mali and the Sahel for their opening
statements.
Luxembourg fully endorses the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
The Security Council rightly recognizes the role and
contribution of regional and subregional organizations
to preventing, managing and resolving conflicts in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. The strengthening of cooperation
between the United Nations and these organizations is
not only desirable, but necessary.
It is in Africa that the cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is the most developed. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
extends to many areas. I highlight one area to which
attach particular importance — the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. The Security
Council has emphasized the valuable contribution that
regional and subregional organizations can make in this
sector, and has welcomed in particular the signing on
17 September 2013 of the joint statement of the Office
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Peace and Security
Department of the African Union Commission. In that
regard, I welcome the discussion held on 6 June within
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

with the the African Union Commission for Peace and
Security, Ambassador Smail Chergui. It is important to
pursue these efforts to institutionalize child protection
mechanisms in all activities of the African Union in the
field of peace and security.
The examples of Mali and the Central African
Republic highlight the operational impact of the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. In both countries, in 2013 and 2014
African-led missions turned into Blue Helmet
operations — the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. As part
of this partnership, we believe that the interaction
between the members of the African Union Peace and
Security Council and all the members of the Security
Council, permanent and non-permanent alike, would
benefit from being strengthened in New York and in
Addis Ababa. This would improve the exchange of
information at an early stage and thereby contribute to
better informed decision-making on both sides.
One year after the outbreak of hostilities in South
Sudan, despite the concerted efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (GAD), the situation
remains appalling. The main protagonists continue to
give pride of place to military strategy, and with the end
of the rainy season there is a growing threat of renewed
large-scale fighting, with incalculable consequences
for the already traumatized civilian population. Given
the situation and the statements issued by IGAD and
the African Union Peace and Security Council, we
believe that the Security Council should take restrictive
measures against any party responsible for violations of
the ceasefire, obstructing political negotiations, or even
violations and abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law. The country’s natural
resources, including oil, must also be used for the
benefit of the South Sudanese people rather than to fuel
rearmament and war. We believe that these measures
are necessary to bring the parties to the conflict to
finally engage in good faith in political negotiations
for a lasting settlement of the conflict, in the primary
interests of the people of South Sudan. The strength of
a partnership is tested at moment such as this.
Luxembourg welcomes the strong partnerships
that have been established both between the United
Nations and the European Union and between the

S/PV.7343

African Union and the European Union. The United
Nations and the European Union have developed
synergies that benefit Africa in the fields of immediate
crisis response, humanitarian action, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. That is the case in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia and Mali, especially in the area of
security sector reform.
Europe supports the development of African crisis
management capacities through training and equipment.
In 2016, more than 17,000 African soldiers were trained
with the support of the Europeans — some, in Mali and
Somalia, by instructors from Luxembourg. The support
of the European Union and its member States is also
demonstrated through their substantial contributions to
the budgets of United Nations operations and African
missions, particularly through the African Peace
Facility.
The presence of several operations in the same
country, such as at present in the Central African
Republic, reinforces the need for coordination at
the political, operational and financial levels. Such
coordination involves an ongoing exchange of
information and experience at all levels of the chain of
command. In this spirit, we support the deepening of
triangular cooperation among the United Nations, the
African Union and the European Union. We welcome
the fact that the synergies among the three organizations
figure prominently in the presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/27, which we have adopted at Chad’s
initiative. Luxembourg will continue to commit itself to
strengthening the bonds of solidarity among the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union
in order to better address the root causes of instability
represented by the absence of development, inequality,
exclusion, poverty and inadequate governance.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): My delegation
strongly condemns the terrorist killing of over 130
students, mostly aged between 12 and 16, in a school in
Peshawar, Pakistan. This is a totally outrageous act of
cowardice, and our hearts are with the families of the
victims and the people and Government of Pakistan.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s open debate. Its importance is
further underlined by your presence. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing,
as well as his ongoing efforts to improve the agility of
peacekeeping operations, and my deep appreciation

14-6979925/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

goes to Mr. Pierre Buyoya for his statement on behalf
of the African Union (AU).
The Republic of Korea welcomes the fact that the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the AU has steadily broadened and deepened, especially
in the areas of conflict prevention, crisis management,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We are particularly
encouraged to see enhanced interaction between the
two bodies, as exemplified by the annual meeting
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. The growing
United Nations-AU cooperation is most noteworthy
in the area of peacekeeping. Over the past decade, the
AU’s contributions to United Nations peace operations
have become more visible than ever. African countries
are now contributing nearly half of all uniformed
personnel, which is a record high. Moreover, the AU
peacekeeping missions have proved critical to swift
responses to crises, as illustrated in Darfur, Somalia,
Mali and the Central African Republic.
Despite such progress, however, there are
challenges on the ground. First is the fact that the lack
of adequate financial and logistical resources remains
a serious problem that undermines the AU’s capacity
to undertake effective peacekeeping missions. We must
work together to find a creative solution to securing
predictable, sustainable and flexible financing for
AU peacekeeping operations under United Nations
mandates. Concerted efforts are also needed to
strengthen African capacities to enhance its operational
and institutional effectiveness.
Secondly, achieving the effective transition of
regional forces into a United Nations peacekeeping
mission remains a difficult task where greater United
Nations-AU collaboration is required. As we learned
from the case of Mali, better coordination is critical
to the rapid deployment of well-trained and -equipped
troops. In that context, we support the ongoing efforts
of the AU, in close cooperation with the United Nations
and international partners, to operationalize an African
capacity for immediate response to crises, as well as
the African Standby Force. Such enhanced cooperation
with the African Union is essential not only to the
operational aspects but also in the planning phases. Our
experiences from the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali indicate
that the transition process works best when there is

26/54

16/12/2014

coordinated cooperation beginning with the planning
stage between the United Nations and the AU. At the
same time, we hope that logistical and traning support
from bilateral partners will also continue to reinforce
United Nations activities.
Before concluding, we would also like to
underline that peacekeeping alone is not sufficient for
addressing conflicts. Given the interconnectedness of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict prevention,
support should continue in parallel so as to enhance
the AU’s capacities in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. Cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the AU should also be strengthened
in order to support national and regional efforts to
consolidate peace. In that regard, we hope that the 2015
review of peace operations will address those areas in a
comprehensive and strategic way.
Finally, I would like to express our full support for
today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/27) and
thank Chad for drafting and leading the negotiations on
it to a successful conclusion. We hope that the Council,
building on today’s discussion, will continue to explore
ways to strengthen the partnership between it and the
African Union for maintaining international peace and
security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I would like to
begin by thanking the Secretary-General, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Chad and the members of the
Security Council for their condolences and sympathies
regarding the horrendous terrorist attack on a school in
Peshawar this morning. It was a heinous, unconscionable
act of savagery that has been universally condemned.
The Government and people of Pakistan are committed
to fighting terrorism and promoting and protecting the
right to education. Families in Pakistan are devastated,
and the entire nation is in a state of shock. The words of
sympathy, condolence and solidarity of those here today
have touched the hearts of the people of Pakistan. We
are a resolute nation. We will overcome this menace.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) is an important constituent
of the United Nations-led peacekeeping operations. It
conforms to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which creates space for cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in
maintaining and bolstering peace and security. Today’s

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

debate, convened by you, Mr. President, comes at an
opportune time, since what we discuss here today will
feed into the ongoing strategic review of peacekeeping
operations commissioned by the Secretary-General.
We welcome the strong institutional linkages
established in recent years between the United Nations
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, aimed at determining causes and
drivers of violence, resolving conflicts, supporting joint
planning exercises and developing United Nations-AU
operational models.
Financing for AU peacekeeping operations should
be predictable and sustainable. In that regard, we agree
with the President that the recommendations of the
Prodi United Nations-African Union Panel of Experts
should be seriously considered for implementation,
and that a fresh drive should be launched to generate
indigenous resources. The United Nations-African
Union partnership becomes most critical in managing
drawdowns and transitions. Successful transitions
usher in peacebuilding and pave the way for national,
subregional and regional ownership. The African Union
brings with it complementary resources, expertise and
insight. The Secretary-General’s initiatives, such as the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, and
the integrated strategy for the Sahel, have built on such
complementarities.
It is important to have clearer mandates and take
preventive measures to stem fragile States’ relapses into
conflict. Moreover, the African Union’s involvement
at early stages of the Security Council’s deliberations
on conflict resolution and management would help
to ensure that the right course of action is adopted.
The Council is increasingly mandating peacekeeping
missions in volatile security environments. In view
of the fast-developing crises and conflicts in the past
year, rapid response and deployment have become
imperative. Pakistan has recently decided to deploy a
rapid-deployment battalion within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is also important to improve
and harmonize the working methods of the two Councils
through better communication.
It is true that the more the African Union is
politically involved with African countries, the more
they will contribute to security initiatives, as the
President’s concept paper (S/2014/879, annex) argues.

S/PV.7343

In this debate, we should also bear in mind the
following general points.
First, when authorized by the Security Council,
African peacekeeping operations should be supported,
from planning and funding to equipment, logistics and
training. Regional organizations and countries bear part
of the responsibility for securing resources. In addition,
resourceful countries and regional organizations should
contribute more to the African Union’s capacitybuilding projects and programmes.
Secondly, lessons learned from recent transitions
must be collated and utilized for future missions.
Interoperability is a major priority. We encourage the
Secretariat to continue to develop exercise and training
policies with regional organizations aimed at improving
interoperability.
Thirdly, Africa is the locus of the bulk of the United
Nations regional and hybrid missions. Communication,
consultation and coordination between the Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
should be enhanced to further build mutual trust and
confidence.
Fourthly, increasing regional capacities should not
lead to parochialism or regionalization of peacekeeping.
While drawing upon regional expertise, focus should
remain on peacekeeper training, professionalism and
performance. Emphasis on regional deployments
raises the risk of peacekeepers becoming prone to
taking sides and the United Nations subcontracting
its responsibilities. Regions and subregions should not
be removed from the international mainstream simply
because they are not of strategic interest.
Fifthly, regionalization should not lead to disparity
in professional levels and standards. The United
Nations should strive to develop and maintain uniform
standards in training, equipment and technology.
Sixthly, to cement their partnership, both the United
Nations and the African Union should invest heavily in
peacebuilding.
Pakistan is deeply committed to collective efforts to
strengthen peacekeeping through regional partnerships.
Since 1960, Pakistan has consistently demonstrated a
strong commitment to peace and security in Africa.
The bulk of our troops are deployed in the continent.
Our experience in Africa has further enhanced our
appreciation of the value of regional partnership and

14-6979927/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

cooperation. We will remain a steadfast partner of the
African Union.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): Mr. President, we congratulate
you on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and we thank you, Sir, for personally
presiding over this open debate on “Peace operations:
The United Nations-African Union partnership and its
evolution”. We also thank the Secretary-General and
President Pierre Buyoya, High Representative of the
African Union for Mali and the Sahel, for their remarks.
At the outset, we join the Secretary-General and
other speakers in condemning in the strongest possible
terms the horrific attack on innocent school children in
Pakistan. We cannot but feel a sense of deep revulsion
and horror. Our hearts go out to the grief-stricken
families of the innocent children killed or injured in
this barbaric attack.
Our relationship with Africa is rooted in history.
It goes back even to long before our common struggle
against colonialism. With a strong political foundation,
it has over the past many decades also acquired a
vibrant economic dimension. At the same time, India
is the largest overall contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Having sent more than
170,000 Indian troops to 43 of the 69 United Nations
peacekeeping operations mandated so far, we have
considerable experience in the field. We therefore feel
we are well placed to comment on the subject at hand.
We recognize the role of regional organizations,
particularly the African Union (AU), in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We also support the
strengthening of cooperation between the United Nations
and African Union for the enhanced effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations. At the same time, we also
need to emphasize that, while regional arrangements
can play an appropriate role in assisting the United
Nations in maintaining peace, the primacy of the
United Nations cannot be denied. The United Nations
cannot disengage with the continent by contracting
peacekeeping to regional arrangements, whose role
must be to reinforce rather than to replace that of the
United Nations. We also need to start worrying if the
impartiality of the United Nations forces is called into
question, which is a possibility that cannot be ruled
out with the regionalization and subregionalization of
peacekeeping.

28/54

16/12/2014

The concept paper prepared by the presidency
(S/2014/879, annex) usefully draws attention to
the financing of AU peacekeeping operations. It
is undeniable that the provision of sustainable and
predictable financial support is at the core of the success
of any peacekeeping operation. The Prodi report
(S/2008/813) recommended an option in which funds
from the United Nations assessed peacekeeping budget
could be used to support United Nations-authorized AU
peacekeeping operations for a period of no longer than
six months, with each decision taken on a case by case
basis, with approval by the Security Council and the
General Assembly, and with the AU mission making
a transition to United Nations management within six
months.
The logic for meeting the expenditure from the
United Nations peacekeeping budget seems clear as
the AU mission is doing only what is required to be
done by the United Nations and is so doing because
the United Nations has requested it to do so because it
does not itself have the capacity for doing so rapidly.
Our recommendation would therefore be for the
Security Council to request the Secretary-General
to draw up a road map for the implementation of
the recommendations of the Prodi panel. However,
it may be fruitless for us to express our views if the
Council adopts an outcome document — as it has done
today — before opening the floor to non-members of
the Council. While we greatly appreciate the tradition
of open debates, we cannot but question the utility of
this practice of hurriedly adopting outcomes.
We have closely perused the recommendation
given in the section of the concept paper that deals with
managing mission transitions. These recommendations
deserve serious consideration. Also important, however,
is the very useful contribution to this objective already
made by the strengthening of the United Nations Office
to the African Union in Addis Ababa. The strengthening
of that Office has helped to smooth transitions, which
is an example of how simple actions on the ground can
yield disproportionately significant benefits.
Enhancing collaboration between the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council is another area that could, in our view, benefit
from simple actions on the ground, rather than anything
more grandiose. We note the suggestion that elected
African members of the Security Council should be
provided with special observer status in the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union. It would,

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

however, be beyond the remit of this Council to make
any recommendation on the manner in which an AU
institution should be structured.
In conclusion, we would like to commend the
African Union for its cooperation with the Security
Council. We also take this opportunity to urge both
organizations to further strengthen their cooperation
with the objective of maintaining of international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the Managing Director for Africa of the European
External Action Service.
Mr. Westcott: I have the honour to speak this
morning on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia,
Albania and Turkey; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and Armenia,
align themselves with this statement.
Like others, before anything else I join in expressing
our condemnation of the atrocity that has taken place in
Peshawar, Pakistan. We express our condolences to the
Government, the people and the families of the victims
of those involved. We recall similar attacks against
schoolchildren in Nigeria and elsewhere, which equally
deserved our condemnation at the time.
I would like to thank the Chadian presidency for
bringing to the table the subject of cooperation with
regional organizations in the field of peace operations.
The fact that the issue has been discussed three times
in the Security Council this year is testimony to its
relevance. The European Union expresses its support
for presidential statement S/PRST/2014/27, which has
been adopted and issued today.
Chad itself has played a critical role in tackling
regional peace and security challenges on the African
continent and in its immediate region, so Chad knows
that the kind of security threats that we now face almost
invariably require a collective regional and international
response, particularly where a peacekeeping role
is required. That necessarily involves a range of
partnerships.
The partnership of the African Union (AU) and
its regional organizations with the United Nations has
evolved rapidly over the past decade, from capacitybuilding programmes to joint operations. In Mali, and

S/PV.7343

more recently in the Central African Republic, the
successful handover or transition of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) and
the African-led International Support Mission for the
Central African Republic (MISCA) to the the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) are clear
illustrations of that increasingly effective partnership.
Today. Africa is the continent that contributes more
peacekeepers than any other to United Nations
operations. Nearly 50 per cent of the 100,000 United
Nations peacekeepers come from African countries.
Mr. Mangaral took the Chair.
The European Union has long-standing partnerships
with both the African Union and the United Nations.
In the field of security and peace support operations
those partnerships increasingly overlap, and it is very
timely to reflect on how that trilateral cooperation
works, and how it could work even better. As was
reaffirmed at the EU-Africa Summit in Brussels in
April, the European Union is committed to supporting
Africa’s efforts to manage its own security. To help
build African solutions to African problems, we have
from the outset supported from the outset the African
Peace and Security Architecture (APSA), and we aim
to give practical help at all levels — national, regional
and continental — to enable its implementation, within
the limits of our resources and our treaty obligations,
which, for example, prevent the supply by the European
Union of military hardware. A number of additional
steps were identified in the road map for implementation
of the follow-up to the EU-Africa Summit, including,
first, intensified political dialogue on security,
defence and crisis management issues; secondly, the
operationalization of APSA, in particular by supporting
the African Standby Force; and thirdly, the pursuit of
sustainable funding for African deployment and crisis
management capacity.
The European Union has put its money where
its mouth is. In the 10 years since 2004, the EU has
provided €1.2 billion in support of AU-led peace
operations through the African Peace Facility. That
includes contributions to support both AFISMA
and MISCA, but the largest amount has been the EU
share of the costs of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). This is an excellent example
of the three-way cooperation whereby the African

14-6979929/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Union coordinates the force contributors and assures
the command of the operation, the European Union
provides stipends for the AU’s 22,000 troops, and the
United Nations and the United States provide logistics,
equipment and training. It is a genuine joint effort.
Such peace support operations, however, do not
come cheap, and even the European Union’s resources
are finite. It is therefore important that others also
contribute to building African capacities, as some
colleagues around the table have already indicated
their countries are prepared to do, and help fund
such operations until such time as African countries
themselves can cover the full cost. We note that progress
in implementation of the African Standby Force has not
perhaps been as fast as anticipated, but we take note
that the efforts to introduce the African Capacity for
Immediate Response to Crises and to make it more
rapidly deployable will be welcome and important.
This trilateral cooperation among the EU, the
United Nations and Africa is like the three legs of a
stool. They provide a stable basis for peace support
operations across the continent. In Mali, for example,
the EU is able to draw on one of its other instruments,
under our Common Security and Defence Policy, to
provide both civilian and military training missions for
the reconstruction and retraining of the Malian armed
forces. That is part of a coherent medium-term strategy
to build up Africa’s national capacities, enabling it in
due course to replace the United Nations peace support
operation, MINUSMA.
All in all, 16 Common Security and Defence Policy
missions and operations have been deployed on the
African continent so far, usually in coordination with
the United Nations and the AU, bringing practical
support and concrete results in a number of fragile
and post-crisis countries. In the Central African
Republic, the European Union-led force, has been
working closely alongside both the AU mission MISCA
and now MINUSCA to provide vital protection for
the civil population in Bangui. In Somalia, the EU
Training Mission has been providing key support to
the Somali security forces, which in turn have worked
closely alongside AMISOM to improve the security
situation and to push back the terrorist threat posed
by Al-Shabaab. Through Operation Atalanta offshore,
the EU has helped drive private piracy from the seas
around the Horn of Africa.
In recent years, as the EU has evolved with its
member States to become a global player, we have used
30/54

16/12/2014

a range of our political, diplomatic, financial and crisis
management tools to restore or preserve peace. Clearly,
it is preferable to prevent conflict breaking out in the
first place, and conflict prevention, together with early
warning mechanisms, is an increasingly important part
of our approach to fragile regions throughout the world.
In Africa, we pursue such actions, again, in close
collaboration with the United Nations and the AU. The
Great Lakes is a good example of close cooperation in
helping to resolve the challenge to peace and security
that was posed by the Mouvement du 23 mars. The
remaining problem there posed by residual elements
of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) also needs to be dealt with if genuine and
lasting peace is to be brought to that troubled region.
We look to the 2 January deadline, when, if the FDLR
has not responded, action will need to be taken.
On Somalia, the EU has firmly supported the
endeavours of AMISOM and the cooperation of the AU
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to enhance the effectiveness of our action in
support of a more inclusive political process. In South
Sudan, we commend and support the efforts of IGAD
and the African Union, but we remain concerned about
the situation in Darfur and urge all three parties — the
United Nations, the AU and the Sudan — to find a way
to enable the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur to complete its mandate.
To prevent conflict, however, nothing works better
than good transparent and accountable Government, in
which citizens and groups in a country feel that they
are represented and protected and that their concerns
are heard. Hence, efforts by the AU and United Nations
to encourage good governance, respect for human
rights, the fight against corruption and the full respect
of constitutional rule are fundamental building blocks
to prevent crises. This was expressed clearly and well
in the communiqué following the 463rd meeting of the
Peace and Security Council of the AU on 27 October:
“[B]uilding strong, responsive and accountable
State institutions at the local and national levels
that deliver essential services, as well as ensure
inclusive political processes, rule of law and
public security, is key to preventing conflicts and
consolidating peace building gains.”
The EU fully associates itself with those
conclusions. The EU is prepared to continue to commit
its instruments and experience to support African
countries that have decided to follow this guidance in
14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

building effective, honest and loyal security sectors
to manage the security of their own countries. We
encourage other international partners to join the
efforts to help finance such capacity-building. Strong
cooperation between the African Union, the United
Nations and the European Union can have the greatest
effect in facing immediate challenges and in building
long-term capacities to address underlying causes
comprehensively.
In conclusion, as we often say with our United
Nations colleagues, peace and security cooperation
has become a way of life. The same should apply to
cooperation among all three of us.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Sir, for organizing today’s debate. It is a pleasure
working under your leadership.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the African Union High Representative for Mali
and Sahel for their briefings, and like those before me,
to express our condolences to all those stricken by the
heinous terrorist attack today that took the lives of more
than 120 young students in Peshawar, Pakistan. Brazil
extends its full solidarity to the Government and the
people of Pakistan at this time of deep sorrow and pain.

S/PV.7343

enhance cooperation, under the auspices of the Union
of South American Nations and the South American
Defence Council.
Brazil is a strong believer in African ownership in
dealing with African issues. We praise the stabilization
efforts now put in place by the African Union with the
support of subregional organizations in the African
continent. The United Nations and the African Union
have collaborated in Darfur, Mali, Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Côte d’Ivoire,
as well as in efforts to alleviate the impact of Ebola
in West Africa and to combat the threat posed by the
Lord’s Resistance Army. We see the establishment
of the United Nations Office to the African Union
as an important landmark in the two organizations’
cooperation in conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. Cooperation between the United
Nations and any regional organization — not only the
African Union — under Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations can be a way for the Security
Council to better exercise its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security across the
globe. In no way should cooperation on peacekeeping
be understood as a means of outsourcing the Council’s
authority.

The convergence of purposes and actions among
regional and international actors can only strengthen
multilateral efforts to achieve peace. The history of the
relationship between the United Nations and the African
Union provides us with a number of lessons, which this
debate can help to assess. Being institutionally ever
more advanced and increasingly tested by a range of
challenges, the African Union has not only experiences
to share, but also solutions to provide. The Security
Council does well in being open to dialogue and mutual
learning with the African Union. Lessons should be
learned from the relapses into conflict in Libya, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan, as well as
from the initiatives to promote the stabilization of the
Great Lakes region and much of West Africa, even in
the face of the Ebola epidemic.

Financial constraints should not drive policy
decisions in cooperating with regional organizations.
Hybrid missions should be evaluated according to
their merit, not taken as models to be automatically
replicated. Although it is fair to recognize the
comparative advantages of local States — proximity,
better knowledge of regional dynamics, among other
things — we should be mindful that often neighbours
are not only part of the solutions, but also part of the
problems. Interests and priorities may vary as one
moves from the subregional to the global approach.
The closer one is to the conflict, the greater are the
effects of its action — unfortunately, not always in
ways conducive to ensuring lasting peace. Maintaining
international peace and security in Africa, as anywhere
in the world, is not and cannot be approached exclusively
through peacekeeping. Diplomacy, conflict prevention,
post-conflict peacebuilding and strong economic
development with social justice are key to maintaining
and consolidating political stability.

Mindful of the differences among the challenges
faced by the two regions, South America, my own
region, like Africa, is also seeking to build an
institutional architecture to consolidate peace and

In discussing the United Nations-African Union
partnership in peacekeeping, one should not avoid the
question of ensuring adequate means for implementing
increasingly complex mandates. Peacekeeping mandates

14-6979931/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

must be accompanied by the necessary resources. By
the same token, regional actors should spare no effort
to progressively bring their troops up to United Nations
standards of performance. We commend the African
Union’s efforts to have its Standby Force ready by
2015. Brazil reiterates that no amount of peacekeeping
resources will be enough if diplomacy is not deployed
with even greater emphasis. The cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, as well as
this debate, should therefore also focus on initiatives
to foster mediation, prevention and peacebuilding.
Political consensus-building is at least as important
as building an effective peacekeeping force. The
promotion of stability, the prevention of relapse and
peacebuilding that leads to sustainable development
are the ultimate goals. Last month, in my capacity
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, I visited
Addis Ababa and had a series of meetings with the
African Union Peace and Security Council, the African
Union Commission and the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa. Ambassador Téte António,
who represents the African Union here at the United
Nations, accompanied me. That dialogue underscored
the complementarity among the roles and functions of
the United Nations and regional actors in supporting
political and socioeconomic recovery processes in
African countries emerging from conflict.
As always, Brazil stands ready to contribute
its fair share, not only to peacekeeping but also to
efforts to invest in diplomacy, conflict prevention
and the peaceful settlement of disputes as an essential
basis for cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): First, I would like
to thank the delegation of Chad for providing this
important opportunity to discuss how the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) can be enhanced.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic
countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my
own country, Sweden.
Before going into the substance of today’s debate,
however, the Nordic countries would like to add their
voices of condemnation with regard to the horrendous
terrorist attack committed in Pakistan. We offer our

32/54

16/12/2014

sincere condolences to the families of all the victims
and to the Government and the people of Pakistan.
The Nordic countries attach great importance to
peace and security in Africa. We welcome the fact that
there has been a deepening of cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations in the past decade.
The AU and its member States have demonstrated an
increasing ability to contribute to resolving conflicts
on the continent. We endorse the important work done
by the United Nations Office to the African Union, and
we welcome the AU’s efforts to strengthen the role of
its office here in New York.
We commend the role played by the AU in leading
regional missions, such as the African Union Mission in
Somalia. At the same time, there are many lessons that
we can learn from the cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations in Somalia, as well as
in Darfur, Mali and the Central African Republic.
We must strive to ensure better complementarity of
roles. Difficult issues, such as financing and improved
capabilities, must be part of that discussion.
The Nordic countries welcome the intention of
the AU to develop its civilian and military conflictmanagement capacities further, and stand ready
to support that endeavour. For many years, the
Nordic countries have helped to strengthen the
institutional capacity of the AU Commission, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Eastern African Standby Force. We also contribute
troops, not least to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, as well as
military observers, staff officers, police and correction
officers and other civilian personnel to both United
Nations- and European Union-led peace operations
across the continent.
The Nordic countries are dedicated to continue
supporting African aspirations and commitments so as
to ensure peace, security and stability in the continent.
The African Peace and Security Architecture has proved
its value as a good framework for that endeavour. We
believe that the AU’s role in ensuring peace and stability
in Africa could be strengthened even further through
closer cooperation between the Peace and Security
Architecture and the African Governance Architecture.
On this occasion, we would also like to recall General
Assembly resolution 68/303, entitled “Strengthening the

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution.” That resolution
stresses the importance of regional organizations in
conflict prevention and resolution, and acknowledges
the contribution of the African Union.
The Nordic countries continue to emphasize the
importance of the full and active participation of
women in the prevention, management and resolution
of conflicts, as well as in post-conflict efforts and
cooperation. This is key to building inclusive and
sustainable peace and security. Ensuring that the women
and peace and security agenda is properly implemented
in peacekeeping missions will also increase their
effectiveness. In that regard, we commend the African
Union for having appointed a Special Envoy for
resolution 1325 (2010).
The Nordic commitment to supporting peace and
security in Africa is to a large extent focused on tackling
the root causes of conflict, instability and fragility.
Promoting peace effectively requires a comprehensive
approach. Without sustained and inclusive economic
growth, without equitable social development that
includes men, women and children, without progress in
democracy, governance and human rights, we all know
that peace and security will be elusive. Fighting poverty,
exclusion, injustice and impunity and implementing
international law and global norms will therefore
always be crucial for promoting long-term peace and
security.
Reconstruction and reconciliation after a conflict
should also always receive our central support
and participation. In that respect, we welcome the
African Solidarity Initiative and look forward to its
implementation.
We need strategies to avoid fragile States
relapsing into conflict. In that regard, peacebuilding
and State-building are crucial. The Nordic countries
and the African Union are already engaged in
knowledge-sharing, and we would welcome further
engagement from and exchange with the African Union
in the international dialogue on peacebuilding. We
welcome the recently held dialogue in Addis Ababa
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission, and we encourage
the continued strengthening of such activities during
the coming year.
In conclusion, the Nordic countries welcome the
particular focus of the Security Council on the partnership

S/PV.7343

between the United Nations and the African Union,
which should also be duly reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s review of peace operations. We stand ready
to contribute by supporting regional capacity-building
and participating directly in international and regional
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, as well as
other conflict-prevention and -management efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, and Chad on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also wish to address my delegation’s appreciation to
you and your team for having convened this important
open debate and for the thought-provoking concept
note on this issue (S/2014/879, annex). Allow me to also
thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, and the African Union High Representative
for Mali and the Sahel, His Excellency Mr. Pierre
Buyoya, for their briefings on this issue.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
We wish to underscore the importance of developing
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant statutes
of the regional and subregional organizations. In that
regard, we are encouraged to note the progress made
in the ongoing cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU), which is manifested
in the ongoing capacity-building efforts in many
important areas, including mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
We note the structured annual consultative meetings
that have been established between the United Nations
and the Peace and Security Council of the AU. We
further acknowledge the need to strengthen cooperation
and develop a more effective partnership with the Peace
and Security Council of the AU to address the many
security challenges facing Africa.
Over the last decade, the AU and subregional
organizations have significantly bolstered their own
role in building the architecture for peace and security
on the African continent. Regional organizations,
including the AU, are indeed well positioned to analyse
the root causes of conflicts given their knowledge of
the region. Such organizations can also provide useful

14-6979933/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

information to enhance the effectiveness of United
Nations efforts in the management of conflicts.
In our view, while cooperation has intensified
in recent years, the AU and the United Nations must
increase and improve collaboration in the maintenance
of peace and security in Africa. As such, we fully support
the efforts undertaken by both sides to harmonize their
approach to crisis management and peacekeeping, as
well as to mobilize their resources to bolster regional
security, whether in political, civilian or military
terms. The partnership can also be further enhanced in
a number of ways, including by learning news lessons,
developing new tools and intensifying engagement with
civil society on issues related to mediation and conflict
prevention.
In that regard, there is a need for the United Nations
to build an innovative, flexible, action-oriented and
balanced partnership with the AU so as to ensure that
Africa’s concerns and positions are taken into account
when making decisions on matters of fundamental
interest to Africa. We also support the idea that there
must be greater clarity on how the Security Council
should best consult with the Peace and Security
Council of the AU on major decisions relating to peace
operations.
We furthermore note that the United NationsAfrican Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security
issues recently adopted recommendations to strengthen
the exchange of information between the United Nations
and AU and promote joint analyses of conflict in order
to build a common understanding of the causes and
drivers of organized violence in Africa. We believe that
this could be a valuable forum to strengthen regional
efforts and cooperation to combat terrorism and other
peace and security challenges across Africa.
We also fully support the proposal to have a greater
level of coordination between the Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the AU on their
agenda of work, in particular in relation to African
issues and related thematic discussions such as the
protection of civilians, women and peace and security,
and children in armed conflict. As such, we believe
there should be greater engagement and interaction
between the Presidents of the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the AU, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Given that the maintenance of international peace
and security is primarily the responsibility of the

34/54

16/12/2014

Security Council, assisting in the capacity-building
and funding of peacekeeping efforts of regional,
subregional and other organizations that lack resources
for peacekeeping should also be a concern of the
Council.
We believe that capacity-building and technical
support for the AU in the area of peace and security
is an important matter that should be addressed
accordingly. The need for continuous operational
and planning support as well as long-term capacitybuilding support is clearly established. This includes
support to the planning and management of the ongoing
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations, as well as
potential future operations and technical advice and
support in the development of policies, guidelines,
doctrines and training.
The importance of finding a lasting solution to the
funding of AU-led peace support operations cannot be
over-emphasized. There is clearly an urgent need to
enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility
of financing the AU when undertaking peacekeeping
missions under United Nations mandates. In that
regard, the international community should consider
the establishment of a financing mechanism that could
be mobilized quickly as needs arise. The United Nations
States Members could contribute significantly in this
area by paying their annual assessed contributions to
the Secretariat in full, on time and without conditions.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm
its commitment to continue working together with all
partners and stakeholders in our collective efforts to
advance the cause of international peace and security
in Africa and around the world through the United
Nations’ peacekeeping and peacebuilding agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
those who have expressed outrage at the atrocity
committed at the Pakistani school over the past 24
hours. It seems that more than 140 young people left
their homes in the morning in school uniforms and now
lie in caskets. No political creed, no religious creed
and no military strategy justifies deliberately killing
school children. That is a crime against humanity. Our
thoughts and prayers are with the people of Pakistan.
New Zealand has consistently advocated for
strengthened cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, and there is no regional
14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

organization where stronger, more meaningful
engagement is more important than with the African
Union (AU). We therefore thank Chad for convening
today’s debate and for the useful suggestions in its
concept note (S/2014/879, annex).
As an incoming Security Council member, New
Zealand will focus its remarks today on improving
the relationship between the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council Peace
and Security Council. In that regard, we offer three
practical suggestions.
First, the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council should ensure that their annual
consultations are in a format that allows for a genuine
discussion of issues and a free-flowing, constructive
exchange. That would contribute to a deepened
understanding of perspectives and greater unity of
purpose between the two Councils.
Secondly, consultations between the two Councils
must not be limited to a once-a-year dialogue. To
enable improved coordination on African issues,
there must be ongoing conversations, particularly
between the two Council Presidents. As Chad has
suggested, videoconferencing could be used for those
communications. For our part, before New Zealand
assumes the Security Council presidency in July, we
see value in meeting with members of the AU Peace
and Security Council, not least with its Chair for the
month of July.
Thirdly, there should be constant, ongoing and
better-quality information-sharing between the Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council, including
on emerging crises. We see value in Chad’s proposal
that African members of the Council might observe
meetings of the Peace and Security Council. We also
welcome the ideas proposed at last week’s high-level
seminar on peace and security in Algeria, particularly
on finding ways to more closely link African members
of the Security Council with the Peace and Security
Council. Those ideas could be helpful to this Council’s
work, including as part of the AU’s wider efforts to
transmit its voice to New York.
New Zealand is committed to playing its part by
working closely next year with the so-called African
Three — Angola, Chad and Nigeria — to ensure that
Africa’s voice is better heard.
New Zealand is a strong believer in supporting
African leadership in conflict prevention under Chapter

S/PV.7343

VI of the Charter of the United Nations — efforts that
can be carried out continent-wide, particularly in the
early stages when regional organizations often have a
comparative advantage over the United Nations. For
that reason, New Zealand is significantly increasing its
diplomatic resources to engage both at AU headquarters
and in African capitals, and has contributed to recent
efforts to support African Union-led responses in Mali,
the Central African Republic and Somalia.
But in order to support AU and regional efforts
in the longer term, solutions must be found to ensure
that such missions have more dependable financing
mechanisms. The Security Council must be prepared
to take bold steps to resolve the funding and capacity
issues faced by African-led missions. New Zealand is
deeply disappointed by the continued failure to make
progress on that matter.
It is indicative of our commitment to partnership
with the African Union that New Zealand, in partnership
with the AU Commission, will launch the next African
Union Handbook at the AU Summit in January. The
second edition will be in French as well as English. It is
a great improvement over the first edition, which was
published in January. We hope that Member States will
find the Handbook to be a useful resource, in a small
but practical way, to contribute to the positive evolution
of the partnership between the Security Council and the
African Union.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to express my Government’s sincere
condolences to the State of Pakistan over the cowardly
terrorist attack that led to more than 140 victims. We
condemn that criminal act in all its aspects, which can
be described only as a crime against humanity.
In the context of today’s debate, I express Egypt’s
sincere appreciation to the Chadian presidency for its
initiative in convening this important thematic debate,
with the participation of Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad. It reflects the
commitment of the brotherly nation of Chad to the
maintenance of peace and security from both the
regional and the international perspectives.
My delegation also aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

14-6979935/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

This meeting is important not only because its
subject reflects one of the main pillars of the relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
but because it is timely. It is being convened concurrently
with the launch of the Secretary-General’s High-level
Independent Panel to Review Peace Operations, which
is tasked with evaluating and reviewing peacekeeping
operations. Egypt recalls that the review is supposed
to achieve tangible results aimed at strengthening
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) in peacekeeping operations. It also
requires that African States contribute to developing
the vision of the Panel.
Likewise, we welcome the words of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Egypt delivered at the High-level
Meeting in New York on 26 September, when he called
for the holding of regional African consultations on the
review process regarding United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We look forward to the convening of those
regional consultations. In 2006, Egypt proposed that
such an item be included on the agenda of the African
Union Peace and Security Council.
Above all, the relationship between the AU and
the United Nations with regard to peacekeeping efforts
must focus on building AU capacities to deal with
conflicts. For its part, Egypt will make every possible
effort in that context, including by contributing to
the full operationalization of the African Standby
Force — by 2015 or by whatever date agreed on by the
African States — for deployment anywhere in Africa,
as well as to efforts to strengthen various capacities.
Egypt volunteered, before any other country, to
assist the African Capacity for Immediate Response
to Crises, and participated in a summit in June on the
margins of the AU Summit in Malabo. We are currently
holding talks with various African missions on the
nature of Egypt’s participation in that effort.
The AU also held two important meetings in Cairo
during the past month. One was a meeting of senior
officials of the African Union and the East African
Community on the subject of maintaining peace and
security. Furthermore, on 20 and 21 November, there
was a meeting of the African Union Peace Support
Operations Division. It is certain that those two
meetings will strengthen the African Union’s capacities
in coordinating efforts with other African mechanisms,
with a focus on strengthening African Union capacities
in general.

36/54

16/12/2014

Egypt has always believed that conflict resolution
involves not only peacekeeping, but must also include
the complete conflict cycle. Post-conflict efforts are
necessary to prevent relapses into conflict, ensure
sustainable peace and promote development. In that
context, Egypt’s efforts to promote the development
of institutional cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU has included hosting workshops
in Egypt in 2014 to develop the regional dimension
of peacekeeping. Egypt is also a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission, where we have proposed
the establishment of a real peacekeeping architecture
for the African Union, because there is a dire need
to address the relationship between security and
development and to prevent a relapse into conflict.
Egypt has concluded that current efforts to reform
the existing mechanisms of the African Union and
the United Nations are insufficient, so we have also
called for the establishment of an African Union centre
for reconstruction and development in post-conflict
nations, which should become one of the main pillars of
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations.
None of these efforts to strengthen the partnership
between the United Nations and the AU will be
fruitful unless we have competent human resources.
In this context, the Cairo Regional Centre for Conflict
Resolution and Peacekeeping is active in developing
human resources and capacity-building in the areas of
peace, security and peacekeeping in Africa, regionally
and internationally. In that respect, I stress the
important role being played by the Centre in northern
Mali and in the Ebola crisis. We must also increase the
human resource capacities of the African Union by
managing interaction between the two organizations at
all levels, including direct interaction and by delegating
representatives and envoys. Egypt urged the African
Union to establish a forum for meetings between
officials of the United Nations and the AU. The forum
was created in 2010, and it continues to offer a unique
opportunity to exchange our experiences.
All these efforts are geared towards empowering
the United Nations and the African Union to uphold
their responsibilities and duties in maintaining regional
and international peace and security in order to promote
stability and development. The African Union has
made great strides in this direction and has developed
the African Peace and Security Architecture. We now
look forward to the United Nations increasing its

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

contribution to support the African Union, as required.
We hope and are confident that this thematic debate
will help help to that end.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Let me start by
expressing our deep sympathy to the people and the
Government of Pakistan after the horrendous crime
perpetrated this morning against the schoolchildren in
Peshawar. This is a cruel reminder of how terrorism is
affecting our lives.
I would like to acknowledge this morning the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration
of the Republic of Chad. His decision to be here with
us this morning to preside over this meeting is an
illustration of the commitment of Chad to the promotion
of a strong partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) in peace and security matters.
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to Chad for its
tremendous contribution to peace in Africa and in the
world. As Africans, we are proud of Chad’s role in the
United Nations.
Algeria attaches particular importance to the role
of regional and subregional organizations and their
cooperation with the United Nations. We believe that a
principled, consistent and strong cooperation between
the United Nations, on the one hand, and regional and
subregional organizations, on the other, is indispensable
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Obviously, the African Union and its subregional
organizations are better placed in terms of geographical
proximity, political and cultural familiarity with local
conditions, and shared experience, which are critical to
making a real difference in the prevention or resolution
of armed conflicts.
As a member of the African Union, Algeria has
always commended and supported the AU for its efforts
over the years to strengthen African peacekeeping
capabilities. Today’s debate comes at a time of renewed
recognition of the importance of building a strong
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union in order to enhance our efforts to promote peace,
security and stability in the African continent.
Building peace in Africa means abetting and
supporting African-led efforts for peace in Africa. In
our view, this debate comes at the right time, as the
African Union is making tremendous efforts to address

S/PV.7343

the peace and security challenges that Africa continues
to face. In that regard, Algeria welcomes the steps
taken for the full operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, including the African
Standby Force — and, in the meantime, the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to a Crisis — and
support the continued United Nations-AU cooperation
on different components of the Architecture, including
on early warning, preventive diplomacy, mediation,
electoral assistance, peacekeeping, conflict prevention
and resolution, and peacebuilding.
The implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in the Sudan, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the African Union
Mission in Somalia, and the operations in the Central
African Republic and Mali are also good examples
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. Furthermore, it should be noted that in
the past five years, the Security Council has held no
less than five meetings devoted to the United NationsAfrican Union partnership.
While acknowledging that much progress has been
made in cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union and its subregional organizations,
it should also be recognized that much remains to
be done. Such cooperation has yet to reach its full
potential. We should like to stress the importance of
further strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations Security Council with the African Union
Peace and Security Council, consistent with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, to address
common collective security challenges in Africa,
taking African concerns into consideration. This is a
crucial point, in our view. We believe that there is a
need to establish a more effective relationship between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council, including by ensuring more effective
annual consultative meetings, the holding of timely
consultations and collaborative field missions of the
two Councils. In that regard, we look forward to the
convening of the ninth annual consultative meeting,
scheduled to take place in Addis Ababa next year, to
address the issue of follow-up and implementation of
previous communiqués and statements.
The cooperation between the United Nations
Secretariat and the AU Commission has also registered
commendable achievements, as demonstrated by the
regular consultations between senior United Nations
and AU officials on issues of common concern and

14-6979937/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the mechanisms put in place to that end. However,
we call for the strengthening of such cooperation and
underscore the importance of developing the followup programme to the 2006 United Nations 10-year
capacity-building programme for the African Union as
an important contribution towards conflict prevention,
management and resolution on the African continent.
In his report of October 2010 on support to AU
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations, the Secretary-General rightly observed that:
“The complex challenges in the world today
require a revitalized and evolving interpretation of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations”
(S/2010/514, para. 54).
Algeria fully shares that view. Clearly, those challenges
require concerted responses on the part of the United
Nations and the African Union and a much closer
partnership, based on a creative reading of the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter, to allow the
African Union and its regional mechanisms for conflict
prevention, management and resolution to fully play
their role as integral components of collective security.
We should give due consideration to the critical issue of
securing predictable, sustainable and adequate funding
for African Union peacekeeping missions authorized by
the Security Council. We need to understand that AU
actions in the field are conducted for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
We encourage the Security Council to engage
more actively with the African Union Peace and
Security Council. Mutual respect, African ownership,
consultative decision-making, division of labour
and the sharing of responsibilities are the principles
and foundation of any successful and productive
partnership, especially in the area of peacekeeping.
We also look forward to the review of United Nations
peacekeeping operations to be undertaken by a highlevel United Nations panel, which Algeria hopes
will lead to the building and strengthening of a AU/
United Nations partnership, especially in the context of
Chapter VIII of the Charter.
We hope that this discussion will generate proposals
and strategies in order to expand, deepen and improve
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union, with a view to strengthening the capacity of
the international community to respond effectively to
threats to international peace and security.

38/54

16/12/2014

We
welcome
the
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2014/27) adopted earlier by the Security
Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation for your leadership in convening today’s
open debate. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
Let me begin my statement by underlining the
importance of African ownership in resolving conflicts
in Africa. The African people know themselves better
than anyone else. Political mediation efforts and peace
operations in Africa can best succeed when they are
conducted in ways that are respectful of African cultures
and traditions. Japan therefore highly commends
Africa’s ownership in the field of peace and security.
The African Union (AU) has been taking the lead in
these efforts. The roles played by various subregional
communities are also noteworthy.
I witnessed on the ground how crucial African-led
processes are in dealing with crises on the continent.
When I served as Japan’s Ambassador to the Republic
of Côte d’Ivoire, I closely observed the situation
following the presidential elections in November 2010.
As the Ivorians went through political turmoil, the AU
and the Economic Community of West African States
mediated between the parties concerned. Although that
did not prevent military clashes from occurring in the
ensuing months, active engagement by those African
institutions helped to lay the necessary foundation for
the political stability and reconstruction that have been
brought about in the country since May 2011, under the
leadership of President Alassane Ouattara.
African ownership and international partnership
are the basic principles of the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD). These
principles were reaffirmed in the Yokohama Declaration
issued at TICAD V, which Japan hosted in June 2013
together with the AU Commission, the United Nations,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank.
As Director-General for African Affairs at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, I was directly in charge
of the organization of TICAD V. I would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate my personal gratitude to

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

my African counterparts, in particular my Chadian
colleagues, for their valuable cooperation in the
successful holding of the conference. Among them was
Ambassador Mahamat Zene Cherif, then Permanent
Representative of Chad to the AU. It is a great honour
for me to be able to continue to work closely with him
in his new capacity as Permanent Representative of
Chad to the United Nations.
Today’s Security Council debate is particularly
relevant and timely in terms of exploring ways to deepen
the United Nations-AU partnership for peace, as the
issue of partnerships is one of the areas on which the
High-level Panel to Review Peacekeeping Operations
will focus. I would like to touch upon two challenges to
be addressed in this regard.
My first point concerns the financing of AU
peace operations. While the primary responsibility to
secure financial resources lies with the African Union,
the United Nations must continue to engage with the
African Union so as to consider how to enhance the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of the
financing of the AU operations mandated by the
Security Council.
In that context, we note that the Prodi Panel
recommended the establishment of a multi-donor trust
fund as a possible option. We are of the view, however,
that this option needs to be carefully considered to see
if such a fund would be operated under appropriate
oversight, which should include a reliable audit system.
Japan has been making its own financial
contributions through the African Peace Fund, which
now total approximately $12 million. Last March, Japan
donated $3 million to the Fund to support the Africanled International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic, and, later on, the African Union mission for
the Central African Republic and Central Africa.
My second point concerns the issue of the rapid
deployment of peacekeeping operations. Japan
appreciates African ownership in this area. Japan looks
forward to the early operationalization of the African
Stand-by Force (ASF). We hope that the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises, which
the AU unveiled last year, will serve in the interim to
facilitate the rapid deployment of African forces. We
would also like to commend the initiative taken by
the United States to launch the African Peacekeeping
Rapid Response Partnership.

S/PV.7343

Japan, for its part, will continue to support
African endeavours, in line with the pledges that
Prime Minister Abe made at the summit meeting on
United Nations peacekeeping operations held in New
York on 26 September. For instance, we are currently
working on a new assistance package to provide heavy
engineering equipment and personnel training in Africa.
Furthermore, Japan’s assistance to peacekeepingoperation training centres in Africa contributes to the
capacity-building of African personnel. As many as 13
peacekeeping operation centres have to date received a
total of $36.6 million from Japan since 2008. Japan Self
Defense Forces personnel have also been dispatched
to manage programmes or hold conferences at those
centres.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore once
again the importance of Africa’s ownership in the
field of peace and security. We expect Africa to
continue to actively engage in not only resolving its
conflicts but also in preventing them. As a proactive
contributor to peace, Japan stands ready to support
those African efforts. Our contributions are not
limited to capacity-building: we will continue to
provide development assistance to reduce poverty and
promote economic growth. We are confident that our
assistance helps address the root causes of conflicts.
Those are key commitments that Prime Minister Abe
made to African leaders at the fifth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD V). The
African Union Commission and the United Nations
are among the co-organizers of the TICAD process.
Japan will continue to work hand in hand with those
two institutions to promote peace and prosperity in
Africa on the basis of TICAD’s principles of African
ownership and international partnership.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Ireland joins with all other
speakers and wholeheartedly condemns the tragic
killing of schoolchildren and others in Pakistan today.
In the words of my minister, it was an attack of savage
brutality that targeted innocent children in their place
of study. I wish to express my heartfelt condolences and
those of the Irish people to the families of the victims
and to the people and the authorities of Pakistan.
Permit me to also thank the Chadian presidency
for organizing this important debate. Cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations

14-6979939/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

with regard to peace operations is a subject of key
importance, and I welcome the opportunity to provide
Ireland’s perspective.
I would also like to align myself with the statement
delivered just moments ago on behalf of the European
Union (EU).
This subject is a significant one. Today, more than
half of the peacekeeping missions and just over 80 per
cent of peacekeeping troops are deployed in Africa. In
addition, almost 50 per cent of the more than 100,000
peacekeepers currently deployed by the United Nations
are from African countries. Furthermore, some of
the most challenging missions the United Nations is
currently undertaking are in Africa — in Mali and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such missions
highlight the changing nature of peacekeeping, and they
provide a serious test of how we carry out peacekeeping
missions. The contributions from African countries to
those demanding missions are also evident, including,
for example, from Tanzania, South Africa and Malawi
to the decisive Intervention Brigade of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We previously discussed United Nations-African
Union (AU) cooperation in July (see S/PV.7228). In
resolution 2167 (2014), adopted during that debate,
the Council requested the Secretariat and the African
Union to undertake a lessons learned exercise on the
transitions from AU to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Mali and the Central African Republic.
We look forward to learning of its findings.
Looking more widely, Ireland welcomes the
establishment of the High-level Independent Panel to
Review Peacekeeping Operations, led by José RamosHorta, and looks forward to active engagement with it
in the coming months, especially when it considers the
question of cooperation with regional organizations. In
making our contribution to the review, we will draw
on our own considerable experience of peacekeeping
and our strong commitment to the United Nations in
addressing how peacekeeping needs to evolve to meet
the new demands. We will be conscious in particular of
the need to ensure that the protection of civilians is at
the heart of mandates for peacekeeping operations.
We also need more consistent and systematic
application of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on the same subject and to address the root
causes of why women and girls are so disproportionately

40/54

16/12/2014

affected by conflict. We need to ensure that peace
operations in Africa and elsewhere have the capabilities
to protect civilians and the participating troops
themselves. We also need to address issues such as rapid
deployment, improved intelligence and performance
assessment. We need to ensure effective command and
control arrangements, which underpin the success and
the credibility of operations.
The United Nations also needs to seek ways to
develop internal capacities — for example, in terms of
police, courts and local authorities — so that conflictaffected countries, including in Africa, can build and
sustain peace themselves. Those are issues that apply
to all peacekeeping operations, but as I mentioned
already, the balance of operations in Africa means they
apply there in full.
The successful implementation of increasingly
complex mandates means that neither the United
Nations nor individual Member States can work
alone. Increasingly, the African Union and regional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) are taking the lead in
maintaining peace and security in Africa and in meeting
the many security challenges that the continent faces.
That is a positive development. The generation of the
African Standby Force is another positive development,
and we look forward to seeing it fully operational
before long.
However, work remains to be done. Challenges
to be overcome include improving the transition of
missions, enhancing the logistical capacity of AU
forces, addressing long-standing issues in relation to
financing missions and ensuring complementarity
and coherence across regional and subregional peace
operations.
Joint planning of peacekeeping operations also
needs to improve. We welcome the cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations in Somalia,
the joint planning between ECOWAS and the AU on
Mali and the successful coordination between the AU
and the United Nations on the transfer of authority
in the Central African Republic from the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. In addition, we strongly support all efforts
to enhance three-way cooperation between the African
Union, the European Union and the United Nations.
Effective triangular cooperation will be critical to
14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

successful peacekeeping operations in the coming
years.
Nationally, Ireland makes a significant contribution
to the training of African security forces, both through
participation in EU training missions in Somalia and
Mali and on a bilateral basis. In September, at the
peacekeeping summit referred to by the representative
of Japan just now, which was co-hosted by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and United States Vice-President
Biden, we committed to further assisting the
development of peacekeeping capacities among our
key partner countries in Africa. We look forward to
establishing a programme drawing on the expertise of
Irish peacekeepers and reflecting United Nations best
practices.
Ireland, as a long-standing contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping and an active contributor to
EU-led missions, sees huge value in an ever-closer
relationship with the African Union in the areas I have
referred to. We support a holistic approach to preventing
and resolving conflict that draws on all available tools
and processes. We look forward to continuing to work
with all partners in that regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Before starting, I would like to
extend our heartfelt condolences to brotherly Pakistan,
which lost over 140 people in a heinous terrorist attack
today in Peshawar. We reiterate our strong solidarity
with the people of Pakistan. Turkey has declared
tomorrow a day of national mourning. We strongly
condemn terror in all its forms and manifestations.
Today it has taken the form of the murder of innocent
schoolchildren. The attack once again manifests the
complexity and brutality of the terrorism threat that
the world faces today. We all know that the African
continent is no stranger to those threats.
Turkey aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union today.
I would like to thank the Chadian presidency for
organizing this timely and useful meeting. In our view,
cooperation with and between regional and subregional
organizations is one of the most important and relevant
issues on the peace and security agenda of the United
Nations today.
The international system and the United Nations
face increasing challenges. A simple look will show

S/PV.7343

that the Security Council’s agenda for this month
speaks for itself, as it indicates the rising number and
intensity of conflicts, most of which are in Africa. A
great portion of the new threats are asymmetrical in
nature, involving non-State armed actors and organized
crime groups, some of which have connections to global
terror networks.
The evolving nature of the dynamics concerning
international peace and security requires a recalibration
in the international response to it. That, coupled with
the administrative and budgetary challenges facing
the United Nations system, makes partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations in the field of
peace operations all the more important.
We are glad to observe the positive developments
in recent years in the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in the search
for solutions to several conflicts in Africa. Turkey
actively supports various United Nations and AU peace
operations in Africa by supplying funds and personnel
to the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Mission in Liberia, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. We also contribute to the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund and the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We encourage expansion
of the United Nations-AU partnership to encompass
such areas as institutional capacity-building, securitysector reform, the protection of civilians, human rights
and gender mainstreaming, and combating organized
crime.
Turkey also contributes bilaterally to peace and
security in Africa. At the second Africa-Turkey Summit,
held in Malabo from 19 to 21 November, we reiterated
our desire to continue collaborating in all fields of
peace and security, including the prevention, resolution
and management of conflicts through exchanging
expertise and information, training programmes
and strengthening a culture of peace. The joint
implementation plan for the Africa-Turkey partnership
adopted at the Summit outlines the way ahead to further
strengthen our comprehensive collaboration.
In discussing ways to achieve sustainable peace and
stability in Africa, we must particularly emphasize the

14-6979941/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

16/12/2014

nexus between security and development. Despite the
significant progress made in development in the past
decade, it is still evident that Africa will continue to
require further support from its international partners.
Most of the affected countries in Africa lack adequate
resources, capacity and expertise for a timely and
effective response to complex challenges. The latest
outbreak of Ebola serves as a reminder of this fact. We
believe the partnership between the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER)
and the African Union Support to the Ebola Outbreak
in West Africa (ASEOWA) could become an example
for responses to similar crises. Turkey has announced
a pledge of $5 million to the Ebola response, with
$1 million going to ASEOWA and $1.5 million to be
used for UNMEER’s activities.

who try to create fear and kill innocent people must not
be allowed to have their way.

Humanitarian diplomacy is a key objective
of Turkish foreign policy. As an emerging donor
country, Turkey is keen to share its humanitarian and
development experience with countries in need of
assistance. Our approach is based on drawing on local
expertise and utilizing genuine partnerships. Somalia
is a case in point. The combination of humanitarian and
development assistance offered by Turkey is reflected in
its investment in human capital, infrastructure and basic
services in Somalia. Moreover, Turkey’s development
agency is conducting projects in 36 African countries,
with a focus on building communities’ resilience,
capacity-building and offering technical assistance in
agriculture, education and health.

Before addressing the topic of today’s meeting, I
would like to reiterate NAM’s main principles regarding
peacekeeping by saying that the establishment of
any peacekeeping operation, or the extension of the
mandates of existing ones, should strictly observe
the purposes and principles of the Charter and those
principles that have evolved to govern such operations
and have become basic principles thereof — that is,
the consent of the parties, the non-use of force except
in self-defence, and impartiality. NAM stresses that
respect for the principles of the sovereign equality,
political independence and territorial integrity of all
States, and of non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within States’ domestic jurisdiction, should
also be upheld in that regard.

We must continue to share our experiences and
maintain our partnerships in line with the visions and
strategies defined by host Governments. Strengthened
and diversified cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU, as well as increased support to the
AU through various bilateral and multilateral means,
will enhance local ownership and self-sustainability.
Guided by those principles, Turkey will do its utmost to
contribute to peace and security in Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Dehgani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
first offer my heartfelt condolences to the people and
the Government of Pakistan for the appalling terrorist
attack by the Taliban on a school in Peshawar, which
has resulted in the killing of scores of innocent people,
most of them children. We condemn that terrorist act
in the strongest terms and reiterate our belief that those
42/54

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I would first like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Chad’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council this month,
and to express our appreciation to you for holding this
open debate. I also express thanks for the briefings
provided this morning.
The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
determination of the United Nations to enhance
its relationship and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations.

NAM supports the continuing efforts to strengthen
African peacekeeping capabilities and emphasizes the
importance of implementing the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme for the African Union and the joint
action plan for United Nations support to the African
Union in peacekeeping in the short, medium and long
terms in all relevant areas. NAM has also recommended
enhancing the effective partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union in order to improve
the planning, deployment and management of African
peacekeeping operations.
NAM has always commended the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the Group of Friends of IGAD for their
indispensable role and efforts in achieving the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement for the Sudan and in
sustaining peace and stability in the Darfur region. The
Movement has always supported the Comprehensive

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Peace Agreement for the Sudan, signed in January 2005,
which ended one of the longest-running wars on the
African continent and thereby contributed to regional
peace and security. NAM encourages the political
process as a priority and emphasizes the need to focus
on development assistance in regions affected by war,
since peace and development mutually reinforce each
other.
NAM noted with satisfaction the sustained efforts
made by the relevant Governments, the African Union,
the United Nations and other interested parties that
led to a lasting peace in Darfur, and we expressed
our support for the Doha peace process for Darfur. It
is NAM’s conviction that no action should be taken
that could jeopardize the delicate nature of the process
under way in the Sudan. We commend the initiatives
and steps taken by the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan to resolve their differences through
peaceful means, and we urge that all pending issues
between the two countries continue to be resolved in
line with the agreements signed under the auspices of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel,
with priority given to resolving security issues and
agreeing on border delineation in accordance with the
January 1956 borders.
NAM has also welcomed the adoption of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, as
well as international efforts to mobilize resources and
assistance in support of the efforts by States in the
region to address the complex security, political and
humanitarian situation. We stress that the strategy
should be implemented in close cooperation with the
States of the Sahel, West Africa and the Maghreb, as
well as the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States, the Community of Sahel-Saharan
States and the Arab Maghreb Union.
NAM also commends the contribution of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to lasting
peace and stability there, expresses its appreciation for
the continued commitment of troops to AMISOM by
troop- and police-countries, and calls on members and
the international community to provide the resources it
needs to better fulfil its mandate.
The Non-Aligned Movement commends the
important role played in the region by the active
leadership of the Economic Community of Central
African States, as well as by the African Union and
the international community, in promoting lasting

S/PV.7343

peace and stability in the Central African Republic.
NAM welcomes the positive impact that the action of
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic has had on the ground in
protecting civilians and restoring stability and security
in the country. We also look forward to the outcome
of the ongoing assessment by the Secretariat of the
two related processes in Mali and the Central African
Republic.
Finally, NAM also commends the continued
efforts of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Southern African Development
Community to ensure durable peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and welcomes the
positive developments in the situation in the eastern
part of that country following the end of the Mouvement
du 23 mars.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Isnomo (Indonesia): To begin with, my
delegation wishes to extend its heartfelt condolences
to Pakistan for the deaths of over 100 innocent people
as a result of the terror attack that took place today in
Peshawar. We join previous speakers in expressing our
fullest sympathy for the victims and their bereaved
families and relatives.
Mr. President, we would like to express our
appreciation to you for organizing this debate on the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union (AU), in the maintenance of international peace
and security. My delegation also thanks the SecretaryGeneral and the African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel for their respective briefings.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The contributions of regional and subregional
organizations to the maintenance of international peace
and security, particularly in promoting dialogue and
confidence-building, conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping, cannot be overemphasized. Indeed,
it has been established that regional organizations, on
account of their knowledge of their regions, are well
positioned to understand the root causes of many
conflicts closer to home and therefore to influence their
prevention or resolution.

14-6979943/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

As a founding member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, Indonesia has historically and
vigorously promoted the significant role of regional and
subregional organizations, as they can fundamentally
generate security and prosperity in their respective
regions. Indonesia has also strongly promoted
interregional activities between Southeast Asia and
other regions.
In that spirit, during Indonesia’s presidency of
the Council in November 2007, we initiated an open
debate on this particular agenda item, resulting in
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/42). That
presidential statement clearly stated, inter alia, the
importance of promoting the identification and
further development of modalities that enhance the
contribution of regional and subregional organizations
to the work of the Council in maintaining international
peace and security, in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter. It further stressed the
need to strengthen the interaction between the Security
Council and regional organizations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, particularly
between the United Nations and the African Union,
is a major multilateral commitment that we must all
continue to encourage, support and contribute to.
Indonesia supports the enhancement of cooperation
and partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, in whose region most of the conflicts
have occurred. We are encouraged by the fact that
various important initiatives and activities have been
developed between the United Nations and the AU.
Moreover, the deepening of United Nations-African
Union partnerships has also been intensely increased
in the field of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions. We agree, however, that this
partnership continues to be challenged by several
elements, as stated in the concept note for today’s
meeting (S/2014/879, annex).
It is our view that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations will be viable and
sustained when it is developed on the basis of equal
partnership. That is also the case with respect to
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
in the context of peacekeeping operations and political
missions. We therefore welcome the adoption today
of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/27, which
reiterates, inter alia, the importance of establishing
a more effective relationship between the Security

44/54

16/12/2014

Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, as well as formulating cohesive positions and
strategies in dealing with conflict situations in Africa.
Indonesia agrees with the Council’s emphasis
on encouraging the United Nations and the African
Union to take concrete steps to strengthen their
relationships and develop a more effective partnership.
We also highlight the need to enhance the United
Nations-AU predeployment joint planning and joint
mission assessment processes to promote common
understanding and increase effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We also agree
that there is a need to enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing regional
organizations, including the African Union, when they
undertake peacekeeping under a Security Council
mandate.
In order to guarantee closer collaboration between
the United Nations and regional organizations, it
is pertinent to ensure that there not only is a legal
foundation for such cooperation, but also mutual trust
and confidence, which can be built and sustained
through regular dialogues as well as comprehensive
sharing and exchange of knowledge and expertise.
My delegation also encourages the enhancement
of regular discussions between the Secretariat and
regional organizations in order to better identify and
understand the needs of both entities in ensuring
effective joint responses to security challenges. There
is no doubt that the increase in the number of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and the growing role
played by regional organizations make it particularly
necessary for the United Nations to step up its efforts
and measures in creating mechanisms for effective
cooperation with such organizations.
To conclude, Indonesia wishes to reiterate its support
for the enhancement of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
We believe that the unique potential and capabilities of
regional organizations in regional confidence-building
and preventive diplomacy should be further utilized to
establish lasting peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to add my voice to those of us who have expressed
condolences to Pakistan for the unspeakable atrocity
that occurred today. I am very sorry to say, also, that I
14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

would like to extend my condolences to Yemen, where
a horrible attack has also taken place. My Government
condemns these acts of appalling terror that violate
everything humanity stands for.
Mr. President, I would now like to express my
appreciation for your initiative to organize this important
open debate. I align myself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. In the light of time
constraints, I will read out a shortened version of my
statement. My full text will be available via Twitter.
My Government thanks Chad for the excellent
cooperation between both our contingents in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Mr. President,
we commend the dedication and perseverance of
your country’s peacekeepers under the harshest of
circumstances in northern Mali. We commemorate the
brave Chadian peacekeepers who were killed in action
and pay tribute to their determination and to their
contribution to the cause of peace.
We need new and innovative approaches to
maintaining and restoring peace and security. Conflicts
are changing in nature, from conflicts between States
to conflicts within States. Poverty, inequality and lack
of perspective combine into an unstable mix, which
forms a breeding ground for violent extremism that
can easily spill across borders. New threats, such as
terrorism, transnational crime and Ebola, demand
international cooperation and a concerted effort.
These are not just challenges for Africa, but for the
international community as a whole. Enhancing the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU
is therefore in the interest of all of us. Member States
should contribute what they can, and the Kingdom of
the Netherlands aims to do its fair share.
My Government is committed to peace and
security in Africa. Most of our military, police and
civil experts worldwide are deployed in missions in
Africa. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a partner for
Africa. Let me mention, for example, our contingents
in MINUSMA and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, our training of African peacekeepers, our
anti-piracy activities and our logistical support through
our naval vessel Karel Doorman in the fight against
Ebola.
Regional organizations play an increasingly
important role in maintaining peace and security,
complementing United Nations efforts. We therefore

S/PV.7343

welcome the fact that the African Union is rapidly
developing into a stronger and more effective
organization. As an example already addressed by some
speakers today, AU missions are increasingly deployed
ahead of United Nations missions. That illustrates the
need for close cooperation between the United Nations
and the AU, especially between the Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union.
Complex conflicts demand a comprehensive
approach,
combining
diplomacy,
development
cooperation, defence, police, justice and trade, with a
specific focus on the issue of women, peace and security.
The Netherlands believes that such a comprehensive
approach would further strengthen United Nations-AU
efforts. For example, links between the African Peace
and Security Architecture, the African Governance
Architecture and the regional economic communities
could be enhanced. We believe that this would lead
to more sustainable results. Transparent and inclusive
governance, respect for human rights and post-conflict
reconstructive measures lead to more stable societies,
lowering the risks of a return to conflict. We welcome
the African Union’s initiatives in those areas.
Let me also highlight the issue of prevention,
echoing my Indonesian colleague. The African Peace
and Security Architecture contains several important
instruments in that field. It is quite simple — prevention
saves lives.
In conclusion, it is my country’s ambition to remain
Africa’s partner for peace, justice and development. We
are fully committed to continuing our active role in
United Nations peacekeeping, in particular in Africa.
We wholeheartedly support the initiative to strengthen
the role of the African Union in maintaining peace and
security on the continent, and to improve cooperation
with the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): At the outset, allow me to
join previous speakers in expressing our condolences
to the parents and families of those who lost their lives
during the horrific attack in Peshawar this morning, as
well as our strong condemnation of that brutal act.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your country, Chad, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. Allow me to wish you every success
in steering this important organ. I also would like to

14-6979945/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

express my gratitude to you for convening today’s
important debate on such a critical and timely topic. It
provides a great opportunity for all of us to discuss and
share views concerning the modalities of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
with an emphasis on the African Union (AU), in the
field of peace operations.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Nevertheless, I wish to make few additional remarks in
my national capacity.
The international community has recently faced a
growing number of increasingly complex multifaceted
challenges. The changing global context in the area of
peace and security confronts us with repeated cycles
of violence, collapsing governance and endemic
instability that adversely impact all aspects of civilian
socioeconomic life. The situation is further exacerbated
not only by the shifting character of conflicts, but
also by the diverse nature of conflict parties and their
motivations. Those challenges have become plainly
visible and commonly recognized in various parts of the
world, leading to augmented pressure and intensified
demand on peace operations to adequately adapt and
effectively react. To put it simply, the response must be
as complex as the challenges.
In such an environment, successful response
requires enhanced cooperation and strengthened
partnership between the United Nations and relevant
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
between and among those same regional and subregional
organizations. Slovakia supports the trend towards
building such partnerships, in particular with respect
to the African Union and its regional organizations.
Such an approach would allow us more efficiently and
effectively to steer a path through conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding all the way to
sustainable peace.
It is remarkable to note that almost half the
participants in current United Nations peacekeeping
missions come from Africa. Recent transitions from
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, and from the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic have proved once again the significance of

46/54

16/12/2014

effective United Nations-AU operational partnership
on the ground.
At the same time, we are fully aware that peace
operations represent a complex process, requiring
time and resources. Such a process consists of various
components and layers that are mutually interconnected
and interlocked. Seldom has one country or even a
single organization had the ability and capacity to
contribute to the support and development of all peace
instruments and security mechanisms. Therefore, the
specific expertise and thematic focus of Member States
and regional and subregional organizations add value
to the overall success of the entire project of peace
operations.
In that respect, the direct experience of many
United Nations and AU peace missions and operations
clearly shows that a nationally led and inclusive
security sector reform (SSR) process can progressively
deal with the root causes of insecurity and fragility and
create an enabling environment that allows sustainable
development and peace to take root. In addition, security
sector reform is directly linked to the protection of
civilians and the rule of law — two critical tasks that
have become an integral part of almost every peace
operation.
Resolution 2151 (2014) on security sector reform,
adopted in April under the Nigerian presidency, is a key
milestone in those ongoing efforts. It also underscores
the importance of partnerships and cooperation with and
among regional organizations in supporting security
sector reform. For us, building effective partnerships
is vital to ensuring that the international community
remains the best actor to appropriately respond to
growing needs and multiple challenges, that there is a
coordinated approach, and that we are able to share our
experience and expertise when needed.
Slovakia has long sought to further strengthen
working partnerships among the United Nations, the
African Union, the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe in the area of
SSR. Such a dialogue can be critical in helping to build
synergy while also preventing the fragmentation of
efforts. We actively promote the creation of synergies
in order to avoid overlapping and duplication, as well as
to streamline available resources.
Our active engagement and commitments in that
area were personally reiterated by Mr. Miroslav Lajčák,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign and

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

European Affairs of Slovakia, during his recent trip to
Ethiopia and Kenya at the end of November, when he
met and held fruitful discussions with high-ranking AU
and United Nations officials. During his visit, Slovakia,
together with the African Union, organized the Africa
Forum on Security Sector Reform in Addis Ababa
from 24 to 26 November; and on 26 November, in
partnership with the United Nations Office in Nairobi,
our country organized a panel discussion in Nairobi on
the challenges of and opportunities for security sector
reform in East Africa and the Horn of Africa. Along
with other issues, both events highlighted the important
role that regional and subregional organizations can
play in SSR processes in view of the cross-border
nature of the many challenges to peace and security. At
the same time, they noted the central role of the United
Nations in all global peace and security issues, and the
vital role of the partnership with the AU and its member
States in regional peace and security efforts in Africa,
including peace operations.

S/PV.7343

schoolchildren in Pakistan. We believe the Security
Council has a duty to take action on that matter.
Today’s peacekeeping activities have both increased
and strained United Nations resources and capacity
owing to various changes in the operations, both
quantitative and qualitative. Peacekeeping operations
are more complex and demanding then ever, with
various factors contributing to the changing nature of
peacekeeping. They include the often intra-State nature
of conflicts, the lack of full consent and cooperation
on the part of the parties and the breakdown of law and
order. The United Nations faces increasing challenges
from the emergence of uncontrolled militias and
armed civilians, the collapse of State structures and
the targeting of civilians during conflicts, with the
attendant humanitarian disasters, which include mass
movements of people, who become internally displaced
persons and refugees.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.

The importance of the partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations can be traced to the timely intervention
of the African Union in the conflicts in the Sudan,
Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and, recently, in Mali. Such
timely intervention averted the escalation of those
conflicts, which could have lead to ethnic cleansing,
and has contributed immensely to the later transfer
of those missions to United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

Mr. Naanda (Namibia): I congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and would like to thank you for
convening this very important debate on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Head of the African Union (AU)
Mission in Mali and the Sahel, former President Pierre
Buyoya, for their insightful briefings. Let me use this
opportunity to also thank the non-permanent members
of the Security Council during 2013-2014 for their
contribution to the maintenance of a peaceful world.

The United Nations has extensive experience in
best practices pertaining to peacekeeping operations.
We believe that experience is central to the partnership
and should be conveyed to the relevant regional
organizations. Furthermore, the respective roles should
be based on their comparative advantages. Regional
and subregional organizations have the comparative
advantages of geographic proximity and a deeper
understanding of the root causes of the conflict and the
cultural dimensions of the local community. Therefore,
the Council should engage more with regional
organizations so as to enable them to deal effectively
international peace and security issues.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representatiave of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Although Chapter V, Article 24, of the Charter of the
United Nations clearly vests the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
with the Security Council, the Charter also provides a
role for regional organizations and arrangements in the
maintenance of peace and security in their respective

In conclusion, I wish to confirm Slovakia’s
continuing support for building effective partnerships
between the United Nations and the AU and other
subregional organizations in Africa, and our readiness
to build close coordination and cooperation in that area
of common interest. We stand ready to share our own
experience in that regard.

in

Namibia also joins the other delegations
condemning the horrendous attacks on the

14-6979947/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

regions. Chapter VI, Article 33, paragraph 1, provides
that parties to any dispute endangering international
peace and security
“shall, first of all, seek a solution by negotiation,
enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or
arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own
choice.”
Chapter VIII, Article 52, paragraph 1, stipulates that
nothing in the Charter is to preclude
“the existence of regional arrangements or agencies
for dealing with such matters relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security as
are appropriate for regional action”.
Paragraph 2 of the same Article goes on to invite
Member States entering into such arrangements
or disputes through such regional arrangements or
constituting such agencies to
“make every effort to achieve pacific settlement of
local disputes through such regional arrangements
or by such regional agencies before referring them
to the Security Council.”
Namibia has experience in its own region through the
Southern African Development Community (SADC). In
that regard, we understand implicitly the comparative
advantage that regional organizations can bring to
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
We fully subscribe to the complementarity of the
roles of regional organizations and the United Nations
in containing threats to peace and security. As such,
SADC member States have committed themselves to
strengthening the thematic group of the international
cooperating partners on peace and security by
enhancing capacity for implementation, monitoring,
evaluation. They have also agreed to a mutual defence
pact on military intervention to resolve regional conflict
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
In that connection, in March 1998, the SADC Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation authorized
an intervention to restore democracy and the rule of
law in the Kingdom of Lesotho, after the disputed
parliamentary election results had ruling Lesotho
Congress for Democracy Party winning overwhelming,
79 out of 80 seats, and the opposition party alleged vote
fraud.
In 2009, following a coup in Madagascar, the
African Union suspended the country’s membership.

48/54

16/12/2014

SADC took the lead in mediating a solution and
appointed the former President of Mozambique, His
Excellency Mr. Joaquim Chissano, to try to mediate a
political solution, a process that led to the holding of
free and fair elections in Madagascar. This year, SADC
further resolved several months of political stalemate
in Lesotho. The mediation efforts were led by South
African Deputy President, His Excellency Mr. Cyril
Ramaphosa, on behalf of SADC.
In conclusion, I would like to thank regional
and subregional organizations for their valuable
contribution towards our shared goals of maintaining
international peace and security as set out in the United
Nations Charter.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I would like
to join previous speakers in offering our profound
condolences for those who lost their innocent lives in
the tragic terrorist attack in Peshawar, Pakistan, which
only makes us more resolute to fight terrorism.
I thank the presidency of Chad for convening this
important debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations, in
particular on the United Nations-African Union (AU)
partnership. Both the United Nations Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council have
a legitimate interest and genuine desire to build on the
various peace and security coordination mechanisms
established jointly by the United Nations and the
African Union since 2006. Considerable progress has
resulted from that deep relationship, including joint
consultative mechanisms.
Mutual support and cooperation also need to
respond better to peace and security challenges in Africa
by strengthening the AU capacity in peace operations.
With the devastation afflicting the lives of civilians
today, it is obvious that the issues of accountability
and the protection of civilians and children in armed
conflict also raise paramount concerns.
Ending impunity and promoting justice and
reconciliation remain among the core objectives, and
the United Nations and the AU need to develop a
policy framework on transitional justice, especially on
the issue of impunity and its relationship with peace,
justice, reconciliation and healing.

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Modernizing the police force and enhancing
security-sector reform draw the attention of both
Organizations. A major challenge also lies in jointly
designing hybrid operations, with more comprehensive
and multidimensional approaches.
At the same time, coordination between the United
Nations and the AU is important in order to avoid
duplication or rivalry. We recognize that cooperation
with other emerging peacekeeping operations and
institutions is essential to make existing and new
peace operations succeed. Considerable efforts have
been made to move from ad-hoc cooperation to more
permanent and predictable coordination mechanisms,
and overall success depends on coherent and integrated
relations at all levels.
My delegation proposes that the United Nations
assistance to the AU under the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme ending in 2015 should continue to
cover the following areas: peace and security, capacitybuilding for mediation, democracy and electoral
assistance and support for the AU Peace and Security
Council. That can be achieved through exchanges
on regional political developments and responses,
knowledge-sharing and management, strategic policy
development, lessons learned, the training of experts
and strengthening non-governmental organizations.
Guidance should also encompass the establishment
of sanctions committees, the building of institutional
memory and the strengthening of the work of the AU
Gender Directorate in the areas of peace and security.
Kazakhstan welcomes the AU decision to mark
its fiftieth anniversary in May 2013 with a solemn
declaration by African leaders pledging “to end all wars
in Africa by 2020” and “achieve the goal of a conflictfree Africa”. We also appreciate that 2014-2024 has
been declared as the Madiba Nelson Mandela Decade
of Reconciliation in Africa.
Since poverty and deprivation breed conflict, our
efforts must also be directed at achieving development
that ensures political and socioeconomic stability.
Kazakhstan is therefore carrying out several initiatives
to promote the economic growth of the continent as
part of peacebuilding and recovery processes. Those
initiatives include the Astana EXPO-2017 World
Specialized Exhibition on Future Energy and the Green
Bridge Partnership programme, aimed at transferring
new technologies to developing countries.

S/PV.7343

With the vast potential that lies ahead, Kazakhstan,
which now has observer status with the AU, has
established its Embassy in Addis Ababa and is trying to
better understand and become more involved in African
Union activities, including by deploying Kazakhstan
peacekeepers in Africa. My country is committed to
developing mutual cooperation with the AU and calls for
further fostering the political relationship between the
United Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. Although peacekeeping operations
can achieve a great deal, Kazakhstan will work with
the international community to develop more viable
and lasting political processes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mrs. Gatto (Italy): I wish to thank your country,
Sir, for having convened this very important open
debate.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and would like
to add a few remarks in its national capacity.
I know it is late, but please allow me, first of all, to
say a few words to express Italy’s heartfelt condolences
to Pakistan following the horrible terrorist attack that
struck the country in recent hours.
Italy strongly encourages cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, in
keeping with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. Regional organizations can, at times, be better
positioned to respond to certain problems, emergencies
and crises. We must therefore use such comparative
advantages and support regional organizations that can
assume leadership, as necessary and jointly agreed, so as
to ensure coherence in the response of the international
community and avoid the duplication of efforts.
We therefore welcome and support the efforts of
the African Union to strengthen its capacities in the
prevention of conflicts and in peacekeeping, and its
active role in defining and implementing African
solutions to African problems. We encourage the
strengthening of the African Union-United Nations
partnership, including through the joint planning of
peacekeeping operations, so as to facilitate a smooth
transition to United Nations peace missions. To that end,
we look forward to a harmonization of the standards for
troop- and police-contributing countries.

14-6979949/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Over
the
years,
Italy
has
strongly
supported — politically and financially — the
endeavours of the African Union. We have done so both
bilaterally and within the framework of the European
Union and with full respect for the principles of national
and African ownership. Through the Italian African
Peace Facility, we have allocated approximately
€30 million for a number of initiatives developed by
the African Union. In the security sector, we have
contributed to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), to the development of the African Standby
Force, to bilateral initiatives defined jointly with the
African Union and to efforts to support the Somali
security forces in developing their capacities.
Furthermore, since last February, Italy has held the
command of, and provided the main contingent to, the
European Union Training Mission Somalia and for the
Somali security forces fighting alongside AMISOM,
thus contributing to our shared goal of quelling terrorism
in the country and the region. Italy has also contributed
engineers to the EU Operation in the Central African
Republic in support of the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic, and
subsequently the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.
Politically, Italy has always upheld the role of the
African Union and its structures. We have contributed
to the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
and to the Panel of the Wise, and we are glad to be in
the process of granting new contributions.
We have also encouraged and promoted cooperation
between the African Union and African subregional
organizations. In the Horn of Africa, for instance,
the synergies between the action of the African
Union and that of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, also strongly supported by Italy,
are of the utmost importance for the effort to further
consolidate the stabilization processes in the region,
such as in South Sudan and Somalia.
In the concept note prepared for today’s discussion
(S/2014/879, annex), some specific questions are
posed on how we can overcome the challenges that the
African Union-United Nations partnership still faces.
We trust that the peace operations review recently
launched by the Secretary-General will offer an answer
to those questions. More generally, we hope that the
review will provide some innovative and much-needed

50/54

16/12/2014

food for thought. The reality on the ground has clearly
shown the need to update the United Nations peace and
security architecture. A holistic approach is necessary
in order to take into account all of the various phases of
conflicts. The nature of the attacks against civilians and
Blue Helmets in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic, South Sudan, Darfur and
Mali also demands more robust mandates as well as
more modern equipment and appropriate training. In
consideration of the added value of unmanned aerial
vehicles, we urge the High-level Independent Panel to
Review Peacekeeping Operations to further explore the
use of modern technologies in peace operations, while
keeping in mind the concerns retained by part of the
membership about the matter.
Italy is ready to further engage in initiatives such
as the Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units
in Vicenza, which is led by our Carabinieri. It provides
effective training and skills, mostly to African police
officers. We also intend to heighten collaboration
between the Italian Army’s Military Academy and the
United Nations System Staff College, both in Turin.
During the Italian presidency of the European
Council, working together with Germany and in close
collaboration with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, we hosted a series of seminars, here and in
Europe, on European Union-United Nations cooperation
in crisis management. They were important occasions
to discuss ways to strengthen cooperation by talking
about lessons learned and the way forward. We hope
that the results of that exercise will contribute to the
work of the Panel.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Italy’s
determination to continue its efforts in strengthening
relationships among the United Nations, the African
Union and other regional organizations and especially,
the European Union.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December. I would
also like to commend you for taking the initiative to
organize this open debate on United Nations-African
Union partnership in peace operations. It is indeed a
very important and strategic partnership, which has
evolved over time in response to the challenges facing
Africa in the area of peace and security.

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel Pierre Buyoya for their insightful
briefings.
We cannot find words to adequately convey the
indignation we feel over the horrendous terrorist act
carried out in Pakistan today. We condemn it very
strongly.
The changing global security landscape after the
end of the Cold War and the growing importance of
regional and subregional organizations as critical
players in peace and security have made it all the more
imperative for the United Nations to strengthen its
cooperation with those organizations. Certainly, that
will require greater appreciation of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, we note
the primary role of the United Nations and recognize
the role of regional and subregional organizations as
first responders to crisis situations in their respective
regions. We are pleased to note that the close cooperation
and consultation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) in the promotion and maintenance
of peace and security in Africa has been not only
strengthened but institutionalized in recent years.
Let me take the opportunity to express
my appreciation to the Secretary-General for
demonstrating his firm commitment to enhancing the
strategic partnerships between the United Nations and
the African Union and its regional mechanisms in the
advancement of peace and security in Africa.
In the area of peacekeeping,in particular, the
United Nations and the African Union have established
various cooperation arrangements to address conflict
situations. There is indeed growing recognition that
new and emerging challenges confronting Africa
cannot be addressed through the prism of traditional
peacekeeping doctrine alone. Today, the challenges
confronting our peacekeepers, 70 per cent of whom are
deployed in Africa, include fighting terrorists in Somalia
and Mali, combating negative forces in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, protecting civilians in the face
of institutional collapse in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan and assisting communities to continue
to coexist in harmony in Abyei.
Those are but a few examples that illustrate that
peacekeepers are expected to shoulder responsibilities
well beyond the traditional mandates of peacekeeping
operations. The evolving situation therefore dictates

S/PV.7343

the adoption of innovative and flexible approaches by
the United Nations and the African Union based on
the principles of complementarity and comparative
advantages in the overall context of the United
Nations collective security framework. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the African Union Mission in Somalia, supported by
the United Nations logistical package, the Intervention
Brigade in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the protection force in South Sudan could be cited as
examples in that regard. Building on those and other
experiences is absolutely critical for strengthening
United Nations-AU cooperation at the strategic
and operational levels. We hope that the High-level
Independent Panel to Review Peacekeeping Operations,
which will review peacekeeping in all its aspects, will
reflect upon that issue seriously.
Over the years, the African Union and its various
regional mechanisms have demonstrated their political
commitment and readiness to respond immediately
to crisis situations, if and when they arise. However,
challenges abound, particularly with respect to adequate
financial and logistical support for peace operations. It
is certain that the issue carries serious implications for
African-led peace operations with respect to the full
and effective discharge of their mandates. It is time
to find a lasting solution to that critical issue, which
now enjoys only ad hoc arrangements. It is perhaps
time for the United Nations to scale up support to the
AU by providing comprehensive and multidimensional
support to United Nations peace operations, in line
with its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Finally, while we are pleased with the significant
progress made thus far in the cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU in the area of peacekeeping,
we are nonetheless of the view that much is still needed
in the light of both the complex challenges we all
face and the opportunities available for even greater
cooperation in support of regional and global peace and
security. It requires further enhancing of the strategic
partnership between the two organizations in order to
meet the challenges of today.
Ethiopia has been a major contributor to both
United Nations-led and AU-led peace operations.
Today, close to 12,000 Ethiopian peacekeepers are
deployed in Somalia, Darfur, Abyei and South Sudan
under the United Nations and AU umbrella.

14-6979951/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I wish to conclude my remarks by reaffirming our
full commitment to much more expanded and effective
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU for
regional and international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nyago (Uganda): Uganda appreciates the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad,
presiding over this relevant and important debate, as well
as the statements of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and President Buyoya, who is currently African Union
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel.
Uganda hereby presents its profound condolences
to the people of Pakistan for the barbaric murder of
its school children by the Taliban. In the same vein,
we further extend our condolences to other countries
that have experienced similar killings in the month,
including Nigeria, Australia and Kenya. That event
serves to highlight the relevance of this open debate.
Allow me also to express our sincere appreciation
for the President’s able stewardship of the business of
the Security Council during the month of December.
Uganda expresses its appreciation for the
President’s selection of this relevant topic for discussion
at this open debate. This is indeed a good way to place
Africa — our marginal continent in global political
and economic terms — at the centre of the Security
Council’s agenda, especially as about 70 per cent of the
Council’s work focuses on Africa.
At the cornerstone of Uganda’s foreign policy is the
idea that subregional and regional organizations have
to play the primary role in addressing the concerns of
their particular geopolitical areas, with the Security
Council and the international community performing a
complementary supportive role guided by international
law. With that fruition of that particular thinking being
well exemplified through the conclusion, for example,
of the Burundi peace process and the 1999 Lusaka Peace
Accord, subregional and regional organizations, as a
norm, tend to be well versed on the issues behind local
or regional conflicts — and hence their appropriateness
in getting them resolved.
We are of the view that the Security Council should
normally intervene in resolving local conflicts in a
framework that is supportive of the subregional and
regional efforts I have mentioned.

52/54

16/12/2014

It is with that thinking and spirit that, through initial
African Union sanctioning, Uganda contributed troops
to the effort to bring about peace in Somalia in 2007. It
is critical to add that this took place with the Security
Council’s concurrent sanction for the intervention.
Burundi, Kenya, Djibouti, Ethiopia and Sierra Leone
are the other troop contributors to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), while Uganda, Ghana,
Kenya, Nigeria and Sierra Leone have also contributed
police officers to Somalia.
When Uganda joined the Security Council for
the period for 2009-2010, we joined hands with other
non-permanent members and permanent members
of this critical United Nations organ to ensure that
it accepted to offer logistical support to AMISOM.
Among other things, that included the provision by the
United Nations of hospitals, vehicles, troops, armour
and rations for the Mission’s troops. The symbiotic
AMISOM relationship between the African Union (AU)
and the United Nations requires further consolidation,
for peace in Somalia translates into peace in the region,
the western Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea.
As a way forward, the conditions that cause
conflict — for instance, the burden of being
landlocked — need to be meaningfully addressed by
the Security Council and the global community. On
the infamous Berlin partition of Africa, as a continent
Africa has a disproportionate number of landlocked
countries, many of which — the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Central African Republic, Mali and
South Sudan — are extremely underdeveloped and
conflict-prone. Conflict in such a setting does not occur
by mere bad luck.
During next year’s joint review of AMISOM
there will be a need to factor in the capacity-building
of the forces for peace, in addition to obtaining the
Security Council’s commitment to build Somalia’s
State structures and economy. A similar framework
will also need to be provided for South Sudan, the
Central African Republic and the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The creation of
State structures is important to ensuring that there is
stability and that terrorist groups cannot take refuge in
that kind of setting.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Ben Sliman (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to offer our condolences to

14-69799

16/12/2014

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Pakistan following this morning’s horrendous attack on
a school in Peshawar.
I would like to congratulate Chad on the occasion
of its accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also thank you, Mr. President,
for your initiative to convene this debate, which
provides an opportunity for a constructive exchange
on ways to further strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union in the context of
peacekeeping and international security, characterized
by numerous challenges, the proliferation of crises and
multifaceted threats.
We cannot but welcome the increase in recent years
of the number of Security Council meetings devoted
to the partnership between the African Union and the
United Nations. It clearly reflects measheightened
awareness and a commitment to working jointly to meet
the peace and security challenges facing that Africa
through the building and strengthening of a strong and
innovative partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations.
The experience of judicious cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, led by
the African Union, demonstrates the foresight, wisdom
and pioneering vision of the authors of the Charter of
the United Nations, who decided to include Chapter
VIII, recourse to which is nowadays indispensable to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
This resurgence of Chapter VIII as an instrument to
promote the participation of regional and subregional
organizations in the establishment and building of
peace and security not only strengthens the universal
character of the Charter, but also gives regional
organizations a growing role in the management of
crises and post-conflict stages.
With this in mind, we welcome the leading role
played by the African Union in the implementation of
the African Peace and Security Architecture. Despite
the weakness of its material and financial resources,
Africa has managed to deploy African peacekeeping
missions of peace in the Sudan, Darfur, Somalia, Mali
and the Central African Republic. These missions
have undoubtedly contributed to the improvement and
evolution of African-led peacekeeping operations,
while generating organic and even strategic links
between the African Union and the United Nations,
which are especially important in light of the fact that
the continent is the focus of a majority of the activities
of the United Nations and hence of the Security

S/PV.7343

Council’s work. Today, 50 per cent of peacekeeping
operations, 80 per cent of Blue Helmets and 70 per cent
of the peacekeeping budget are devoted to Africa.
The new cooperation mechanisms that are being
put in place between the United Nations and the African
Union, such as the annual meetings between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council contribute greatly to defining the
guidelines and common approaches for responding to
complex and multifaceted crises, civil wars, rebellions,
terrorism and crime, as well as to the ongoing evolution
of peacekeeping.
This close partnership, based on the comparative
advantages of each organization, strengthens the
resilience of both organizations to new threats and to
the demands of the rapidly changing realities on the
ground. Innovative arrangements — such as the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the transformation of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali into the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, and of the African-led International Support
Mission for the Central African Republic into the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic — illustrates
the flexible approach that now prevails at the United
Nations and the African Union.
In that context, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
initiative for an a overall review of peacekeeping
operations and to include in that review, pursuant to
resolution 2167 (2014), modalities for transitioning
an African mission to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. Similarly, we believe it is appropriate that,
next March, the Secretary-General will submit an
assessment report and recommendations dealing with
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations in peacekeeping operations.
My country, which is involved in a number of
peacekeeping operations in Africa as a troop-contributing
country — the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic, among others — welcomes these
various transitions and adaptations of peacekeeping
operations and their immediate impact on the ground.
Nevertheless, we support further consideration with
regard to the lessons learned from experiences acquired

14-6979953/54

S/PV.7343

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

during the transition of operations from the African
Union to United Nations peacekeeping operations, with
a view to improving the conditions necessary for such
transitions and to avoid delays, which are sometimes
too long, in deploying a new peacekeeping operation. It
is crucial to rapidly deploy contingents, peacekeeping
staff and support staff for reconstruction. It is equally
important to consider the possibility of establishing
a system of standby forces and capacities in order to
rapidly intervene when crises occur. That should be
based on an early-warning system so that the necessary
measures can be taken at the appropriate time.
The experience of recent years has shown that the
United Nations and the African Union are working,
in the framework of their partnership in the area of
peacekeeping, towards establishing a solid, effective and

54/54

16/12/2014

innovative peacekeeping architecture based on lessons
learned from recent years. However, flexible, sustained
and predictable financing for those operations remains a
vital precondition for their success. It is highly desirable
that we see a more sustained international commitment
to financing such operations and to strengthening the
operational capacity of the African Union in the areas
of conflict prevention, crisis management and postconflict stabilization.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the current stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.20 p.m.

14-69799
