United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)
Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8699th meeting

Monday, 13 January 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Schaetzen
Mr. Zhiguo Liu
Mrs. Gómez Polanco
Ms. Mägi
Mr. Benaabou
Ms. Bade
Mr. Soemirat
Mr. Niandou
Mr. Proskuryakov
Ms. Drayton
Mr. Davies
Mr. Baati
Mrs. Cross Smith
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Upholding the United Nations Charter
Letter dated 31 December 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2020/1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-00905 (E)
*2000905*

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was resumed at 3.05 p.m. on Monday,
13 January.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Colombia, Qatar and Senegal to
participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with longer statements are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
election as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council and on assuming the presidency for the month
of January. We believe that Viet Nam will make a
significant positive contribution to the work of the
Council and we have great confidence in your capable
diplomacy. I welcome the presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam
during our debate last Friday.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and
Estonia as they begin their terms as non-permanent
members and to reiterate my warm thanks to Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland
for their significant contributions to international peace
and security over the past two years.
I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to the
Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their
extremely important statements.
The theme chosen for this first open debate of 2020
is very symbolic. Indeed, as we prepare to celebrate
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations, some serious reflection is called for
to take stock of the achievements made and identify
current challenges.
In 1945, at the end of the Second World War,
the United Nations was created with the Charter of
the United Nations as its founding text, which was
conceived as a political contract among nations resting
on three pillars: peace and security, development and
human rights.
2/23

13/01/2020

The essence of the Charter was and continues to
be the maintenance of international peace and security,
which today remains the core objective of United
Nations operations. The Security Council, which bears
the primary responsibility in that area, is dedicated
to serve as the guarantor of peace and security in
the world.
In that context, we welcome the efforts of the
Security Council to promote conflict prevention,
mediation and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
which are fundamental principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. It should also be noted
with satisfaction that the Security Council has, over
the decades, developed an extensive institutional
and legislative framework for tackling emerging
global challenges, such as international terrorism
and transnational organized crime. However, it is
essential that the Council be able to show unity and
take joint action when faced with the gravity of current
global crises.
We also welcome the reforms launched by
Secretary-General António Guterres, which have
strengthened the role of the United Nations as the
leading and authoritative actor in preventing and
resolving conflicts and promoting dialogue and
political solutions to disputes. In reforming the peace
and security architecture, strengthening the principle
of sustainable peace and launching the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, those reforms have made
it possible to adapt the various bodies, strategies,
mechanisms and departments of the United Nations to
tackle today’s realities and challenges, with full respect
for the provisions of the Charter.
Our Charter constitutes the road map of the
Organization. It is therefore crucial to safeguard the
unity of its message and implement its provisions. To
that end, the founding fathers of the United Nations
enshrined in the Charter a separation of the functions,
powers and prerogatives among the bodies of the
Organization and specifically articulated, in Article 12
of the Charter, a distinction between the mandate of
the General Assembly and that of the Security Council,
by clearly stipulating that: “While the Security Council
is exercising in respect of any dispute or situation the
functions assigned to it in the present Charter, the
General Assembly shall not make any recommendation
with regard to that dispute or situation unless the
Security Council so requests.”
20-00905

13/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

Full respect for this separation is therefore a
prerequisite for each body to fulfil its respective
mandate and, ultimately, for the proper functioning of
the Organization and respect for the Charter.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that peace and
security will be strengthened when the Charter of the
United Nations is fully respected and it is therefore
crucial to promote and protect the sacrosanct principles
rooted therein — sovereignty, territorial integrity and
the national unity of States.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the founding of our Organization this year, I wish
to reaffirm the firm commitment of the Kingdom of
Morocco to respect for the Charter and the purposes of
the United Nations. Our Organization remains the ideal
and indispensable venue for the pursuit of collective,
multilateral efforts towards the realization of a world
that enjoys peace, security, sustainable development
and respect for human rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Ms. Šćepanović (Montenegro): At the outset,
I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
organizing this open debate on the theme “Maintenance
of international peace and security: Upholding the
United Nations Charter”. I would also like to thank
both briefers for their valuable contributions.
While we fully align ourselves with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union, I would like
to make some additional remarks in my national capacity.
Today’s world is completely different from that of
75 years ago, when the United Nations was created.
Significant progress has been achieved in eradicating
extreme poverty and upholding human rights, as
well as in fostering peace, security and international
cooperation. However, we live in a rapidly changing
world that faces complex global challenges, such as
climate change, refugee and migration crises, terrorism,
violent extremism and nuclear proliferation.
In addressing these challenges, we must uphold the
Charter of the United Nations as the cornerstone of a
multilateral system that strives to maintain international
peace and security, foster friendly ties among nations
and ensure respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all. We all agree that no country on its
own can handle these ever more demanding challenges

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 2)

of modern society. Cooperation is a prerequisite
for success, while strong commitment to the vision
enshrined in the Charter is imperative.
For more than seven decades, the world has faced
countless peace and security challenges, while recent
developments in the Middle East once again confirm
the importance of dialogue and cooperation. We must
be aware that any form of long-term instability will
make all of us vulnerable. Therefore, it is more crucial
than ever to address the root causes of conflict and
work to prevent them before they escalate.
In so doing, everyone must assume their
responsibilities to make the Organization stronger and
more efficient. To effectively respond to non-traditional
and transnational security challenges, we believe that
the Security Council should undergo necessary reforms
and demonstrate a stronger and renewed commitment
to the tools provided in the Charter.
In the year that marks the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the founding of the United Nations in an atmosphere
of increasingly profound polarization, fragmentation
and instability in international relations, and economic
and geopolitical uncertainty, it is our common
responsibility to reaffirm the true values of United
Nations action and efficient multilateralism as the only
global solution for the global challenges we face. We
must ensure that this global Organization serves as a
framework for dialogue and cooperation, guaranteeing
that all people can enjoy safety, prosperity and dignity.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm my country’s strong
commitment to the approach defined by the founders of
this global Organization, which we accepted in 2006
after restoring our independence and becoming a fullfledged State Member. That is the approach of goodneighbourliness, strongly and resolutely defending
universal values and principles, and being a reliable
partner in efforts to preserve international peace and
security. We believe that every country, regardless of
its size or statistics, can by its own example contribute
to global solutions and take part in them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Djibouti wishes to express its deep gratitude to
the delegations of Viet Nam for having convened this
open debate on an issue of critical importance for the
maintenance of peace and international security.

20-009053/23

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)

Maintenance of international peace and security

13/01/2020

We condemn the terrorist attack of unprecedented
violence that brutally claimed the lives of 89 soldiers in
Niger. The upsurge in terrorism and violent extremism
and the enormous loss of life that they cause is a source
of grave concern for the African continent. We must
equip ourselves with the appropriate tools and develop
a comprehensive approach to stop the perpetrators of
such acts aimed at spreading terror and sowing death.

jurisdiction in recent years, not just to resolve disputes
concerning international boundaries — which have
become increasingly important to address, particularly
as the extension of maritime rights to 200 nautical
miles or beyond can give rise to disputes over access to
ocean-based resources — but also to resolve disputes
concerning such varied but important matters as
transboundary pollution and human rights.

Djibouti reiterates its congratulations to the
incoming members of the Security Council and wishes
them success.

States should be encouraged to make — as Djibouti
has done — declarations under article 36, paragraph
2, of the Statute of the Court, accepting the Court’s
compulsory jurisdiction. Where a State fails to comply
with a judgement of the Court, the Security Council
must not hesitate to act under article 94 of the Charter
to decide upon measures to give the judgement effect.

(spoke in English)
The seventy-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the
Charter of the United Nations provides an opportunity
to assess the effectiveness of the system of international
law and international relations that the Charter put into
place and to consider ways to further strengthen this
vital institution, which has done so much to safeguard
international peace and security and foster economic
and social development.
Reviewing the Charter’s Preamble, as well as its
purposes and principles as set out in Articles 1 and 2,
one cannot help but be struck by how the concerns that
motivated the Charter’s adoption remain salient today,
more than seven decades later. In fact, many of the most
urgent challenges currently facing the international
community can by their very nature only be effectively
addressed through the approach of such collective
action as is reflected at the foundation of the United
Nations system.
As we evaluate the United Nations’ capacity for
meeting those global challenges, one is heartened by
the central role that the United Nations has already
played in advancing the causes of peace, development
and self-determination. Indeed, many of the most
effective means for resolving disputes are explicitly
mentioned in Article 33 of the Charter, which requires
parties to a dispute likely to endanger international
peace and security to seek its solution by, among other
means, negotiation, mediation, arbitration and judicial
settlement. Much of the international infrastructure for
resolving such disputes is already in place.
For example, the Charter’s creation of the
International Court of Justice as the United Nations’
principal judicial organ provides for a permanent court to
resolve legal disputes between States. It is encouraging
to see how frequently States have invoked the Court’s
4/23

When the Charter was adopted, most of the
world’s peoples were subjected to colonial domination,
especially in Africa. That is no longer the case. Much
of the credit rightfully belongs to the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations. The Charter
refers to the determination of the peoples of the United
Nations to “save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind”. It is a matter of deep regret
that the world has often failed to meet that objective.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to adapt the
tools of the United Nations to current realities and
the emerging transnational threats. We also need to
collectively reflect on the decision-making process in
the Security Council. Continued divisions and conflicts
of interpretation of the Charter of the United Nations
have undermined the Council’s ability to respond
effectively and decisively to emerging crises.
Djibouti has joined the two initiatives that have
been developed in response to the use of the veto in
cases of mass atrocities — the France-Mexico initiative
on veto restraint and the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group code of conduct. The United
Nations system offers tools for addressing many of the
world’s vexing problems, but to be effective they must
be utilized, which in turn requires a greater level of
awareness of their availability and the possibilities they
hold. Djibouti urges the United Nations to engage in a
concerted effort to make those mechanisms available
through enhanced training and capacity-building.
Under the rules of the African Union, it is
indisputable that Djibouti should be the sole candidate
of the Group of African States for a seat at the Security
20-00905

13/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

Council for the period 2021-2022, at the elections to be
held in June. If elected, Djibouti will tirelessly continue
to uphold and promote the rules of the United Nations
Charter. Together, let us recommit to strengthening the
rules-based international order. Together, let us open
the new decade from 2020 to 2029 as a decade of the
rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bolivia.
Mr. Cuéllar Suárez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would
like to convey the gratitude of Her Excellency Karen
Longaric Rodríguez, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Bolivia, for the kind invitation extended to her.
Unfortunately, she is unable to participate in this
debate due to a scheduling conflict, but she asked me
to express her congratulations and good wishes on Viet
Nam’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and organization of this debate on such a key
issue for the States Members of the United Nations. We
also welcome the participation of Secretary-General
António Guterres and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of
The Elders.
Today, we are going through a particularly
challenging time for international peace and security.
We live in a time of growing uncertainty and instability
for global security. The existence of armed conflicts
shows that geographic tensions have persisted or
intensified in various parts of the world, as we have
seen over recent weeks.
Unfortunately, that global uncertainty and
instability undermine or threaten to undermine
multilateral dialogue for disarmament. As the concern
over global instability has grown, so too has our concern
for the future and reliability of the global architecture
for arms control. In recent years, we have witnessed the
constant erosion of various disarmament treaties and
agreements and it is evident that there is growing global
concern over their future.
The challenges facing the Security Council in
the fulfilment of its mandate are many and complex.
Nevertheless, we believe that those that jeopardize the
efforts of the Council and the Organization to avoid
the breakdown of international peace and security
are also linked to the inadequate implementation
of the mechanisms stipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations. We are particularly concerned that
authoritarian Governments that do not act in accordance

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 2)

with the basic principles of respect for human rights
and democratic freedoms in their own countries
bring that tension to the international arena, which is
frequently the trigger for confrontations or problems of
global security.
The use of force should never be considered as
an alternative. That is very clear. We believe that all
countries should exhaust all peaceful means of resolving
disputes before employing the use of force as a last
resort. The application of that measure must always be
occur in line with the principles of the United Nations
Charter and exercised within the Security Council in
the framework of respect for multilateralism, which
underpins our Organization.
The effectiveness of our Organization’s efforts
to safeguard and maintain international peace and
security depends specifically on Members’ respect for
and compliance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as the actions
implemented through the Council, which must at all
times promote dialogue and the peaceful settlement of
disputes over the use or threat of use of force. Dialogue
requires a dynamic, inclusive and participatory process
that promotes mutual understanding and cooperation,
with the primary purpose of resolving conflict through
the peaceful means set forth in the Charter.
The International Court of Justice, as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations, plays a leading
role in the peaceful settlement of disputes, as long as
the universal jurisdiction with which the Court was
conceived and the work it has been carrying out since
its creation represent a permanent call for dialogue and
always opt for negotiation and peace rather than force
and aggression.
A comprehensive peace can only be achieved in the
context of adequate living conditions for all, without
exception, which in turn requires that we recognize
our differences and promote dialogue and consensus in
order to pave the way for sustainable development at all
levels of society so as to fully comply with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Bolivia therefore consistently advocates the
peaceful settlement of disputes, good offices, preventive
diplomacy, multilateralism and non-interference with
respect to State sovereignty — so violated of late,
with my country as victim — as well as respect for the
independence and territorial integrity of States, which
are all universal principles that are recognized by the

20-009055/23

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)

Maintenance of international peace and security

international community and effective tools to avoid
the scourge of armed conflict and its consequences.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): We would like to thank the
delegation of Viet Nam for convening this open debate
and giving all interested Member States the chance to
express themselves on what is now already the third
day of the open debate.
Austria aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union (see S/PV.8699(Resumption 1)).
We have come a long way since 1945. While we may
have succeeded in saving humankind from the scourge
of a new world war, we have not saved it from regional
or national wars and we are still far from realizing
fundamental human rights, the dignity and worth of
every human person and the equal rights of men and
women and of nations large and small, as stipulated in
the Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations.
Nevertheless, the United Nations, with the Charter
at its core, has undeniably proven to be indispensable.
Austria strongly believes in multilateralism and that
a rules-based international system with clear and
predictable rules is an essential precondition for
lasting peace and development. As States Members of
the United Nations, it is our responsibility to adhere
to the Charter and the rule of law at the national and
international levels.
Lately, as the United Nations Charter, legally
binding Security Council resolutions and human rights
obligations are being blatantly ignored, one might get
the impression that some countries believe they are
above the law. In order to uphold the principles of the
Charter and the rule of law, it is clear that we must
do more.
We must further strengthen the prevention of
violence and conflict, including in the Council. Early
warning and response capacities need to be enhanced,
as do national expertise in mediation and preventive
diplomacy. Austria is working with partners in the
Economic Community of West African States and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
that regard.
Austria supports all means of peaceful settlement
of disputes referred to in the United Nations Charter
and we call on all Member States to accept, without
6/23

13/01/2020

any reservations, the compulsory jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice, in accordance with
Article 36 of the Charter.
All States must refrain from actions that are in
violation of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter,
prohibiting the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State. We note with concern the increasing number
of cases where armed force is applied unilaterally,
invoking the inherent right of self-defence pursuant
to Article 51 of the Charter. These cases and the fact
that other States Members of the United Nations do not
publicly express their legal views on each and every
case may not be interpreted as a new State practice or
opinio juris that might lead to the erosion of Article
2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, which the International
Law Commission has determined to be a peremptory
norm, or jus cogens.
We emphasize the importance of a collective
response to threats to international peace and security,
which must be guided by the rule of law. In this regard, in
situations where Security Council action could prevent
or stop violence, it is the Council’s responsibility to do
so. Austria urges Security Council members to refrain
from using the veto to curtail Security Council action
where such action could prevent or stop violence or
conflict in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter. Austria supports the code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group as well as the initiative by Mexico and France in
that regard.
Also, when it comes to Security Council sanctions,
fair and clear procedures, including an independent
mechanism for review, are a prerequisite for the
legitimacy of and compliance with sanctions. While
Austria would like to highlight in this regard the vital
function of the Office of the Ombudsperson for the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, we call on the Council to ensure that procedural
human rights guarantees are institutionalized in all
sanctions regimes.
Finally, Austria believes that accountability and the
fight against impunity for violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law are central to
ensuring lasting peace. Austria is a strong supporter of
20-00905

13/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

the International Criminal Court (ICC), and we call on
the Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to
the ICC as well as to ensure cooperation and follow-up
in situations it has already referred to the Court.
In conclusion, I would like to stress once again that
the provisions of the United Nations Charter are legally
binding for all States Members of the United Nations.
They serve not an abstract goal but the protection of the
rights and interests of both States and individuals. The
United Nations Charter is the cornerstone of the rule of
law at the international level. Austria, also in its role as
coordinator of the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law,
will continue to give utmost priority to this subject.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brunei Darussalam.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): I would like
to congratulate Viet Nam on assuming this month’s
presidency of the Council and to thank you, Sir, for
having organized this timely and important debate,
particularly as we commemorate the seventy-fifth
anniversary of this body. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, António Guterres, and the Chair of
The Elders, Mrs. Mary Robinson, for their remarks.
Brunei Darussalam aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Azerbaijan and the
Philippines, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), respectively (see S/PV.8699, Res.1).
The United Nations was born after two world wars
that made it crucial for nations to come together in
forging collective peace and security and preventing
another such global destruction. Seventy-five years
on, the United Nations has no equal. As the world
becomes increasingly interconnected, its mandate has
also evolved, but our lofty goal of sustained peace
remains constant.
The United Nations Charter has been the
cornerstone of the success of the Organization. It has
been a meaningful compass that has seen us through
both significant advancements and difficult times.
The Charter has also been a means of empowerment,
especially for small States such as ours. We firmly
believe that the security and well-being of our country
are ensured in a rules-based international order, with
strict adherence to the principles of the Charter. It
has ensured our equal participation in pursuing the

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 2)

goals of achieving international peace, security and
development, along with the rest of the world.
It bears recalling that we are meeting here, at the
United Nations, where multilateralism and diplomacy
are at the core of our work. And yet we do so against
the backdrop of a backsliding on multilateralism. Thus
today’s debate provides an opportune moment of selfreflection, with a focus on our concerted efforts in
respecting and upholding the United Nations Charter.
As great and as many as our differences may be,
it is evident that the Charter has been an effective
commonality that has contributed to our overall unity.
The effectiveness of the United Nations is
contingent on each and every Member State upholding
the Charter. On its part, Brunei Darussalam reaffirms
the principles and purposes of the Charter that govern
our conduct in the international arena and recognizes
it as a key document to guide the Security Council in
implementing its mandate of maintaining international
peace and security.
We are mindful that much more needs to be done.
We continue to see conflicts all over the globe that
have resulted in the loss of lives as well as distress and
much suffering. We share the concern that security
developments and the escalation of conflicts in many
parts of the world could weaken our resolve to achieve
our common goals.
We continue to look to the leadership of the Security
Council for global collective security and stress the
importance of engaging regional organizations such as
ASEAN. Such partnerships are crucial to addressing
global challenges. Indeed, a big part of ASEAN’s
identity is our shared commitment to upholding the
United Nations Charter and international law, as
enshrined in the ASEAN Charter. On that note, we
are committed to seeing a more robust ASEAN-United
Nations partnership in enhancing ASEAN’s capacity
in preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention as
well as peacekeeping for the maintenance of peace and
stability. These are vital tools that are conducive to an
environment of trust and constructive cooperation and
promote the peaceful settlement of disputes without
resort to the threat or use of force.
For Brunei Darussalam, the United Nations Charter
is not merely an abstract concept. It has moral and legal
significance for big and small countries alike. We look
to the Security Council’s moral and persuasive authority
to further demonstrate the principles and fundamentals

20-009057/23

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)

Maintenance of international peace and security

contained therein for the maintenance of international
peace and security. On our part, we will always strive
to achieve congruence between those principles and
our own conduct in world affairs.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Varli (Turkey): The rules-based international
system is experiencing what is perhaps its gravest
crisis since its emergence after the Second World War.
For some, multilateralism is no longer the best way to
work for global security and prosperity. Consensusbuilding and compromise are viewed not as virtues of
strength but as signs of weakness. Long-standing legal
norms have been eroded. The threat of force is used all
too frequently. As a result, people are losing faith in
international institutions, including the United Nations,
which are viewed as ineffective and weak.
Despite the narrative of some about the failure of
multilateralism, it has produced many success stories
over the past seven decades. It developed a culture and
ethics of peace, as well as institutions, and adopted
rules. These institutions and rules help us resolve
conflicts and enable us to establish norms and platforms
for dealing with global challenges, from climate change
to weapons of mass destruction. That is why we have to
protect multilateralism and defend international rules,
norms, agreements and institutions. That is why we
must take up the multilateral agenda with a renewed
commitment; relaunch the narrative of multilateralism;
and show the added value of international cooperation.
This effort can start with evoking the spirit and letter of
the United Nations Charter.
The United Nations Charter is resilient and remains
visionary, with its articulation of universal values, its
grounding in peace, development, human rights and the
rule of law, and its vision of countries living as good
neighbours and sharing a common fate and future. It
remains our most valuable legacy for future generations.
Yet young people need to better understand the
Charter and the United Nations system. They need to
know what it would be like to live in a world governed
by no rules at all or by a set of rules imposed by the most
powerful among us. The seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations offers us a compelling opportunity
to educate young people about the values of the United
Nations Charter and the achievements of the United
Nations system. We need to teach them that the United
Nations is our unique platform to deal with global
8/23

13/01/2020

challenges, from climate change to weapons of mass
destruction, and that the United Nations system must
be saved.
We must also remember that the Charter confers on
the Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The success of the Council is, in the eyes of many,
indelibly linked to the credibility of the United Nations
as a whole. When the Security Council fails, the United
Nations fails and people lose faith in multilateralism.
When the Council succeeds, it is a victory for the
Charter and the rules-based international system. The
Security Council therefore needs to fulfil its mission
as the primary United Nations organ for maintaining
international peace and security.
Before I conclude, I must use my right of reply
with regard to some statements made last week (see
S/PV.8699). The representative of the Syrian regime
repeated, as usual, delusional references to my country.
Let me underline that the Syrian regime, which is
responsible for massacring and torturing countless
people for more than eight years, lost its legitimacy
long ago. Let me also remind representatives that
millions of Syrians have suffered and continue to
suffer countless crimes at the hands of the regime. The
representative of the Syrian regime is therefore not our
legitimate counterpart.
Also during last week’s meeting, Egypt made
some misleading remarks with reference to the
recent memorandums of understanding (MOUs)
signed by Turkey and Libya. I would like to remind
the delegation of Egypt that the MOUs that Turkey
signed with Libya’s sole legitimate Government not
only are in full compliance with international law and
the relevant resolution 2259 (2015) but also seek to
strengthen peace, security and stability in the eastern
Mediterranean region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic.
Mr. Vongxay (Lao People’s Democratic Republic):
At the outset, let me express my delegation’s sincere
congratulations to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
on its election to the Security Council and on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of January.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Azerbaijan and the
20-00905

13/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

Philippines on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, respectively (see S/PV.8699 Resumption 1 and
S/PV.8699). I am honoured to speak at this important
open debate, which is timely and of great importance
as the international community marks the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations.
Since its inception, the United Nations has made
significant achievements on many fronts, making
substantial contributions to the maintenance and
promotion of international peace and security. The
Security Council has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security by
performing its duties in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
At the same time, Member States agree to accept and
carry out the decisions of the Security Council. All
that demonstrates that the role of the United Nations
remains very relevant after more than seven decades.
The international community now faces everincreasing challenges, which include, among others,
armed conflicts, terrorism, extremism, political unrest,
climate change, natural disasters, widening inequality
and extreme poverty. The current situation poses
serious threats to international peace and security
and sustainable development in various parts of the
world. We are therefore of the view that it is high time
for all countries to reaffirm their strong political will
and commitment to strengthening multilateralism by
upholding the United Nations Charter and international
law, in particular the principles of the sovereign
equality, independence and territorial integrity of
States, non-interference in their internal affairs and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in seeking to address the
current challenges and promote international relations.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic recognizes
that, without peace, development cannot take root and
human rights cannot be upheld. Therefore, supporting
multilateralism, enhancing cooperation at all levels
and creating a conducive environment for peace
and development are of great importance. In that
connection, the United Nations system, especially the
Security Council, should further strengthen its efforts
and central role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, while every Member State should
honour its commitments and fulfil its international
obligations and responsibilities in good faith.

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 2)

Let me conclude by stressing the importance
of making the United Nations more effective, more
responsive and more relevant to all and by calling for
collective political will and a renewed commitment
to upholding the United Nations Charter and
international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Mozambique.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): At the outset,
on behalf of the Government of the Republic of
Mozambique, I would like to congratulate the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the first month of its current
term as a non-permanent member of the Council. We
also welcome the other new non-permanent members of
the Council, namely, Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent
and Grenadines and Tunisia, and wish them success
in their endeavours to represent all of us in this very
important organ of the United Nations.
Allow me to extend greetings from His Excellency
José Pacheco, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Mozambique, who asked me to convey
this message of gratitude to the Deputy Prime Minister
of Viet Nam for the kind invitation to attend this
important and timely gathering marking the seventyfifth anniversary of the signing of the Charter of the
United Nations. Regrettably, previous commitments
related to the recent elections in Mozambique prevented
him from attending this important meeting.
Mozambique wishes to align itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(see S/PV.8699 Resumption 1).
We gather here at a time of great anxiety, when
menacing clouds of conflict and insecurity threaten to
engulf several regions of the world in a never-ending
spiral of instability, as recent events in different parts
of the world attest. As Secretary-General António
Guterres recently stated with his usual frankness “[w]
e are living in dangerous times. ... And this turbulence
is escalating.”
Indeed, as the logic of peace and mutual respect
is being drowned out by the rhetoric of war and
confrontation, the international community and
particularly the Security Council, the central organ
responsible under the Charter for upholding international
peace and security, is called upon to assert its role in

20-009059/23

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)

Maintenance of international peace and security

pursuit of the noble goal of peace and stability across
the globe. In the same vein, it is incumbent on the rest
of the membership to remember the role of the Charter
in guaranteeing international peace and security, as
clearly outlined in its Preamble: “to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war”.
Whatever differences may perhaps exist in
assessing the track record of the United Nations in
upholding the ideals and principles of the Charter, it is
undoubtedly true that, over the past seven decades, the
Organization has developed as an essential platform for
the promotion of global governance, in which States can
debate, shape, articulate and develop international law
and norms in areas such as human rights, international
trade, the sea, space, cyberspace and combating
terrorism and violent extremism.
While the spotlight is invariably and appropriately
shined on the mandate of the Security Council in matters
of international peace and security, the Government of
Mozambique welcomes the increasing attention that the
nexus between security and development is receiving
from national, regional, international and transnational
actors. As the Secretary-General repeatedly stresses,
development and security are inextricably linked.
In that regard, Mozambique welcomes the work
undertaken to enhance conflict prevention, as well
as that of the Peacebuilding Commission to help the
sustainable recovery of nations emerging from conflict.
We call for the allocation of adequate resources to that
body in order to better address the broader demands
of providing sustainable human security, which, by
emphasizing the principles of freedom from want and
freedom from fear, constitutes an integral dimension of
international peace and security.
The Sustainable Development Goals are
intrinsically linked to human security. They can be
achieved only if the right conditions for international
peace and security exist, under which broader political
freedoms and stability, as well as economic prosperity,
thrive and existential challenges to humankind, such as
climate change, can collectively be addressed.
Since the Charter was adopted, we have witnessed
the growing emergence of new forms of threats and
conflicts, such as intra-State conflicts, insecurity,
terrorism and violent extremism. Naturally, those
challenges require the Security Council to reform its
composition and working methods and readjust its
10/23

13/01/2020

approach in the light of the current reality of the world
of the twenty-first century.
In conclusion, I would like to call upon to the
international community to seize the momentum of the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter to rise up to
the ambition of those men and women who more than
seven decades ago in the city of San Francisco achieved
the far-reaching vision that set up the foundations
for this important institution. That vision has indeed
stood the test of time. It has enabled humankind to
avert many catastrophes and continues to give a sense
of purpose to the lofty ideals of a peaceful world, as
encapsulated in the opening preamble of the Charter,
which continues to represent our collective will to seek
multilateral solutions to the multifaceted challenges
that humankind has encountered over the past 75 years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Ms. Frazier (Malta): We thank Viet Nam for
organizing this open debate on the importance of
upholding the Charter of the United Nations to maintain
peace and security, and we wish Viet Nam and the new
elected members of the Security Council a successful
and productive term. I also take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson
for their inspiring and insightful statements.
Malta fully aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Observer of the European Union (see
S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)), and I would like to add a
few remarks in my national capacity.
The Charter of the United Nations, which all
Member States have the obligation to uphold, promotes
the maintenance of international peace and security as
one of its main tenets, conferring this responsibility
upon the Security Council under Article 23. Member
States repeatedly underscore their commitment to
upholding the values and principles enshrined in the
Charter, yet the work of the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole is required now more than
ever before.
Such
debates
have
become
increasingly
important as we recognize the crucial role of the
international multilateral system in managing
an ever-more interconnected world. Geopolitical
tensions, disarmament, migration and climate change,
among others, are challenges that require a common
response. As a State that embraces the principles
20-00905

13/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

and responsibilities of the United Nations Charter,
strengthening the international multilateral system has
been a constant pillar of Malta’s foreign policy since it
joined the Organization in 1964. The Charter provides
a common safety net for inter-State relations in the
pursuit of peace and security.
The prevention and resolution of conflicts,
peace negotiations, peacebuilding, peacekeeping,
humanitarian
responses
and
post-conflict
reconstruction remain at the core of the United
Nations work. Upholding the United Nations Charter
also means that all Member States — in particular
members of the Security Council, which represent
the general membership in their deliberation and
decisions — recognize their responsibility to fulfil the
principles of the Charter.
As we look towards celebrating the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, we are aware that,
in order to ensure that the legacy of the important
Organization lives on, we need to act now. Over the past
years, the international community has time and time
again sought to promote collective action to address
pending issues and seek solutions. There has always
been a tendency to be reactionary, thereby yielding
positive, albeit limited, results.
We cannot shy away from working together.
Global issues require global solutions. We need to
revitalize and refocus our efforts by stressing that
only through multilateral endeavours can we secure
lasting solutions. Effective multilateralism remains
the best way to advance the national, as well as the
collective, interest. To echo what the Secretary-General
said just a few days ago, we need to stop escalation,
exercise maximum restraint, restart dialogue and renew
international cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to
congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month and for holding this
important open debate during a milestone year for the
United Nations — the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
Organization, which embodies the sum of the collective
memory and achievements of humankind of more than
three-quarters of a century and its hope for the future.
I would also to thank the Deputy Prime Minister of
Viet Nam for presiding over this debate earlier last
week, the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres,

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 2)

and the Chair of the Elders, Mrs. Mary Robinson, for
their interventions.
I would also like to congratulate the new
non-permanent members — Tunisia, Estonia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines and the Niger — on starting
their two-year term on the Security Council and wish
them the best of luck.
Lebanon, is proud to have been one of the founding
Members of the United Nations and to have been
represented in San Francisco 75 years ago. Lebanon is
also honoured to be one of a handful of countries that
drafted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. A
country with such a legacy and history does not look at
the United Nations as a mere organization, regardless
of its limitations and shortcomings; it sees it as the
best hope for humankind, especially for small States.
Lebanon sees the United Nations, as all small States do,
as the guarantee of its sovereignty and independence,
and views it as the embodiment of a rules-based system
in which all enjoy equal rights and the principle of
sovereign equality, as Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations promises.
In San Francisco, the then Governor of California,
Earl Warren, addressed the attendees of the United
Nations Conference on International Organization and
said that, “We have learned that understanding of one
another’s problems is the greatest assurance of peace”.
It is this peace and the determination to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war that have guided
the work of Member States over the past seven decades
with successes, as well as failures.
At the United Nations, the world community has
achieved many successes over the past 75 years in
political, economic, and social issues. Human rights
and their protection around the world — no matter how
imperfect — are one of the success stories. With regard
to gender, it should be remembered that only 4 out of
the 850 representatives who signed the Charter were
women. We have come a long way, but we still have a
long way to go.
In conflicts around the world today, people say that
the United Nations did this or failed to do that, but we
all forget that, as my predecessor Ambassador Charles
Malik put it, the United Nations in its activities mirrors
the objective political realities of the world. Let us all
look in the mirror, and we will find the answers to
what ails our world. Some expect the United Nations to
achieve miracles, as if the United Nations had a power

20-0090511/23

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)

Maintenance of international peace and security

13/01/2020

of its own, independent of its components. Conflicts
are mushrooming and becoming resistant to solution.
Nature and the environment have been under attack.
Force, not the rule of law, is the guiding principle
instead of the last resort. Inequality is becoming the
norm, especially in international relations. Member
States are doing this to themselves and to others.

the international community. Prevention should become
our overarching concern — in this building, and around
the world. The international community has been too
preoccupied by crisis overload around the world to be
able to focus on prevention. But we have to remember
that it is easier, cheaper and more humane to prevent
crises than to have to deal with their consequences.

Seventy-five years ago, the world came together
and we committed ourselves to upholding the set
of principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. President Truman, at the conclusion of the San
Francisco Conference, considered the failure to fulfil
our commitment to the principles of the Charter as an
act of betrayal. He warned that,

In conclusion, I would like to join the voices of the
more than one hundred countries that took the floor
during this debate and reaffirmed their commitment
to the Charter and its principles. Lebanon is going
through difficult times, as it has on many occasions in
its history. But like the phoenix behind the President,
which symbolizes rebirth, Lebanon, the phoenix of the
East, will rise again.

“If we seek to use [the Charter] selfishly — for the
advantage of any one nation or any small group of
nations — we shall be equally guilty of that betrayal.”
It is the responsibility of all Member States not to betray
the ideals upon which the United Nations was built. The
more power a country has, the greater its responsibility
to uphold the Charter and its principles.
The Charter entrusts the Security Council with
maintaining international peace and security. There
are a number of conditions that are necessary for the
Council to succeed in its mission.
First, concerning the unity of the Council, when
the Security Council is blocked and prevented from
taking any meaningful decisions, it is not fulfilling
its responsibilities under the Charter. The unity of
the Council is more urgent today than ever, as the
multilateral system is facing many critical tests and
conflicts are multiplying.
Secondly, with regard to leading by example,
Council members are the City on the Hill for the world.
They should let their actions speak louder than their
speeches when it comes to their commitment to the
peaceful resolution of conflicts and world peace.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Hatem (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I offer our sincere condolences to the people
and the Government of the sisterly Sultanate of Oman
on the death of His late Majesty Sultan Qaboos Bin
Said. We pray to the Almighty to envelope him with
mercy and grant the people and the Government of the
Sultanate of Oman patience and solace.
We thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
meeting against the backdrop of tense and accelerating
international circumstances that make it necessary and
important to uphold the Charter of the United Nations
if international peace and security is to be maintained.
We also commend you, Sir, as well as your delegation,
on the skilful steering of the work of the Council this
month. Further, we wish to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of
The Elders, for their valuable briefings (see S/PV.8699).

Thirdly, the Security Council should stop the
practice of double standards and implement its
resolutions, especially those that affect peace and
security and are related to ending occupation, mass
atrocities and human rights.

This year the world celebrates the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, whose Charter
remains the principal reference for States as they
strive to resolve international conflicts and maintain
international peace and security through negotiations,
enquiry, mediation, reconciliation, arbitration and
judicial settlement, or through resorting to regional
agencies and arrangements, or through other
peaceful means.

In Article 1, the Charter makes prevention the
foremost priority in maintaining peace and security. The
Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres, considers the inability
to achieve prevention the most serious shortcoming of

The Kingdom of Bahrain believes in the importance
of implementing the provisions of the Charter and the
resolutions of the United Nations, which assert the
principles of non-interference in the internal affairs

12/23

20-00905

13/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 2)

of States, commitment to good-neighbourliness,
mutual respect, the peaceful settlement of crises, and
cooperation in combating terrorism, extremism and
cross-border terrorism. We also need to strengthen our
collective efforts in order to guard against some States
using conflicts to advance agendas that threaten others’
national and international security.

President, His Excellency Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves
Lourenço, mentioned in September during the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth
session, specifically in the context of international
peace and security, multilateralism is the only way to
resolve the conflicts that plague the different regions of
the world (see A/74/PV.4).

In conclusion, we, the international community,
should support reconciliation efforts that have a bearing
on the promotion of the rule of law. This approach calls
all of us to prioritize the supreme interest of committing
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter. We reiterate that the Kingdom of Bahrain will
continue to engage with international partners and the
United Nations to achieve the foregoing noble goals,
as well as the goals of peacefully settling disputes and
achieving security and stability in all States across
the globe.

The Government of Angola has always supported
the notion that the United Nations Charter is one
of the most important global safeguards against
international crimes. In that regard, the Republic
of Angola respects and applies the principles of
the United Nations Charter and the African Union
Charter, seeking to establish friendly and cooperative
relations with all States and peoples based on the
principles of respect for national sovereignty and
independence; equality among States; the right of
peoples to self-determination and independence; the
peaceful settlement of conflicts; respect for human
rights; the non-interference in the internal affairs of
other States; reciprocity of advantages; the repudiation
and combating of terrorism, drug trafficking, racism,
corruption and trafficking in human beings and organs;
and cooperation with all peoples for peace, justice and
the progress of humankind. However, when we assess
how the challenges that we face around the world have
evolved and how the drivers of conflict have become
more complex, and when we see that the consequences
of instability now have far-reaching consequences and
create new threats on a global scale, it is crucial that
we all contribute to the efforts being made to reform
the United Nations, which span the areas of peace and
security, development and management, in order to
make the Organization and its Member States more
effective in fulfilling the Charter’s vision.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Angola.
Ms. Ferreira (Angola): First of all, I would like
to join my colleagues in congratulating Viet Nam on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of January. We also congratulate the other newly
elected members of the Security Council: Estonia,
Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and the
Niger. We would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his timely briefing (see S/PV.8699)
and exceptional guidance on this important issue.
We align ourselves with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see
S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)).
At the outset, allow me to reiterate my Government’s
concern with the escalating tensions in the Middle East,
including increasingly hostile confrontations, which
have the potential to plunge the region into another
deadly cycle of violence. As we gather in this Chamber
today to discuss the importance of upholding the
Charter of the United Nations, we urge all sides, under
the terms of Chapter VI, to use all available peaceful
means of resolution, and that any military intervention
be approved by the Security Council.
Given that in June we will all celebrate the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations Charter,
we would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
our commitment to upholding its principles. As our

During our tenure in the Security Council, we
underscored the importance of promoting international
peace and security by placing more emphasis on
prevention. It is well known that the international
community spends far more time and resources
responding to crises than in preventing them, and that,
through cooperation at the United Nations, we must
rebalance our approach to achieving and maintaining
international peace and security by finding more
effective ways to help countries avert the outbreak of
crises. Chapter VI of the Charter describes the tools
that are available for the purpose of conflict prevention,
namely, negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement and other peaceful

20-0090513/23

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)

Maintenance of international peace and security

measures and means. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is a direct and commendable product
of such tools and offers an integrated framework to
address the economic and social drivers of conflict and
to build stable societies, including through a focus on
institutions and the rule of law.
In the same vein, Chapter VIII of the Charter
recognizes the value of regional arrangements and
agencies as a first resort to the pacific settlement of
local disputes. Regional perspectives are critical to
understanding the challenges that we face, while regional
capacity-building is crucial for rapid deployment. As part
of the African Union and other regional organizations in
Africa, we believe that regional ownership is essential
for effective solutions to take root. In this regard, we
welcome and fully support the dynamic partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations,
anchored in the two framework agreements on peace
and security and in the alignment of the 2030 Agenda
with Africa’s Agenda 2063 because we firmly believe
that conflict prevention depends crucially on advancing
sustainable and inclusive development. We also believe
that if we are to successfully address the challenge of
immigration, as well as the threats of climate change
and rising inequality, we must continue to build on
these established frameworks.
Given the constraints of time, I will conclude
my statement by reminding all States Members of
the United Nations, in particular the members of the
Security Council, that in order to effectively respond to
non-traditional and transnational security challenges,
such as climate change, terrorism, violent extremism,
nuclear proliferation and cross-border insecurity, the
Security Council has to be reformed in order to be
more flexible in its decision-making process. This has
to happen not only because international peace and
security issues are at a critical juncture, but because
multilateralism is also under threat. Multilateralism
cannot be upheld by one Member State or a group of
States. Therefore, the United Nations, and specifically
the Security Council, must continue to improve its
working relations with other interconnected pillars of
the United Nations system and also increase its focus
on the concept of sustaining peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria): At the outset, allow
me to express my county’s gratitude to Viet Nam,
14/23

13/01/2020

Deputy Prime Minister Pham Binh Minh, and to
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open
debate dedicated to a fundamentally important
topic — upholding the United Nations Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is a
privilege and honour for me to be here today to engage
in this discussion.
My country fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union (see
S/PV.8699).
Seventy-five years ago, the drafters of the Charter
of the United Nations wisely and humbly acknowledged
that global peace and security can be restored and
sustained only by collective efforts. They, who twice in
their lifetimes suffered the devastating effects of war,
managed to choose the path of cooperation, instead of
confrontation, and to set the foundation of a new, more
just and rules-based global order.
The United Nations and its Charter are the
legacy and the promise to future generations that
all peace-loving nations will be equal and have the
right and responsibility to settle their international
disputes by non-violent means. Since then, our world
has faced multiple shifts. Despite the ever-changing
circumstances, the United Nations Charter, particularly
its purposes and principles, has proved its role as a
cornerstone in upholding the international rule of law
and maintaining global peace and security. To keep the
momentum, and for our common benefit, we need to
reconfirm its relevance and validity on the eve of its
seventy-fifth anniversary.
Nowadays, we witness security challenges of an
increasingly complex nature. Just a few days ago, the
Secretary-General stated that geopolitical tensions are
at their highest level since the beginning of the new
millennium. This is particularly relevant for the Middle
East, where utmost restraint and de-escalation are crucial
now to prevent violence from spiralling out of control and
developments that may have detrimental consequences.
Addressing some of the newly arising threats, such as
terrorism, violent extremism, asymmetric and hybrid
attacks, space and cyberwarfare, requires qualitatively
new levels of international cooperation and dialogue,
whose foundations lie at the core of the United Nations
system and its Charter. In addition to our commitment
to the United Nations Charter, Bulgaria has lent its
full support to the Alliance for Multilateralism and
Good Human Rights Stories, two recently launched
20-00905

13/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

initiatives that further contribute to building a stable
and secure world.
Against the backdrop of the current international
tensions, the Republic of Bulgaria shares the deep
concern about the crisis of multilateralism. Many
multilateral agreements and institutions, including
those in the field of non-proliferation and arms control,
which for years have served us well, now suffer from
lack of consensus, stalemate and even violations. We
firmly believe that only through multilateralism will
our nations be able to preserve international security
and stability and build upon the achievements of the
rules-based global system. The moment is critical, and
active engagement and concerted collective efforts are
needed now more than ever.
With a view to strengthening multilateralism,
Bulgaria also stresses the importance of goodneighbourly relations, regional stability and mutual
cooperation and puts special emphasis on finding
and implementing definitive, inclusive and binding
solutions to bilateral disputes in the Western Balkans
and on dedicating additional efforts to reconciliation.
Today’s commitment to respecting and upholding
the United Nations Charter will be our nations’ joint
legacy for succeeding generations. Commemorating the
sixty-fifth anniversary of its membership in the United
Nations, the Republic of Bulgaria joins all those who
continue to advocate global peace, international rule of
law, respect for human rights and mutually benefiting
sustainable development.

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 2)

Established in 1945, the creation of the Organization
was a deliberate attempt to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. The Charter of the United
Nations was the means to do just that. The Charter
gave the Security Council the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and provided the procedures to handle international
disputes and prevent their escalation.
The Charter and organizations of the United Nations
are necessary for mediating relations among States,
protecting common principles and promoting common
values and material well-being. The Charter has been
described as the world’s central operating system — the
motherboard of global governance — which has borne
such ideas as the Millennium Development Goals and,
today, the Sustainable Development Goals, which have
been embraced globally.
At the present time, generations around the world
are living in conditions of poverty and peacelessness,
where human development, dignity and security
remain elusive. Despite the fact that Article 2 of the
United Nations Charter calls on countries to refrain
in their international relations from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, today, there are wars being
waged in total disregard for the Charter of the United
Nations and its principles, and the sovereign rights of
States enshrined in the Charter are wilfully ignored.

Ms. Tesfamariam (Eritrea): My delegation wishes
to congratulate Viet Nam for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January and for
convening today’s timely debate entitled “Maintenance
of international peace and security: upholding the
United Nations Charter”. I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh
Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Viet Nam, and thank the Secretary-General
and Mrs. Robinson for their statements last week (see
S/PV.8699).

Our world has witnessed and continues to witness
massive atrocities, mass destruction and slaughter. We
have failed to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, and the Security Council’s efficacy is
being questioned by suffering people everywhere. The
Security Council has been ineffective and inconsistent
in securing peace in our world. In some instances, its
actions have contributed to untenable situations, thereby
prolonging the suffering of millions in the process.
Many populations around the world are grappling
with intractable conflicts beyond their capacities, and
the Security Council remains impotent, constrained
by geopolitical considerations, double standards and
conflicting interests. And when it does act, the Council’s
actions tend to revolve around managing crises, rather
than ending them.

The United Nations came about primarily to
monitor and maintain international peace and security
after the devastation, destruction and dire humanitarian
conditions caused by the Second World War.

The Security Council’s credibility, integrity and
efficacy have been undermined, there are many factors
contributing to this reality. For brevity’s sake, Eritrea
wishes to highlight three of them.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Eritrea.

20-0090515/23

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The first is the less-than-strict observance of
the principles of the United Nations Charter. Eritrea
reiterates the importance and validity of collective
security by fully adhering to the United Nations
Charter in order to deter war and advance peace. One of
the pillars of the United Nations Charter is for nations
to live by their commitments. Treaty commitments are
sacrosanct. States should not be allowed to cherry-pick,
and the Security Council should also be duty bound to
enforce peace accords.
Secondly, in terms of invoking Chapter VII, this
Chapter should be applied only when the situation
warrants it. However, at times, the Security Council
has acted ultra vires, leading to the imposition of
unjust and illegal sanctions on States. The Council has
broadly construed its powers under Chapter VII and
expanded its jurisdiction from traditional matters of
security to new spheres previously under the purview
of other organs and non-United Nations entities. The
Council has also, over time, assumed quasi-legislative
and quasi-judicial functions, straining conceptions of
propriety and institutional competence. Discordant
Council practice has resulted in a blurring of the lines
between the ordinary powers and functions allotted to
the Council and those extraordinary powers reserved
for situations constituting, at a minimum, threats to
international peace and security, thus giving rise to the
need for transparent rules and procedures for invoking
Chapters VI and VII.
Thirdly, with regard to Council’s agenda, there is
a tendency towards the entrenchment of situations in
which Chapter VII has been invoked. Although the
Council may have explicitly concluded its consideration
of an item and removed it from the list of matters of
which the Council is seized, it has done so with great
infrequency, and, in some instances, matters have
remained on the Council’s agenda for extended periods,
which leads to a lack of clarity in assessing both the
purpose and the end point of Council responses to
threats to peace; it also allows for the routinization
of exception. Clarity and consistency are similarly
essential in resolutions pertaining to mandate evolution
and termination. Otherwise, overriding political
considerations could lead to selective and inappropriate
application of the rules. Adherence to its mandate under
the United Nations Charter will enhance the Council’s
credibility, efficacy, integrity and reputation, as well as
the confidence of Member States in its decisions.
16/23

13/01/2020

In 2020, in addition to the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations, the global community will
mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth
World Conference on Women and the adoption of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. As we
enter the decade of action in pursuit of the Sustainable
Development Goals, African Union’s Agenda 2063 and
the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, a renewed and
concerted effort by us all towards the full achievement
of peace, security and development will be required.
The Council can count on Eritrea’s continued support
to that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Bhandari (Nepal): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of Viet Nam, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month and to extend our
best wishes for a successful tenure. I further thank the
presidency for convening this timely open debate. I also
congratulate the new non-permanent members of the
Council and wish them success in their mandates.
I align my statement with the statement delivered by
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (see S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)).
The Charter of the United Nations is the
embodiment of the aspirations of people to universal
peace, security and prosperity. The principles
enshrined in the Charter, including respect for national
sovereignty, territorial integrity, peaceful settlement
of disputes and non-interference in the internal affairs
of States, constitute the fundamental basis for the
peaceful world we all want to live in. As we approach
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, it
is time to acknowledge the achievements the United
Nations has made in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We also need to commend
it for its role in reducing poverty and promoting
sustainable development.
However, we must concede that the world is not yet
free from poverty, inequality, conflict, climate crisis
and terrorism, among other scourges. This is where
the roots of the problems in our efforts to maintaining
international peace and security lie. No one is spared
those problems as they transcend the boundaries
and borders of societies, nations and regions. In this
context, we believe that, more than ever, the world
needs to reassert its faith in the principles of the United
20-00905

13/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nations Charter and multilateralism. We must reflect
further and work together to address the challenges
facing the world.
I am proud to inform the Council that the
Constitution of Nepal recognizes the United Nations
Charter and its principles as guiding principles of
Nepal’s foreign policy. Since 1958, three years after
joining the United Nations, Nepal has contributed its
peacekeepers to United Nations peace operations in
an effort to maintain international peace and security.
The role of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security has been included in
the school-level curriculum to increase the awareness of
Nepali citizens from a formative age. As the birthplace
of Lord Buddha, Nepal’s culture and world view are
imbued with peace, compassion and harmony.
Nepal believes that while strict observance of the
United Nations Charter is essential, our efforts must also
be focused on enhancing the Charter’s centrality and
indispensability in multilateralism. We also believe that
the United Nations needs continuous reforms to adapt
to evolving challenges. The reform efforts should make
the United Nations more responsive to the development
needs of countries, including, inter alia, least developed
countries, landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States. Failure to adapt to changing
realities may make fulfilling the purposes of the United
Nations an increasingly unrealistic proposition.
In conclusion, there is no alternative to peace, and
we, the people of the United Nations, have no choice but
to build a stronger United Nations to maintain peace
and security where each and every Member State, large
or small, rich or poor, has an equal opportunity to
prosper and grow in harmony.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): I wish
to convey to Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam, His Excellency Mr. Pham
Binh Minh, the regrets of Mr. Amadou Ba, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad, who was
unable to take part in this important debate due to
time constraints.
Allow me also to reiterate my warm congratulations
to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, and to all the new
members, on their accession to this prestigious Council,

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 2)

and to express our appreciation for the relevance of
this debate.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for both his very informative
statement and for his commendable efforts, which have
brought tangible progress in terms of respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, particularly in the context of operations for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of the Republic of
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (see S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)) and by
the African members of the Security Council (see
S/PV.8699).
The complexity of today’s international environment
gives us no choice but to remain faithful to the principles
and purposes underpinning the establishment of the
United Nations, namely, the sovereign equality of
States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
the peaceful settlement of disputes and refraining from
the use or the threat of the use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of a State.
Moreover, these purposes and principles are the recipe
for the peaceful and secure world to which we so much
aspire. Their violation creates conditions conducive
to the emergence of various threats, such as armed
conflicts, aggressive expansionist policies, terrorism
and violent extremism, separatism, intercommunal
conflicts and transnational organized crime. That is
why the ongoing quest for peace and security challenges
all of us and requires from each and every one of us a
high level of awareness of the imperative of respecting
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, the fundamental law of our planet.
However, preserving the Charter requires, above
all, the promotion of multilateralism, the foundation on
which the United Nations was built. We would like to
recall that, acting alone, we cannot meet the challenges
of today’s world. It is fundamentally the weakening of
multilateralism through the proliferation of unilateral
actions that encourages repeated violations of the
Charter and further undermines the gains made, at
the cost of immeasurable efforts and sacrifices, in the
area of peace and security since the end of the Second
World War.
The current situation in the Middle East amply
demonstrates that causal relationship. In that

20-0090517/23

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)

Maintenance of international peace and security

connection, we express our serious concerns about
the escalation of violence and the untold suffering of
the civilian population and we call on the parties to
show greater restraint and to negotiate with a view to
reaching a successful outcome to all the conflicts.
We cannot stress enough that multilateralism also
means respecting others, accepting differences and
recognizing the equality of all peoples, as clearly set
forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
On that subject, when addressing the General
Assembly at its seventy-fourth regular session, His
Excellency Mr. Macky Sall, President of the Republic
of Senegal, said:
“We must firmly reject populist rhetoric, which
manipulates minds, fosters hatred and, ultimately,
trivializes racism, xenophobia and violent
extremism ... That also means that peace is also
diversity, that there can be no superior hub of
civilization that would dictate to others how to be
and act and that all cultures and civilizations are
equal in dignity.” (see A/74/PV.4)
The words of the President of Senegal also reflect
another principle that is dear to the United Nations and
essential to our perpetual quest for peace — the right
of peoples to self-determination. In that spirit, Senegal
renews its call for reconciliation between the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples and for the realization of the right
of the Palestinian people to a viable State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, peacefully coexisting alongside
the State of Israel, each within safe and internationally
recognized borders.
In our view, another equally critical requirement is
to ban the use of interference and force as the preferred
means of settling disputes. The Security Council
should do all it can to prioritize peaceful means for the
settlement of disputes in situations that do not constitute
a threat to international peace and security.
In other words, coercive action is only a means and
not an end in itself. The success of the Organization
therefore depends more on its ability to apply Chapter
VI, on the peaceful settlement of disputes, than on
its ability to apply the more difficult and challenging
Chapter VII. That is why Senegal, as a staunch
advocate of preventive diplomacy, favours striking a
balance between the most essential elements of those
two Chapters.
18/23

13/01/2020

Respecting the Charter of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security also
requires us to recall the basic principles governing peace
operations. The consent of the parties, impartiality
and the non-use of force except in self-defence must
therefore continue to be paramount.
To that end, it is important that all parties involved
in peace operations have a clear understanding of the
practical scope of those principles in order to ensure
their effective application. Such an exercise should
therefore invite them to reflect in depth on the dialectic
underlying peacekeeping since the end of the Cold
War — the proper balance between a robust mandate
and the non-use of force, between conflict prevention
and sovereignty, and between the protection of civilians
and impartiality.
In view of the significant regional dimensions of
most conflicts and the essential role that neighbouring
States must play in any peace process, we also believe it
is appropriate to place the regional organizations at the
heart of peace efforts, in accordance with Article 52(1)
of Chapter VIII of the Charter.
The examples of successful cooperation on conflict
resolution in the West African subregion between the
United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States serve to illustrate
the virtues of that approach, although funding remains
an urgent outstanding issue. Peace has no price but
it does have a cost, and it is important to continue
our efforts to find ways to provide predictable and
sustainable funding for peace missions.
In conclusion, the consideration of the principles
and purposes of the Charter from a peacekeeping
perspective also raises the nagging question of the
reform of the principal organ of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and
security — the Security Council — in order to make
it more legitimate in its composition and more credible
and effective in its action.
I would like to thank the outgoing members of the
Security Council for their valuable contributions to its
efforts to maintain international peace and security, and
to assure the States that have just joined this prestigious
organ of my delegation’s full cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
20-00905

13/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I warmly
congratulate Viet Nam on assuming its seat on the
Security Council and commend it for skilfully presiding
over the Council this month.
We thank the delegation of Viet Nam and its Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs for
convening this timely debate on upholding the Charter of
the United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We thank the Secretary-General
and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of the Elders, for their
briefings on a matter requiring the urgent attention and
engagement of all if we are to preserve the international
rules-based order in the face of the many challenges
ahead and are to strengthen multilateralism in service
of global peace, stability and prosperity.
I also would like to say that we associate ourselves
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (see S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1).
Although unjustly denied full membership in the
United Nations, the State of Palestine has pledged
to respect the Charter and to act in accordance with
its noble purposes and principles. We do so despite
being deprived of one of its most fundamental
principles — that of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples — as the Palestinian people continue to
suffer a prolonged foreign occupation and constant
oppression, dispossession and colonization obstructing
their independence and freedom.
In spite of the profound scope and scale of
that injustice, we are firm in our conviction in the
inevitability of the realization of our right to selfdetermination and equally firm in our conviction that
upholding the Charter is vital for the fulfilment of that
right and of all our inalienable rights for the achievement
of a just and peaceful solution and the establishment of
regional and global peace and security.
We know that we are in good company with the
overwhelming majority of the international community,
who agree that the United Nations and its effective
functioning is critical for preventing conflicts and
peacefully resolving them, safeguarding human rights,
and promoting friendly relations and cooperation
among all States.
Yet, some that are granted the rights and privileges
of a Member State have chosen instead to trample the
Charter and abuse United Nations organs, seeking

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 2)

to benefit only themselves while disrespecting
the Organization at every turn. Disparaging
multilateralism, they even mock the Security Council
and its responsibility for international peace and
security, going so far as to claim that it has no role in
resolving certain conflicts — specifically the IsraeliPalestinian conflict — while flagrantly defying the
Council’s authority and violating its resolutions.
That has been done systematically for decades
without real consequences, undermining the Council’s
role and credibility and the Charter’s purposes
and principles. Such selectivity has been gravely
counterproductive and damaging. Upholding the
Charter must mean defending it in all circumstances
and insisting on compliance, without exception,
and it must also mean that any breach will lead to
consequences. Accountability and respect are two sides
of the same coin.
When the right to self-determination is violated,
when force is unlawfully used to kill and injure
civilians and destroy their homes, when threats of
annexation are routinely declared and boasted of — as
we witness being perpetrated every single day by Israel,
the occupying Power — and when all such actions have
no consequences to hold the perpetrators accountable
for their crimes, the international community has
failed in its obligation to uphold the Charter and can
only bear witness to its continuous degradation. This
is to the detriment of all — both those who believe in
international law and in our shared values and humanity
and those who do not, for the world can only become
less safe, less prosperous and less peaceful for all in the
absence of respect for the law.
Yet we maintain faith in the Charter and in the
centrality of international law when it comes to
addressing the challenges our world is facing and to
establishing the peace, stability and security vital for
us all to develop and thrive. This debate has reinforced
that faith within us, as has the recent decision by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to
open a formal investigation into alleged war crimes in
Palestine following a ruling by the Pre-Trial Chamber,
which is an important step that will allow for the
realization of long-overdue accountability and justice
for the many victims of the war crimes that have been
and continue to be perpetrated by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people, as well as for
deterring future crimes. This accountability is the way
in which impunity must be responded to and stopped.

20-0090519/23

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is how justice — the cornerstone of any peaceful
solution — must be realized. It is how our collective
international legal obligations, including under the
Charter, must be upheld — not just in words but
in deeds.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Quintero Correa (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): I appreciate your initiative, Mr. President, to
organize this open debate at the beginning of a new
decade, in which the global challenges humankind is
facing demand the collective, coordinated and effective
action of the international community. Our discussion
takes on even greater relevance as we celebrate the
75 years of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Organization itself.
I also wish to highlight the discussions that have
taken place since last Thursday on international peace
and security, the primacy of the Charter of the United
Nations, the value of multilateralism and the importance
of a world order that is based on rules and international
law. Such valuable exchanges of ideas reflect, above
all, our shared concern for building an increasingly
safer and more peaceful world, as well as our common
interest in promoting sustainable development and
protecting the environment.
In 1945, we declared our determination to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war; to
reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person and in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations; to
establish conditions under which justice and respect for
the obligations arising from international law can be
maintained; and to promote social progress and better
standards of life in larger freedom. As a founding
member of the United Nations, Colombia once again
reaffirms its unwavering adherence to those purposes
and principles, as well as its infinite respect for
international law and its steadfast belief in the value of
multilateralism. It is forums such as this one, and the
Organization in general, that are, without a doubt, best
suited to effectively address and achieve consensus on
the fundamental issues humankind is facing, which
will enable us to make positive progress in meeting
our collective goals. We must acknowledge that there
have also been failures, which is precisely why it is
important to recognize that the Charter must adapt to
the changing realities of the international system so
20/23

13/01/2020

that we can move forward in the process of Security
Council reform.
At this crucial juncture for humankind, we must
rise to the challenges confronting us. We need an
Organization that is capable of taking strong, effective
and timely decisions. We therefore consider it relevant
to renew our commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter, to international law, to modernizing
multilateral institutions, and to promoting synergies
and complementary processes among global, regional
and subregional organizations. That is an essential
endeavour that will be possible only if we work together.
Accordingly, I wish to express my country’s support
for the Secretary-General and his efforts to strengthen
the Organization, thereby contributing to improve its
response capacity and effectiveness in addressing the
dynamic and evolving threats that humankind is facing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Khalifa (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your friendly country’s membership in the Security
Council and on its presidency of the Council this
month. We welcome the participation of the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Viet
Nam in this meeting and commend Viet Nam’s choice
of theme for this open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General and the Chair
of The Elders for their valuable briefings. We would
also like to take this opportunity to congratulate those
countries that joined the Council as non-permanent
members at the beginning of the year. We look forward
to working with them and the other members of the
Council in the years to come. We also commend the
efforts and contributions of the five countries whose
membership of the Council has just ended.
The founding of the United Nations constituted the
beginning of a promising new era in achieving security,
peace and prosperity for all peoples and in upholding
respect for human rights. Given the growing challenges
to global stability, we are today in need of greater effort
and increased cooperation as we strive to adapt to new
developments. We must overcome current challenges by
renewing our commitment to the purposes, principles
and goals of the United Nations, the cornerstone of
which is the maintenance of international peace and
security. This requires us to translate our political will
into action, including through the implementation of
20-00905

13/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

international treaties and conventions in the economic,
political and social spheres as well as through enhancing
cooperation in conflict resolution and the uprooting of
terrorism and extremism. There is no better solution to
these problems than implementing the provisions of the
United Nations Charter.
We recall that the Charter of the United Nations
was originally developed as a comprehensive solution
designed to address the most daunting challenges
to international peace and security in an era that is
not so remote from ours. The Charter exemplified
humankind’s best wisdom for avoiding, or if necessary,
tackling such challenges. Accordingly, we do not lack
a point of reference for ways to maintain international
peace and security. Nevertheless, we have not succeeded
in the practical implementation of the international
instruments at our disposal, principally the Charter
of the United Nations. Numerous experiences over
the decades have proven that failure to adhere to the
provisions of the Charter is the underlying reason for
the many threats to international peace and security,
the outbreak and escalation of conflicts and the
occurrence of violations to which countless innocent
people have fallen victim. It is in this spirit that various
States Members of the United Nations have stressed the
utmost need to strengthen and adhere to the provisions
of the Charter in order to duly maintain international
peace and security.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations, its Charter
constitutes the most important international document
for establishing a global multilateral system that
guarantees peace, security, stability and prosperity
around the world. This Organization and its Member
States must renew their efforts to ensure the effective
implementation of the letter and the spirit of the Charter
so that its noble purpose of serving the peoples of the
world may be achieved. The State of Qatar seizes the
opportunity presented by this seventy-fifth anniversary
to reaffirm its commitment to the Organization as the
most important and irreplaceable forum for collective
action aimed at achieving peace and security,
development and human rights.
We look forward to working with all Member
States to adopt a declaration in line with General
Assembly resolution 73/299 on the commemoration
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
that will express the collective commitment of Member
States to multilateralism, the United Nations and their

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 2)

shared vision for a common future. We are extremely
proud that Her Excellency Ambassador Alya Ahmed
Bin Saif Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of the
State of Qatar to the United Nations, will be working
together with Her Excellency Ambassador AnnaKarin Eneström, Permanent Representative of Sweden
to the United Nations, on the task of facilitating
intergovernmental negotiations to reach a consensus on
the text of that declaration.
Peace and security cannot be achieved in the absence
of a collective approach at all levels. In that regard, the
ongoing blockade against the State of Qatar, which has
now been in place for two and a half years under fake and
exposed justifications for the international community,
constitutes a flagrant violation of the provisions of the
United Nations Charter and of international law. It also
contributes to undermining regional and international
peace and security. The State of Qatar has consistently
called for resolving the crisis through constructive
dialogue that guarantees State sovereignty within the
framework of respecting the Charter, which places
emphasis on developing friendly relations among
countries and the peaceful settlement of disputes as
the only way to defuse crises and achieve international
peace and security.
In line with the policies of the State of Qatar, which
is renowned for its commitment to international law
and its respect for the Charter of the United Nations, we
renew our support for international multilateral action.
It is our goal to resolve all crises and settle disputes
by peaceful means through dialogue, mediation and
enhancing respect for human rights, in accordance
with the provisions and purposes of the Charter and in
cooperation with all parties that believe in the rule of
law and collective action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Barbados.
Ms. Thompson (Barbados): Barbados congratulates
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. We welcome
the convening of this debate on such an important and
almost prescient choice of topic. We acknowledge the
presence in the Council last week of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam,
His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh (see S/PV.8699).
The raison d’être of the United Nations is to
promote dialogue and development, act as a reminder
of the devastation of war and serve as a restraint on

20-0090521/23

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 2)

Maintenance of international peace and security

its pursuit. The decision to promote global peace some
75 years ago came not from a lack of understanding
of the shame or sting of turning the other cheek, but
from the broader understanding that there is a far
greater cost when war robs thousands of young people
of hope and a future, when citizens lose their limbs and
lives, when the development trajectories of countries
are interrupted and their natural environment, built
landscapes and cultural treasures are decimated, and
when the sights and sounds of ordinary daily life are
replaced by the miasma and horror of the sights and
sounds of war.
Suffering is the bread of all those who experience
war, and none of its horrific, far-reaching consequences
can be diminished by the new technologies of modern
warfare. It is therefore the responsibility of every State
Member of the United Nations to uphold the Charter’s
purposes and principles of and maintain international
peace and security, even in the settlement of disputes.
The United Nations, including the Security Council,
must therefore act as the conscience of humankind.
But the Council cannot properly do so unless it better
reflects the security challenges faced by the family of
humankind, as represented by the membership of the
United Nations itself. In that regard, Barbados calls for
Security Council reform that includes a rotating seat for
small island developing States, among other substantive
changes, and an encompassing of the security concerns
of the entire United Nations membership.
That is the very point that the Prime Minister of
Barbados, Her Excellency Ms. Mia Amor Mottley,
made in her statement during the general debate of
the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, in
which she said:
“As a small nation, [Barbados is] not only
committed to multilateralism[;] we also understand
that it is the one thing that protects our sovereignty
and our ability to navigate in this world. It is our
buffer against the display of might and it is our
shield against tyranny. We continue to view the
United Nations as an important mechanism for
achieving international peace and security and
sustainable development for all countries...” (A/74/
PV.9, p. 36).
Our delegation wishes to thank Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland for their
invaluable contributions to the work of the Council
during their tenure, and to congratulate the new
22/23

13/01/2020

members of Estonia, the Niger, Tunisia, Viet Nam
and, of course, our sister country of the Caribbean
Community, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
Barbados’ foreign policy is anchored in the
principles of non-intervention, non-interference,
respect for sovereignty, human rights and democracy,
and adherence to the rule of law. In that regard, it
parallels the Charter of the United Nations. Barbados
will therefore always advocate multilateral approaches
over unilateral ones, and dialogue and diplomacy over
weapons and war. If we forget the horrors that the
United Nations was birthed to avoid or if we choose to
breach or ignore its Charter, knowing well the possible
consequences, then we are again placing humankind on
a path to relive some of its darkest days, and history
would have taught us nothing.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I have asked for the floor in order to make a
further statement in response to what was said earlier
by the representative of the Turkish regime.
The representative of the Turkish regime claims
that it does not recognize the legitimacy of the Syrian
Government. I can assure him, from the Chamber of
the Council, which is charged with the maintenance of
international peace and security and which is handling
the situation in Syria, that we have never and will never
seek recognition of our legitimacy from a criminal
terrorist regime. We derive our legitimacy from the
Charter of the United Nations; from the name of our
country, the Syrian Arab Republic; and from our seat in
this Chamber. Above all, we derive our legitimacy from
the Syrian people, the blood of whom, I would recall,
was spilled by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s regime when he
sent tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters into
our country.
All who are present in the Chamber are aware,
thanks to the reports of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Security Council,
that tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters came
to Syria from 101 countries around the world. Of course,
those foreign terrorist fighters did not reach Syria by
parachute or spaceship; the majority of them infiltrated
my country via the Turkish-Syrian border under the
supervision of the Turkish regime and its intelligence
services, which facilitated the entry of those foreign
20-00905

13/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

terrorist fighters to Syria. Those are not our words nor
are they baseless.
The representative of the Turkish regime says that
we are not his counterpart. I ask my dear colleague to
believe that we are not looking to be a counterpart to a
regime like his. The Turkish regime is an exceptional
one; it has no equivalent in the entire world thanks to its
irresponsible practices, which undermine international
peace and security.
Today, military forces of the Turkish regime arrived
in Libya. What do Turkey and Libya have in common?
What borders threaten the Turkish security? Why do
we see the presence of forces of the Turkish regime
in Libya? For some time now, the Turkish regime has
been sending to Libya Syrian and foreign mercenaries
who fight alongside the Turkish regime in Idlib. The
Turkish regime occupies parts of north-eastern Syria
through an aggressive military operation, which it has
ironically codenamed Operation Peace Spring. The
Turkish regime is first and foremost a sponsor of Jabhat
Al-Nusra, which is classified as a terrorist entity by
the Security Council. The Turkish regime supervises,
finances and facilitates the operations of that terrorist
organization, which controls Idlib and its environs.

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 2)

I advise my Turkish colleague not to speak about
legitimacy, as the legitimacy of the Turkish regime as
an extremist religious party does not derive from its
people. It comes instead from implementing its own
agendas that do not serve the policies and interests of
Turkey. Turkish interests are derived from what Turkish
officials used to refer to as “zero problems”. Today,
the Turkish regime is responsible for the total lack of
security, peace and stability in the Middle East region.
The President: The representative of Turkey has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Varli (Turkey): I did not intend to take the floor
once again and I am actually very sorry that I have had
to do so. I believe that the statement of representative
of the Syrian regime is lowering the standard in
this Chamber to a very disappointing level. I would
merely like to make that point and note that our prior
statement remains valid. I will not otherwise dignify
the representative of the Syrian regime with a response.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

20-0090523/23
