S/2020/537

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 June 2020
Original: English

United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2476
(2019), by which the Council established the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) beginning on 16 October 2019 for an initial period of 12 months and
requested me to report to the Council on the implementation of the resolution,
including any instances of mandate implementation failures and measures taken in
response to them, every 120 days starting from 16 October 2019. The document
covers significant developments that have occurred since the issuance of my previous
report (S/2020/123) and provides an update on the implementation of the BINUH
mandate and the operationalization of United Nations support for the Government of
Haiti in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic.
2.
BINUH and the 19 United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in Haiti
have further strengthened their partnership and are working as one United Nations,
as advised by the Security Council. BINUH has delivered on its mandate through the
provision of strategic good offices, advisory and advocacy efforts in support of
political stability, inclusive governance processes and viole nce reduction initiatives,
thereby complementing the provision by the United Nations country team of
programmatic and technical support.

II. Political and good governance (benchmark 1)
3.
On 19 March 2020, the first cases of COVID-19 in Haiti were confirmed. The
preceding 18 months had been characterized by turmoil and unsuccessful attempts to
forge a negotiated agreement, stemming from a protracted crisis that had paralysed
the country’s institutions. The Government faced the challenge of developing and
implementing an ambitious reform agenda while attempting to restart a failing
economy in the midst of an evolving pandemic that the country’s health system was
not equipped to handle. Notwithstanding the decrease in sustained violent civil unrest
that had characterized the demonstrations held in 2019 against peyi lòk (a forced
countrywide lockdown), as well as a temporary political truce called for by the
moderate opposition, acute levels of political uncertainty and polarization persist
owing to the absence of a legislature, a lack of clarity regarding the electoral calendar
and uncertainty over the timeline for constitutional and structural reforms. The

20-07512 (E)

180620

*2007512*

S/2020/537

dynamic continues to unfold against a backdrop of increasing gang activity and a
prevailing sense of insecurity.
4.
In February 2020, efforts to reach consensus on a political agreement that would
have paved the way for structural reforms, spearheaded by the President of Haiti,
Jovenel Moïse, before the end of his mandate, fell short of success. From 11 to
14 February, following a number of exploratory meetings, BINUH and the Haitian
Patriotic Initiative Committee facilitated, with support from the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), a new round of negotiations among
representatives of the presidency, signatories of the “Kinam Accord” and the
“Marriott Accord”, the non-aligned opposition parties and civil society, which
resumed where the negotiations held at the Apostolic Nunciature in December 2019
and January 2020 had ended. Discussions came to an impasse on 14 February, when
representatives of the opposition tabled a proposal that contained questions on issues
already addressed in previous rounds of talks. Notwithstanding that setback, informal
consultations among Haitian actors continued, leading to a session in a smaller group
setting among representatives of the presidency, non-aligned opposition parties and
civil society, held on 28 February. However, key political forces associated with both
the ruling coalition and the opposition chose not to attend, and as a result, an
agreement could not be reached.
5.
Following those efforts, and in the absence of a functioning legislature,
Mr. Moïse issued a decree on 2 March appointing a former Minister of the
Environment, Joseph Jouthe, Prime Minister. On 4 March, Mr. Jouthe presented his
Government, composed of 19 ministers, 4 of whom were women, and nine secretaries
of State, two of whom were women, and citing insecurity, social inequalities and a
relaunch of the economy as his priorities. Although the new cabinet was introduced
as representing some degree of political inclusion, a number of opposition
representatives claimed that its composition did not take into account progress in
recent efforts towards dialogue and undermined prospects for its res umption. While
the opposition had announced plans to resume street demonstrations at the onset of
the COVID-19 outbreak, several opposition parties, including factions that had
previously conditioned their participation in political talks on the President’s
immediate departure, declared that they would refrain from any action that could
undermine national cohesion and an effective response to the pandemic.
6.
After a slow start, the number of confirmed cases of COVID -19 began to climb
rapidly in mid-May, reaching 3,072 cases and 50 deaths by 7 June. The Pan American
Health Organization (PAHO) projected that the number could reach 127,000 cases
and 5,000 deaths, with 25,000 hospitalizations. The Government has undertaken an
outreach campaign, informing citizens and key sectors of Haitian society of its efforts
to mitigate the effects of a pandemic, to which Haiti could be particularly vulnerable.
In seven speeches to the nation, the President called for national unity and urged the
population to follow directives issued by the Ministry of Public Health and
Population. He cautioned against the stigmatization of infected persons and promised
to address the crisis efficiently and transparently while also responding to
socioeconomic urgencies. On 6 April, the President announced the formation of a
multisectoral commission to coordinate a national response to the pandemic, headed
by a renowned medical doctor and founder of the leading HIV research and treatment
centre in Haiti, les Centres Gheskio, Jean William Pape – and the Director General of
the Ministry of Public Health and Population, Lauré Adrien. While the formation of
the commission was viewed positively by most Haitians, a number of accusations
against the Government regarding a lack of transparency in the purchase of equipment
and material to respond to the pandemic gained resonance in the national media.
Within the region, Haitian authorities and their counterparts in the Dominican
Republic have strengthened their cooperation in response to the pandemic. Th e
2/16

20-07512

S/2020/537

Ministers for Foreign Affairs have held regular videoconferences, and the two Heads
of State met virtually on 19 May to discuss synergies in their response to COVID -19,
as well as other matters of common interest.
7.
Notwithstanding the additional challenges posed by the pandemic, BINUH,
together with the United Nations country team, continued to assist with national
efforts towards governance reform. Such efforts included planning for a constitutional
review process and for the holding of overdue legislative and local elections, as well
as presidential elections. The Mission relies on virtual platforms to communicate with
Haitian partners, including the presidency, which remains actively engaged in
advancing work that can be accomplished in the current context. Hence, the
Provisional Electoral Council, with United Nations support, is currently exploring
measures that would preserve the integrity of the electoral process and, in the light of
the traditionally low number of female parliamentarians in Haiti ( 4 of 149 in the
fiftieth legislature), is seeking to achieve a quota of 30 per cent for women in elected
posts, as provided in article 17.1 of the Constitution – a commitment that the President
made during an International Women’s Day address. Moreover, wi th support from
UNDP and the International Foundation for Electoral Systems, the Council organized
the fourth session of an eight-module training on electoral administration and
continues to upgrade its electoral information technology infrastructure. In a ddition,
staff received seven months of salary arrears resulting from delays in contract
approvals by the Superior Court of Auditors and Administrative Disputes as part of
government measures to ease the economic impact of the outbreak on civil servants.
However, the Council’s activities have slowed owing to the uncertainty generated by
the absence of an electoral calendar and the ongoing health emergency.
8.
Progress towards a revised voter registry, which will be drawn from citizen
registrations for new biometric identity cards, initially slowed following the
announcement of the state of emergency. Widespread criticism on social media of the
size of crowds gathered in front of the National Identification Office in Port -au-Prince
prompted the adoption of additional crowd control measures, which also improved
social distancing guidelines. As of 22 May, the Office had registered some 2.1 million
citizens out of an estimated 6.8 million Haitians of voting age and distributed
1.1 million new biometric identity cards, which were essential for voter identification
used for elections. However, the Government also extended the validity of old identity
cards indefinitely, reversing an earlier decision to phase them out by 31 March.
9.
Using the good offices and convening power of my Special Representative for
Haiti, BINUH engaged relevant national stakeholders to encourage constructive
relations between the executive branch and the opposition and promote multi stakeholder efforts to address the health emergency. The M ission also disseminated
messages of prevention and tolerance and sought to foster widespread support from
international partners for the Government’s response. Its efforts are closely
coordinated with those of the United Nations system in support of natio nal action in
three distinct but complementary areas, namely, the health response, led by PAHO
and the World Health Organization (WHO); the humanitarian response, coordinated
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; and the socioeconomic
response, led by UNDP. My Deputy Special Representative, also serving as the
Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator, is ensuring an integrated
response that maximizes the comparative advantages of each component of the United
Nations system in Haiti.

20-07512

3/16

S/2020/537

III. Community violence reduction (benchmark 2)
10. Haiti experienced an overall increase in criminality and gang -related activity in
the first months of 2020, even as the protests of 2019, which had increased insecurity,
largely abated. While only 30 protests were recorded in the first quarter of 2020,
violence was particularly evident in the context of police protests over labour issues.
The protests culminated in clashes on 23 February between a group of some 100
mostly off-duty protesting police officers and their sympathizers and members of the
Haitian Armed Forces. Between 1 January and 31 May, the number of reported
intentional homicides increased by 33 per cent, with 616 cases reported (591 of the
victims, including 11 police officers and 19 minors, were male, and 25, including
4 minors, were female). A total of 75 per cent of the cases were recorded in the West
Department, where criminality is traditionally more prevalent owing to gangs vying
for control over the marginalized neighbourhoods of Port-au-Prince. Haiti also
experienced a 200 per cent increase in reported abductions, with 92 cases reported to
the Haitian National Police between 1 January and 31 May (57 were male, including
11 minors, and 35 were female, including 8 minors). Abductions peaked in February,
with 50 reported incidents, prior to decreasing to 25 between March and May. There
were 34 reports of sexual and gender-based violence in the first five months of 2020,
down from 31 in the five preceding months.
11. The need for local gangs to generate alternative sources of revenue following
the end of peyi lòk reignited inter-gang clashes and led to ongoing reorganizations
and shifting alliances. The phenomenon was particularly striking in Port -au-Prince
(West Department) and in the Artibonite Department, with regular spikes of gang related incidents reported in Cité Soleil, Croix-des-Bouquets, Martissant and Village
de Dieu over the first two months of 2020, as gangs tried to expand their respective
areas of control. The renewed focus on mobilizing resources in a post-peyi lòk
scenario may have contributed to the rising incidence of kidnappings in February,
which prompted Canada, France and the United States of America to issue advisories
discouraging travel to Haiti.
12. Amid the public outcry over the increased incidence of abductions, the Haitian
National Police launched large-scale police operations, employing improved
intelligence and targeting strategies to reverse the kidnapping trend. Arrests of gang
members and leaders rose, from 169 in January and February to 232 in March and
April, while abductions have declined significantly since March. Anti -gang
operations continued, even as the police were mobilized to enforce government
measures in the context of the COVID-19 outbreak. Gang violence peaked in the
second half of April, however, with a series of inter-gang clashes and confrontations
with the police in the Port-au-Prince neighbourhoods of Bicentenaire, Grand Ravine,
Martissant and Village de Dieu as gang members began to oppose police deterrence
measures put in place to impede their ability to carry out abductions.
13. The Haitian National Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration is asserted its role increasingly as the national entit y that provides
strategic leadership for the implementation of community violence reduction
interventions. On 4 May, it submitted a national strategy to the Prime Minister for his
endorsement. The document was drafted in consultation with national and
international partners and with technical advice from the United Nations. The
Commission was instrumental in reaching a temporary one -month-long truce among
rival gangs in the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of La Saline and adjacent areas.
Moreover, the Commission is to play a key role in the disbursement of the first
$17 million tranche of a $40 million Inter-American Development Bank project,
which includes a significant cash-for-work component in neighbourhoods under gang
control.
4/16

20-07512

S/2020/537

14. As part of the response to the pandemic, the Commission is working with
relevant government institutions, the United Nations and international partners
involved in the distribution of food and protective equipment in areas under the
influence of gangs to facilitate contacts with local communities, thus allowing such
distribution to proceed unhindered. In addition, it is involved in awareness -raising
efforts, including to address the stigmatization of individuals perceived to be infected,
a phenomenon that has led to attacks on some health facilities preparing to receive
cases.
15. The proliferation of illicit weapons and ammunition continues to exacerbate
insecurity. BINUH and UNDP are working closely with national authorities in the
framework of a Peacebuilding Fund project and in close cooperation with the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America
and the Caribbean to develop arms control legislation consistent with international
standards. In addition, the Mission is working with the U nited Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research to conduct a baseline assessment of the life cycle of weapons
and ammunition in Haiti. Although those initiatives will require that work in situ,
preparations are being conducted remotely.

IV. Justice and the rule of law (benchmark 3)
16. Despite the challenging conditions during the reporting period, progress
continued to be made in the police, justice and corrections sectors. BINUH, along
with relevant United Nations agencies and other actors, advocate d the acceleration of
prisoner and detainee releases as part of efforts to reduce the potential impact of the
pandemic on the overcrowded prison and detention system. At the onset of the crisis,
the Minister of Justice and Public Security mandated the 18 j urisdictional public
prosecutors to reduce the number of detainees through special accelerated hearings.
In two jurisdictions where judgments have been tainted with irregularities, the process
was revised, at the suggestion of BINUH, to include special jud icial hearings on the
basis of collective motions for individuals qualifying for early release, thereby
ensuring the legality of the procedures and reducing the potential for corruption
leading to the release of dangerous criminals.
17. To further advance releases, the United Nations, together with international
partners, assisted in establishing a steering committee on detention, composed of
government and justice officials and the Ombudsperson (the national human rights
institution of Haiti), as well as human rights advocates. On the basis of six eligibility
criteria identified by the committee, the Minister of Justice and Public Security
approved guidelines for the release of detainees in all jurisdictions, including those
in prolonged pretrial detention,(who account for 74 per cent of the overall prison
population and 85 per cent of children in detention, or who qualify for early release
on humanitarian grounds. Through the special hearings and limited implementation
of those criteria, approximately 750 individuals, including 68 women and 22
juveniles, were released from the Haitian carceral system, which held 10, 708
detainees (including 341 women and 126 juveniles) as of 3 June, a 2.9 per cent
reduction in the prison occupancy rate, compared with the figures cited in my
previous report. However, the number of detainees released falls short of the
estimated 5,000 discharges necessary to allow prisons and detention centres in Haiti
to better manage the impact of the pandemic. Public outcry regarding wrongf ul
releases, as well as the risk aversion of many judicial and political actors, has
dampened the impetus to set prisoners free.
18. Before the outbreak of the pandemic, the Directorate of Prison Administration
undertook to improve prison conditions for the carceral population. With the support

20-07512

5/16

S/2020/537

of BINUH and United Nations agencies, including UNDP, the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, the International Organization
for Migration (IOM), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), as well as international partners, the Directorate
developed a contingency plan for the prevention, mitigation and control of the
pandemic, including through the distribution of protective equipment and hygiene kits
and the implementation of gender-sensitive awareness campaigns. However, on
15 May, the national penitentiary, in Port-au-Prince, reported 11 cases of COVID-19
among its inmate population, which illustrated the Directorate’s lack of resou rces to
implement proper confinement measures, as well as to store food and medical
supplies, in anticipation of supply chain disruptions. Without sufficient government
and donor funding, detention conditions, characterized by overcrowding, poor access
to health services and an inability to meet basic needs, render prisons in Haiti
particularly vulnerable to COVID-19 and other diseases.
19. The justice system in Haiti responded to the onset of the pandemic by adjusting
its operations in ways that are likely to strengthen the country’s courts in the future.
As part of its mitigation efforts, the Superior Council of the Judiciary requested that
heads of jurisdictions institute personnel rotations and other protective measures for
justice actors and litigants. The National Network of Haitian Magistrates
subsequently put forward a proposal, developed jointly with BINUH and UNDP, on
the use of videoconference technology to conduct court hearings and other judicial
processes remotely. Such measures will enhance the resilie nce of a court system that
was affected significantly by prevailing insecurity during the peyi lòk period and that
had been hampered by the suspension, since October 2019, of all hearings in the Port au-Prince jurisdiction because the capital’s court of first instance and court of appeal
are located in a zone where frequent clashes between gangs occur. However, the
opening of 11 legal aid offices has been delayed by the pandemic, notwithstanding
continuous engagement between the National Council on Legal Aid and justice
partners.
20. The effective response of the Government to long-standing grievances raised by
officers within the Haitian National Police resulted in improved working conditions.
The response was based on 28 recommendations issued by the Facilitation and
Dialogue Commission of the national police, which was created by its Director
General ad interim on 24 February and advised by BINUH. In March, following a
series of increasingly violent protests led by a small group of officers, the Governmen t
increased officers’ benefits and granted them the right to unionize. The resolution
conflict coincided with the emergence of a marginal, and at times violent, group
composed of radical active and former police officers who continue to make extensive
demands notwithstanding the formal recognition of the first police union, on 21 April.
To date, the implementation of the recommendations of police leadership, as well as
the reintegration of dismissed pro-union leaders, has de-escalated most tensions
within the force. The national police went beyond the new legal and financial
provisions implemented by the Government to improve its internal regulatory
framework. With BINUH support, directives were drafted and approved to create a
dedicated welfare directorate and health coordination service of the national police,
as well as a national police hospital. In addition, a draft law standardizing career
progression within the police force is pending adoption by the Council of Ministers.
21. The sole security force in Haiti continues to face serious financial difficulties
owing to the stagnation of the national budget since 2017. At the end of March,
halfway through the fiscal year, approximately 55 per cent of the Haitian National
Police budget had been allocated. The Prime Minister successfully released 1,967 pay
cheques on 24 April to settle long-standing salary arrears affecting the two most
recent classes of police recruits. However, without a significant increase in funding,
6/16

20-07512

S/2020/537

basic operating needs will be compromised. The recruitment process for new police
officers and prison guards has been suspended owing to a lack of funds to pay for new
hires. Combined with the current attrition rate, which averages roughly 400 officers
annually, and given that only 2,370 cadets joined the ranks of the police between 2017
and 2020, the national police will not meet the target of 4,000 additional officers
(including of 12 per cent for women) included in the strategic development plan for
the national police, 2017–2021, by 2021. As of 4 March, the workforce consists of
15,172 police officers, with just over 10 per cent female representation, corresponding
to a ratio of 1.3 police officers to 1,000 inhabitants, below the international standard
of 2.2.
22. After a year-long vacancy, a new director of the Inspectorate of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary was appointed on 19 March, a seemingly small, but
important, development in oversight and accountability. Concurrently, the rise of
corrupt practices in some specialized police units, illustrated by police inaction during
the violent police protests of February and March, has prompted the General
Inspectorate of the Haitian National Police to set up specialized commissions to
investigate allegations of fraud throughout the country.

V. Human rights (benchmark 4)
23. The human rights situation in Haiti remained of concern during the period under
review as a result of persistent insecurity in gang-related neighbourhoods of Port-auPrince, a further deterioration of economic and social conditions and continual
allegations of human rights violations and abuses. Shortcomings of the Haitian State
continue in the protection of citizens’ rights to life, security and physical integrity
owing to protracted challenges in ensuring effective law enforcement and judicial
accountability.
24. Violations and abuses of human rights continued to be documented, primarily
in the context of inter-gang clashes in some areas of Port-au-Prince. Most notable
were the clashes in mid-April among various gangs in the Martissant neighbourhood,
which resulted in the killing of 8 residents and the injury of 11, while displacing at
least 136 families. In another incident, on 18 April, three civilians were killed during
territorial clashes between gangs in the La Saline neighbourhood. Those events
echoed similar emblematic incidents of the recent past, such as in Lilavois and Grand
Ravine (2017), La Saline (2018) and Bel Air (2019), after which no new concrete
judicial actions were taken in response to the human rights violations and abuses
committed.
25. Overall, in the first half of 2020, as political violence gave way to increased
levels of criminality, the number of verified human rights violations attributable to
gangs outpaced those attributable to the police. Between 1 January and 31 May,
BINUH documented 470 cases of alleged human rights violations and abuses, 93 of
which the Haitian National Police are believed to be responsible for. Overall fatalities
resulting from the documented violations and abuses during that period rose
significantly, compared with the figure for the previous reporting period, with 168
individuals killed and 123 injured. The downward trend in police violations was also
observed during the anti-government protests that paralysed the country during the
peyi lòk period, September to November 2019. Investigations of the protests, which
were finalized during the reporting period, indicated that, of a total of 349 human
rights violations and abuses committed, 258 (34 persons killed and 224 injured) were
perpetrated by gang members and unidentified armed men, while 91 cases (32 persons
killed and 59 injured) were attributable to State agents, including the police. The same

20-07512

7/16

S/2020/537

statistics also reveal that 5 women and 5 children were among the 66 persons killed,
while 21 women and 28 children were among the 283 injured.
26. To further improve accountability for human rights violations, the General
Inspectorate of the Haitian National Police reactivated its thematic round table with
civil society. The initiative was aimed at improving engagement between the police
and the general public, including with regard to human rights, and reinforcing trust
by providing police-related information to the population in a transparent way. With
76 allegations of human rights violations received by the General Inspecto rate, the
current reporting period was marked by an increase in allegations received, compared
with the 52 allegations received during the previous period. In addition, 37
outstanding investigations of human rights violations launched between 2005 and
2019 were closed and forwarded to the General Directorate of the national police. The
Director General ad interim of the national police endorsed eight sanctions against
police officers for human rights violations, and four cases were forwarded to the
justice system.
27. Progress was not made during the reporting period with regard to Government wide strategies to improve compliance with human rights standards. Notwithstanding
BINUH advocacy, the national action plan on human rights, which had been validated
by partners that included representatives of civil society and the national human rights
institution in December 2019, has yet to be endorsed by the Council of Ministers. The
lack of progress delayed an important policy development on the national human
rights agenda that could enhance the coordinating role of the Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Human Rights and support the implementation of the recommendations
of the universal periodic review in 2016 and other international human rights
mechanisms. Furthermore, the new Government of Haiti does not currently include a
ministerial position in charge of human rights or a designated human rights focal point
within the executive branch to oversee human rights issues. Only with strong
institutional leadership will the Inter-Ministerial Committee be empowered to
mobilize relevant ministries to prioritize improving the human rights situation in
Haiti.
28. The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated existing vulnerabilities among the
Haitian population, in particular as they pertain to socioeconomic inequalities and
access to health. BINUH and the United Nations country team have engaged with the
Government to protect the vulnerable by addressing the dynamics of incitement to
violence owing to fear of COVID-19 and by focusing on stigma reduction. As at
31 May, BINUH had verified 27 disturbing incidents involving persons who had
tested positive for, or were suspected of having contracted, the virus. The incidents
included seven cases of attempted lynching, eight cases of death threats and hate
speech, five assaults, five cases of attacks against care centres and two instances of
denial of treatment to an individual suspected of having contracted the virus. Migrants
and deportees are at particular risk of stigmatization and targe ted violence. According
to IOM, Haiti currently receives some 4,000 returnees per week. As more Haitians
return to the country in the coming weeks after losing their jobs in the Dominican
Republic because of the pandemic, the number of such incidents is ex pected to
increase.
29. Efforts to raise the awareness of Haitians of the dangers of the pandemic are
critical to addressing misinformation and discrimination and reducing the impact of
the pandemic throughout the country. The Ministry of Public Health and Population
and other national actors, including national human rights organizations, are running
public information campaigns – with support from the United Nations and
spearheaded by UNICEF – to increase awareness and reduce stigma through the use
of leaflets, op-eds, posters, flyers and messaging with partners and health
communicators. In line with my recent call for action against a possible surge in
8/16

20-07512

S/2020/537

domestic and sexual and gender-based violence in the context of COVID-19
lockdowns, other outreach efforts are aimed at reducing the threat of domestic
violence and preventing sexual exploitation and abuse. Furthermore, in response to
the pandemic, the United Nations, along with relevant national and international
partners, is supporting more targeted responses to specific human rights concerns by
helping to develop a comprehensive multisectoral protection strategy addressing the
most serious protection risks facing affected and vulnerable populations.
30. The United Nations partnership with the Office of the Ombudsperson, which is
demonstrating increased capacity to deliver on its mandate, is producing strong
results. As a member of the committee established by the Ministry of Justice and
Public Security to define eligibility criteria for prisoner releases, t he Office has
mainstreamed human rights concerns to mitigate the impact of the pandemic. It also
played an important mediation role during the above-mentioned dispute regarding the
working conditions of the Haitian National Police and the right of police o fficers to
unionize. That role was in line with the its national strategy, 2019 –2024, and the aim
to support dialogue on conflicts involving public institutions.
31. BINUH continues to provide technical assistance to enhance civil society
contributions to United Nations human rights mechanisms. The Mission and UNFPA
organized a workshop with civil society actors focusing on gender and rights in the
context of International Women’s Day (8 March) to assess the implementation of
recommendations issued by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women in 2016 and the second cycle of the universal periodic review of Haiti,
in 2016. From 19 to 21 February, the Mission participated in a training organized by
Avocats sans frontières Canada on the contributions of national human rights
non-governmental organizations to human rights mechanisms, ahead of the October
2020 session of the Human Rights Committee, at which the implementation of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in Haiti will be assessed.

VI. Unemployment, youth and other vulnerable groups
(benchmark 5)
32. Achieving progress towards developing employment opportunities and reducing
socioeconomic inequalities at a time when Haiti is grappling with the multifaceted
impact of the pandemic and a looming humanitarian crisis is daunting. The economic
outlook for Haiti at the outset of 2020 was already bleak following the difficult year
of 2019, which was marked by a steep depreciation of the currency, an inflation rate
of 20 per cent, a contraction of 1.2 per cent of real gross domestic product and
increases in the fiscal deficit, public debt and domestic arrears. The International
Monetary Fund projects that the country’s real gross domestic product will contract
by 4 per cent in 2020 and that inflation will exceed 20 per cent. To date, international
financial institutions and other partners have pledged $195.2 million in direct support
to Haiti, mainly in the form of project grants and budgetary assistance. Absent
additional financial support, the country will fall further behind in addressing its
development challenges.
33. The economy of Haiti is contending with multiple concurrent shocks, including
expected reduced fiscal revenue, increased expenditures to respond to the crisis, a
decrease in foreign direct investment, exports and remittances. The World Bank
forecasts that remittances from Haitians living abroad will decrease by nearly one
fifth as recession hits the economies of Canada, France and the United States.
Discussions are ongoing among the Government of Haiti, the United Nations system
and bilateral as well as multilateral development partners to conduct a joint
socioeconomic impact assessment through a conflict analysis lens that would inform
20-07512

9/16

S/2020/537

the scope of future support packages to Haiti. The assessment would be aimed at
identifying critical areas for recovery interventions, which would help to lay a
foundation for a greener, more resilient and more equitable recovery, thus addressing
the root causes of instability and vulnerabilities in Haiti. Such an effort would be
guided by the global framework developed by the United Nations Sustainable
Development Group to ensure coherent and effective support by United Nations
country teams for the socioeconomic response to COVID-19 in those countries.
34. The export sector in Haiti, which has been hit especially hard, will struggle as a
result of the global economic downturn. The garment and apparel sector alone, which
represents 90 per cent of the country’s manufacturing exports and which, in February,
accounted for 56,000 jobs, 70 per cent of which were occupied by women, has
suffered extensive supply chain disruptions. Following government directives, some
textile factories reopened at reduced capacity in April to pro duce personal protective
equipment, including for domestic distribution. Given that sector’s importance to the
Haitian economy, the textile industry has been, and will continue to be, a priority for
United Nations support. During the reporting period, with support from UNFPA, the
International Labour Organization and the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, 1,328 women employed in the garment industry gained access to health
services.
35. The President is raising national and international awareness of the negative
socioeconomic impact of the pandemic and the need to recover from the crisis and
prepare for a post-COVID-19 Haiti. On 27 March, he announced that 1.5 million
vulnerable families would be receiving direct cash transfers. He also stressed t he need
to reinforce the agricultural sector in order to increase food production and contribute
to fighting future food shortages. He announced a seed distribution programme and
the installation of 10 solar-powered watering pump systems in some departments. In
that context, the United Nations country team continued to support government
efforts to strengthen the capacities and resilience of local communities, family
farmers and governmental and non-governmental stakeholders, including the private
sector. The United Nations country team also contributes to promoting improved
livelihoods and employment opportunities, in the agriculture sector in particular. The
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, UNDP, the International Fund
for Agricultural Development and the United Nations Environment Programme have
provided technical and financial support, capacity -building, training, awarenessraising, research and data management support to State institutions, farmers and
fishermen, aimed at increasing agricultural production, productivity and the quality
of food. Some of the United Nations assistance includes support for women’s
associations and women farmers for green livelihoods, small-scale farming and
nursery management; financial and technical support for improved farming
techniques; the promotion of agriculture extension and conservation agriculture; the
optimization of small-scale irrigation systems; the use of technological innovation to
improve the use of natural capital through climate-friendly technologies; improved
practices in agroecology and agroforestry; and the development of value chains.
36. The United Nations system in Haiti, with the support of the Peacebui lding Fund,
is preparing to implement a series of socioeconomic interventions aimed at promoting
stability and reducing community and gang violence, with a focus on the most at -risk
young people. The interventions will be aimed at addressing the root cause s of
community and gang violence by supporting participatory local community dialogue
platforms and quick-impact projects aimed at fostering education and dialogue,
creating jobs for young people, enhancing vocational training opportunities and
promoting microcredit schemes through which women in particular would be

10/16

20-07512

S/2020/537

provided with access to low-interest loans and subsidies for rebuilding small
businesses affected by armed gang violence.

VII. Basic social service delivery and resilience (benchmark 6)
37. A multisectoral commission for the management of the pandemic, which was
established by the President on 6 April, has overseen the development of a
multipronged national response plan that covers patient care, communications,
logistics, surveillance, laboratories and research, transparency and information
technology. In full support of those efforts, the United Nations health response in
Haiti, led by PAHO, WHO, UNFPA and UNICEF, is focused on early identification,
isolation of and care for suspected cases and community outreach to limit
transmission. The United Nations system has contributed to strengthening the
country’s surveillance capacity by assisting the Ministry of Public Health and
Population in contracting and training national epidemiologists, fi eld nurses and lab
technicians, as well as scaling up laboratory testing capacity through the provision of
reagents and other equipment, including 9,000 molecular tests for COVID -19. To
ensure the protection of front-line workers providing care, the United Nations has
distributed 34,000 items of personal protective equipment to institutions and trained
1,152 medical and non-medical workers on the use of such equipment, infection
prevention and control and suspected COVID-19 case management. IOM, along with
other United Nations agencies, is supporting the work of Haitian health and migration
authorities at the border with the Dominican Republic, where increasing numbers of
migrants cross daily. Lastly, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Office
for Project Services, UNDP and others are supporting efforts to reinforce the supply
chain, a crucial element of a strong response.
38. As anticipated, the systems that have been built or reinforced to fight cholera
are now, with adaptations, proving to be useful for other health crises, including this
pandemic. The sampling process that ensured the testing of suspected cholera cases
has been recalibrated for COVID-19, and several cholera emergency response teams
have been reoperationalized to address the pandem ic. At the same time, the United
Nations continues to prioritize the fight against cholera, focusing on system
strengthening, surveillance, rapid response, prevention and coordination. More than
15 months have passed since the last confirmed case of choler a was recorded in Haiti,
early February 2019, and no deaths have been reported since then. In the first quarter
of 2020, only 68 suspected cases of cholera have been reported thus far by the
Ministry of Public Health and Population, and all tested negative.
39. In addition to all of the efforts under way to provide a strong response to the
health crisis, a number of critical issues must be addressed urgently, including by
designating, equipping and securing dedicated COVID-19 health structures
throughout the country, further clarifying the institutional division of labour among
national entities and addressing the critical funding gap for the response, in particular
for the immediate period. The United Nations is working proactively with its national
and international partners to overcome such challenges.
40. The pandemic and the containment measures will exacerbate an already acute
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation. The onset of hurricane season, from June
to November, could further compound existing needs. Mo re than 40 per cent of the
population of Haiti requires humanitarian assistance, and the country is one of the 10
most food insecure in the world. Alarming levels of malnutrition were confirmed in
February through a nationwide nutrition survey supported by UNICEF, which
revealed a global acute malnutrition rate of 6 per cent and a severe acute malnutrition
rate of 2.1 per cent. Even before the COVID-19 crisis, the number of persons in need

20-07512

11/16

S/2020/537

in the health sector increased owing to limited functioning of, and access to, health
services.
41. Launched on 2 March, the 2020 update to the 2019–2020 Humanitarian
Response Plan amounts to $253 million and is aimed at reaching 2.1 million of the
4.6 million Haitians deemed the most vulnerable, including 1.3 million pers ons in the
health sector. As of 8 June, it received $29.9 million. Some of the country’s additional
pandemic-related health response requirements, estimated at $105 million, are
reflected in the revised global Humanitarian Response Plan, which was launched on
7 May. The evolution of other critical humanitarian needs for the country will be
reflected in the revised Plan, which will be published later in 2020.
42. Following the temporary suspension of United Nations food and cash
distributions in several departments between 19 March and 2 April, Haitian
authorities, along with United Nations agencies, adjusted food distribution procedures
to minimize the impact of the pandemic on the most vulnerable. One month’s worth
of food rations was distributed at the request of local authorities to more than 30,000
persons in two Artibonite communes (Ennery and Saint-Michel de l’Attalaye) in case
those communities – which were closely associated with some of the initial confirmed
cases of COVID-19 – were placed under quarantine. Because schools were closed as
of 19 March, the World Food Programme distributed the remaining 946 metric tons
of food from its school feeding programmes as take-home rations for the students’
families. The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development also
distributed assistance to more than 30,000 vulnerable households in five departments
to strengthen agricultural livelihoods for the spring season and avoid an increase in
food insecurity in the wake of the pandemic.
43. The pandemic has focused attention on the country’s need to adopt structural
and more sustainable solutions to long-lasting problems and vulnerabilities, including
the exposure of Haiti to natural hazards. Efforts should be pursued towards continuing
to promote sustainable development and build the country’s resilience to future
shocks. A good example is the national social protection and promotion policy, which
is pending adoption by the Council of Ministers and would represent a major step
towards reducing poverty, diminishing inequality, empowering women and men and
reducing dependency on humanitarian assistance.
44. Similarly, long-term structural investments in areas such as disaster risk
reduction and climate change adaptation would increase the country’s r esilience to
shocks and reduce its dependence on humanitarian assistance and short-term crisis
response. Support for the Directorate for Civil Protection, which strengthens the
coordination capacities of emergency operations centres at the national and
departmental levels, has been refocused on the response to the pandemic and
preparing for the upcoming hurricane season. In addition, the United Nations is
supporting efforts to establish new protected areas, restore ecosystems and promote
erosion control, natural resources management and waste management planning as
part of disaster risk reduction.

VIII. Operational posture and integration
45. Since the confirmation, on 19 March, of the first two cases of COVID -19 in
Haiti, the United Nations system has supported national efforts to address the
pandemic and mitigate its socioeconomic impact while continuing to advance
Security Council-mandated tasks. Measures to reduce the Mission’s risk profile by
implementing telecommuting arrangements were put in place. Similar steps were also
taken by the United Nations country team to ensure the delivery of critical, in
particular life-saving, activities while limiting risks to staff and preventing the spread
12/16

20-07512

S/2020/537

of COVID-19. Efforts to identify locations for the potential medical evacuation of
staff in cases of COVID-19 infections have succeeded. A regional COVID-19 air
ambulance is now required to have medical evacuation plans fully in place.
46. The integrated strategic framework of the One United Nations initiative,
endorsed by United Nations principals on 19 February, represents a unified vision for
the United Nations system in Haiti, articulated around six benchmarks. The plan,
which guides the collective efforts of the organization in 2020 and 2021, is intended
to focus its advisory and programmatic resources on cross-dimensional structural
obstacles to the achievement of longer-term stability and the Sustainable
Development Goals. While the impact of the pandemic is likely to require adjustments
to the plan COVID-19 only reinforces the urgency to proceed with joint action in the
areas identified in the One United Nations initiative, anchoring the immediate support
in the longer-term objectives of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
addressing structural development deficits and vulnerabilities to help Haiti to better
recover.
47. Having concluded its start-up phase, BINUH is finalizing the procurement
process for the premises of its new headquarters in anticipation of relocating once the
pandemic has been contained. The Mission continues to pursue efficiencies actively
by reviewing service contracts with the objective of reducing costs. On 14 February,
BINUH officially transferred the fuel farm of the former United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti to the Government, which has enabled significant expansion
of the country’s fuel storage capacity. In addition, although some logistics and supply
challenges remain, the Haitian National Police headquarters and central directorates
were relocated to sections of the logistics base vacated by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti, while BINUH continues environmental clearing work. Furthermore, the
rehabilitation of BINUH police and corrections co-location sites is nearly complete,
and all sites will be made fully operational, once conditions permit, to support senior
management of the national police effectively with daily activities and strategic
planning.

IX. Sexual exploitation and abuse
48. The zero-tolerance policy of the Secretary-General on sexual exploitation and
abuse remains a priority for the United Nations in Haiti, where no new cases have
been confirmed since the closure of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Supported by the Office of the Victims’ Rights Advocate at United Nations
Headquarters, the senior victims’ rights officer of BINUH is implementing a system wide, multi-country strategy to support victims in pursuing paternity and child
support claims in the jurisdictions where such claims can be made. As part of the
BINUH advocacy strategy, radio broadcasts were made to inform the general public
of the policy of the Secretary-General, in particular on victims’ rights. BINUH also
set up a grievance mechanism and continued to make referrals with the support of the
Office of the Ombudsperson. Educational, financial and food support continue to be
provided to children born as a result of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeeping personnel formerly deployed to Haiti. Several countries have
coordinated with Haitian authorities to interview victims of sexual exploitation and
abuse as part of processes to address impunity for such wrongs. Online training
modules on the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse have been made available
to United Nations entities and implementing partners as part of the response to the
pandemic.

20-07512

13/16

S/2020/537

X. Observations
49. A strong response to the COVID-19 pandemic in Haiti, a country whose longstanding fragility has been exacerbated by 18 months of a protracted political,
economic, social and institutional crisis, is necessary to prevent an erosion of national
stability and mitigate risks to security and development outcomes. A further
aggravation of the humanitarian and socioeconomic situation in Haiti could lead to
significant human suffering and large population outflows, with a significant impact
on the region.
50. The public health and socioeconomic dimensions of the pandemic in Haiti have
to be addressed urgently. While the Government of Haiti was prompt in adopting a
significant number of strong measures to contain the spread of the virus, efforts must
continue to further clarify and strengthen the coordination arrangements of the
response; encourage all sectors of society to remain mobilized in a coherent, effective,
multipronged and gender-sensitive response; and ensure transparency in the use of
funds for both the health and socioeconomic responses. National authorities have to
quickly take critical decisions, including clarifying which health structures will be at
the forefront of patient care, strengthening measures at the border with the Dominican
Republic and containing the outbreak in prisons and detention centres. Furthermore,
communication efforts have to be stepped up not only to ensure that prevention
measures are fully understood and adhered to but also to counter the worrisome rise
in stigmatization and discrimination.
51. Haiti cannot face the pandemic alone, however. It requires unflag ging support
from its humanitarian and development partners. The United Nations system in Haiti
has adapted its activities and resource mobilization strategy to target its immediate
support to the national response to the pandemic and contribute to social protection
and priorities of early economic recovery. As a number of partners have already
announced the allocation or repurposing of funding to the crisis, I call upon the
international community, including, first and foremost, regional partners, to incre ase
financial, technical and political support for Haiti during these challenging times.
52. It is critical that immediate and targeted interventions to contain and address the
pandemic not detract from the country’s longer-term objectives and persistent
structural challenges. We have to ensure that the crisis is leveraged as an opportunity
to recover better together. The 2030 Agenda continues to provide a long -term vision
and multidimensional framework to guide immediate response actions and longer term investments for a greener and inclusive recovery. I call upon the United Nations
country team and all partners to take all possible measures to scale up support for
Haiti and ensure that health and socioeconomic activities are prioritized under the
response to the far-reaching impacts of COVID-19 and contribute to such longer-term
objectives. The pattern of “short-termism” that has often marked crisis response
efforts in Haiti must be broken.
53. The Haitian National Police passed another important test by d emonstrating
increased professionalism and restraint in enforcing public order, including during a
series of effective anti-gang operations, while taking on the additional burden of
enforcing the implementation of restrictive Government measures to contain the
spread of COVID-19. They have also addressed labour issues within their ranks and
improved their regulatory framework while continuing to make progress in following
up on human rights complaints and ensuring compliance with human rights standards.
Notwithstanding those achievements, the longer-term issue of adequately resourcing
the police remains unsolved. The issue continues to put the lives of police officers at
risk and threatens to jeopardize the sustainability of the progress made in the
professionalization and effectiveness of the police force.

14/16

20-07512

S/2020/537

54. A resurgence in gang activity in the midst of the pandemic is compounding the
plight of the most vulnerable and exacerbating an already volatile situation. Such
activity represents a serious concern and reconfirms the need for holistic, integrated
and sustained efforts to address the scourge of the gang phenomenon and improve
access to basic services in areas under the influence of gang violence. I welcome the
finalization of the multipronged national strategy on disarmament, dismantlement,
reintegration and community violence reduction under the aegis of the Haitian
National Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration. I also
encourage all relevant actors to back it with full political support and relevant
institutions to fully cooperate on its implementation.
55. It is disappointing that the number of individuals released from Haitian prisons
in the context of COVID-19 mitigation measures remains paltry, although cases have
been confirmed among the inmate population. While important steps have been taken
in the right direction, the situation in the Haitian prison system remains alarming
owing to overcrowding and a lack of food, medication and services for detainees. The
situation is illustrative of the major deficiencies that continue to plague the Haitian
justice system. With 74 per cent of incarcerated persons awaiting trial, and an obsolete
criminal code, the length and convoluted nature of judicial proceedings continue to
impede access to justice while compromising the right to due process, most notably
in terms of the legality of pretrial detention. The United Nations system in Haiti will
continue to support the Government of that country as it exerts political will and
leadership in ensuring the sustained and adequate provision of life-sustaining services
and supplies to prisons, as well as swift progress towards judicial reforms to address
long-term issues with the country’s incarceration trends.
56. The fragility of the rule of law in Haiti continues to translate into failures of the
Haitian State to meet its obligation to protect the rights of its citizens to security, life
and physical integrity. It also undermines efforts to combat impunity, denying justice
and reparation to victims and creating an enabling environment for further violence.
Recent events in the Village de Dieu area of Port-au-Prince echo a series of prior
incidents, such as the La Saline, Grand Ravine and Bel Air killings, whose
perpetrators continue to elude justice. The execution of pending arrest warrants,
speedy progress in judicial proceedings and the swift implementation of the national
action plan on human rights remain critical to guarantee the effective protection of
those rights and restore citizens’ trust in State institutions.
57. The failure of efforts towards dialogue to reach a political agreement in
February was another missed opportunity for dialogue and agreement on the long term constitutional, institutional and structural reforms required to suppo rt stability
and State effectiveness, including in terms of providing the economic opportunities,
basic services and protection that Haitian citizens deserve. However, another
opportunity is surfacing in the context of the response to the pandemic, and it should
not be wasted. Political, private sector and civil society actors have overcome their
differences, shown solidarity and thus directly contributed to the response to the
pandemic by providing financial support, organizing aid deliveries and launching
public awareness activities. I am encouraged by this much -needed display of national
cohesion, which responds to the need for national unity and the longstanding
expectations of the Haitian population towards its leaders after months of bitter
political divisions. I call with renewed urgency upon all political actors to take
advantage of the opportunities for cooperation arising from the crisis to build trust
and work together to address, in the longer run, the root causes of political and
institutional instability in Haiti.
58. In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my Special
Representative for Haiti, Helen Meagher La Lime, and my Special Envoy for Haiti,
Josette Sheeran, for their leadership and commitment. I am also grateful to my deputy
20-07512

15/16

S/2020/537

Special Representative, Humanitarian Coordinator and Resident Coordinator, Bruno
Lemarquis, all members of the United Nations country team and United Nations
personnel for their tireless work, dedication and remarkable adaptability to the
difficult working conditions on the ground and operational limitations posed by the
pandemic. The United Nations system stands ready to assist Haitian stakeholders and
institutions by promoting society-wide collaboration to face the threat of COVID-19
and preparing the ground for the implementation of a consensual reform agenda,
along with an electoral process in line with constitutional norms. I reiterate the
commitment of the United Nations to accompanying Haiti through these difficult
times and contributing to its long-term stabilization and prosperity.

16/16

20-07512
