UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THI.9TY-SIXTH

YEAR

2297’”

MEETING:

.i
2

29 AUGUST

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/22971 . . . ..*................I......*...,,..,

1

Adoption of the agenda O.................................,..,,.~.,.,,,.

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 August 1981 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/14647) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*........

1

SIPV .2297

i
NOTE

ci
Jar

TUI
Un
Ire.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published in
quarterly &rpp/~~~tcrrt.sof the OjjX~rl Records qf /he Se~,i(v C’owrcil. The date
of the documentindicatesthe supplement
in whichit appears
or in whichinformationaboutit is given.
The resolutions
of the Security Council,ntuzberedin accordancewith a
systemadoptedin 1964,are publishedin yearly volumesof Resolutions md
Dccisiorrsof me Scwrrity Coancil.The new system,which hasbeenapplied
retroactivelyto resolutions
adoptedbeforeI January1965,became
fully operative
on that date.

225
to
tat)

tak
co

2.
IS

co
tat
KC
Yu

2297th MEETING
Held in New Yrrk on Saturday, 29 August 1981, at 10.30a.m.
Preside

tt: Mr. Jorge E. ILLUECA (Panama).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
!reland. United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2297)

I. Adoptionof theagenda
2. Complaintby AngolaagainstSouthAfrica:
Letter dated26 Aueust 1981from the Char&
d’affairesa-i. of the PermanentMissionof
Angolato t;.- UnitedNationsaddressed
to
the Secretary-General
(S/14647)
The meethtg

was called

to order

at 12.05 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

participatein thediscussion
of the itemon theagenda.
In accordance
with our usualpractice,1propose,with
the consentof the Council,to invite thoserepresentatives to participatein the discussion,without the
right to vote, in accordancewith the provisionsof
rule37of the provisiotlalrulesof procedure.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. van Well
(Federal
Repablic of Germany),
Mr. Krishnan
(India),
Mr. Maina (Kenya),
Mr. Banvin (Libyan Arab Jamahirlya),
Mr. Steward
ISoath Ajiiica),
and Mr. LazareGf (Yugoslavia)
took the places reserved for them
at the side of the Coaracil chamber.

3. The PRESIDENTlinterpretatfon
.from Spanish):
I shouldlike to drawthe attentionof ihe members
of
the SecurityCouncilto the tollowingnewdocuments
in connectionwith this item: S/14655,letter dated
28August 1981,addressed
to the Presidentof the
Councilby the representative
of Egypt, andS/14658,
letter dated28 August, addressed
to the SecretaryGeneralby the representative
of the Unionof Soviet
Socialist~Republics.

was adopted.

4. Mr. MUNOZ LED0 (Mexico) (interpretation
Spa&h):
Allow me, Sir, to congratulateyou
onceagainon your assumption
of the presidencyof
theSecurityCouncil.It givesusallgreatconfidence
to
knowthat our work isbeingconductedby aneminent
Latin Americandiplomat,Mr. JorgeEnriqueIllueca.
May 1 alsoexpressthe respectof Mexico for the
dignifiedand independent
foreignpolicy of the GovI. The PRESIDENT(interpretation
from Spanish):
In accordance with decisions taken at the ernmentof Panama,which shareswith us similar
22%thmeeting,1 invite the representative
of Angola problems
andhopes.
to takea placeat theCounciltableandthe represenof my
tativesof Brazil, Cuba,Viet NamandZimbabweto 5. Let me,aswell, reiteratethe appreciation
take the placesreservedfor themat the sideof the delegation
for theintelligentandskilfulperformance
of
Mr. Id6 Oumarou,of Niger, as Presidentof the
Councilchamber.
Councilduringthe monthof July.
Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter sated 26 August 1981 from the Charg6 d’affakes a.1. of the Permanent Mission of Angola to
the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/14647)

At the invitation
qf the Prrsidwrt,
Mr. de Figwiredo
(AmwlaJ took a nlaw at the Council tab/c: Mr. Uaerro
iBr&l),’
Mr. Roa Korrri (Cuba),
hlr. Ha Vati Lart
(Viet Nom) tmd Mr. Mashbwaidx
(Zimbabwr~
took
he places ;.eserwd for them ot the side of the &rmcil
chamber.

The PRESIDENTfi/r/c,rprc’ttrrio,r
from Stwi.sh):
I shouldlike to inform membersif the Security
Councilthat 1havercccivctl leltersfromtherepresentatives of the FederalRepublicof Germany.India.
Kenya,the LibyanArabJ;tn~ahiriya.
SouthAfrica and
Yugoslavia.in which the\, rcqueT1to bc invited to

2.

from

6. We aregatheredheretoday becauseof a serious
event: the South African regimehas once again
committedan act of aggression
againstthe territorial
integrity and sovereigntyof a neighbouringState,
whichcallsfor anenergeticcondemnation
andimmediatcactionby the Council.
7. Yesterdaywe heardthe dramaticdescriptionof
theonslaughts
of whichAngolahasbeena victim and
which constituteflagrant violationsof international
law.Thoseactsdid not takeplaceby chancenorwere
they gratuitous.They are tactical expressions
of a

racist policy which the international community has
condemned, but which it has been unable to halt.
Indeed, that policy has even been encouraged by our
own omissions,

the problemand be caoableof reversingthe successionof acts of tolerance and complicity behind which
South Africa takescover.
15. As canbe inferred from the consultations held
among Council members and the energetic tone in

8, The impunity of South Africa is in large measure
the result of our ambiguous conduct. We have not
reacted with sufficient decisiveness when faced with
an obvious fact. The South African regime is a
concentrated expression of colonialist hegemony
which the Charter of the United Nations intended to
banish,

which delegationshave publicly expressedthemselves,the Councilshouldbe preparedto take a firm
stepto containthe aggression.
16. Out of respectfor ourselves,the decisionwhich
we shalltake shouldbe consistentwith the oneswe
have previously adoptedand, in particular, with
resolution475(1980).which,asthe Presidentof the
Councilsorightly said,is still in force.

9. Every country in the developing world, through
the South African acts of aggression, once again
exneriences the offences, ill-treatment and interventidns which its people suffered or are still suffering.
Therefore, because of that similarity, this is a question
of principle and perhaps, like no other case, will define
the international attitude of States.

W
CC
W
u
et

at
PI
C

17. Besides
the paragraphs
of that resolutionwhich
werereadout yesterday,I think weshouldalsorecall
paragraph
7 onthe basisof whichwe de_cided
to meet
--“in the event of further acts of violationof the
sovereigntyandterritorialintegrityof the People’s
Republicof Angola by the South African racist
regime,in order to considerthe adoptionof more
effective measures
in accordancewith the appropriate provisionsof the Charter of the United,
Nations,includingChapterVII thereof;“.

IO. The circumstances in which the attacks we are
considering occurred and the arguments invoked by
their authors call for more careful thinking. It would
appear that an attempt is being made to legitimize the
theory of preventive attack and to justify the use of
force against other States for ideological reasons or
strategic interests. Such a trend could lead us to accept
as normal any sort of crusade against movements of
national independence and the efforts at social and
economic transformation which many countries in all
continents are attempting.

2:
F
A
al
tt
a

18. 1 think that respectfor the Councilwould be
seriouslyimpairedif, giventhe graveeventswe are
considering,we werenot to adoptthe decisionswe
werecommittedto previouslyby the legitimatesovereigndecisionof our Governments.

I I. The events we are commenting on compel us to
recall the chain of acts of aggression which the Council
has been dealing with throughout this year, all of
which have remained unpunished, in spite of the fact
that in all cases the required conditions existed for us
to proceed to the application of sanctions, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter.

19. South Africa’s intentionin perpetratingthese
actsof aggression
is clear. It is to prolongits illegal
domination
of Namibiathroughtheannihilationof the
forcesthat arestruggling
for that Territory’sindependence.Our reply shouldbeequallyunequivocal.We
shouldexpressthe firm decisionof the international
communityto restorelegalityto southernAfrica and
ensurethe full exerciseof nationalrights by the
Namibianpeople.

12. -In no case have we spared verbal condemnations
of the continued violations of international law which
South Africa has committed, but we have lacked the
necessary consistency to carry out effective decisions.

20. Mexico,like manyother StatesMembersof the
United Nations, is profoundly concernedat the

.l3. Though we have established an arms embargo,
the sale of technology and military equipment is

succession of acts of aggression that are taking place in
various parts of the world and that seem designed to
entrench the use of force as a new norm of international life. It is concerned because once again
ideological persecution and racial hatred are being
imposed as State policy and as valid reasons systematically to undermine the peace that we have so
painfully been building up. It is concerned at the
dangerous trend towards the establishment of highly
militarized regional sub-Powers, which sow terror
among weaker countries zrtd are upheld in a network
of unavowed alliances. It is concerned that our
weaknesses and cornplacencies might lead us to a
moral abandrnment similar to that which gave rise to
the Second World War.

growing. Though we have promoted the isolation of
South Africa, its economic and political links with
some countries have become stronger. Though we
have institutedthe legal authority of the United
Nations over Namibia and have set up a negotiating
framework for its independence, that Territory is still
occupied and our resolutions are therefore mocked.
14. Those undeniable

if
2frs

facts form the mandatory

frameof referenceof ourdebateandof thedecision
we
shall have to adopt. The Mexican delegation has
agreed that it is urgent for the Councii to take action,
bit we have insisted with even greater emphasis on the
adoptionof a resolutionthat wouldgo io the core of
2

!
tc

P
n
0
Cl

ir
C
t1

21. We should not allow a rekindling of tensions
between East and West to eliminate the possibilities
for understanding between North and South and thus
do away with the expectations for progress and
freedom which inspire the developing peoples. That
would be tantamount to transferring to the third world
conflicts for which it is no; responsible and doing away
with any possibility for an understandiag within the
United Nations. To forestall that, we must consider
each case on its own merits, setting aside prejudices
and rivalries, ideological positions and hegemonist
pretensions. We must apply the exact terms of the
Charter in every circumstance.
22. On this basis, my delegationwill firmly support
any draft resolution which is consistent with our
pr&ious decisions and which will honestly promote
the independence of Namibia. the abolition of the
uparthei$
rkgime and an end to.the excesses of South
African policy.
23. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (interpretation
from
The events which are now taking place in
Angola leave us perplexed because they are occurring
after numerous warnings addressed to South Africa by
the Council, the latest of which dates back to the
month of June 1980 [resolution
475 (19&I)]. At that
time we not only condemned the racist regime of
South Africa for having utilized the international
Territory of Namibia to launch “premeditated, persistent and sustained armed invasions against the People’s Republic of Angola”, but we also contemplated
meetingagain“in the event of further acts of violation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity” of that
country to consider the adoption against it of measures
in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, “including Chapter VII
thereof ‘.
French):

24. Now the Pretoria authorities, disregarding once
again our warnings and resolutions, are repeating in
that same territory of Angola precisely the same
crimes that we have denounced, condemned and
forbidden.
25. I am not goingto recall the facts. They have been
amply and exhaustively set forth by the Government
of Luanda in the relevant documents addressed to
you, Mr. President, to the Secretary-General and to
the Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. Just yesterday, in opening the present
debate, we had yet further revelations from the very
mouth of our brother de Figueiredo, representative of
the People’s Republic c<fAngola.
26. 1 would simply note that the conduct of the
operations, the tin&i and the objective all rule out the
possibility of improvisation or chance in this affair.
What is i;lvolved; indeed, are outright acts of aggression, carefully prepared and backed up with sufficient
means, as witness the succession of events: reconnaissance flights, concentration of war /~a/~++/, concen-

tration of more than 40,ooO regular soldiers and
mercenaries along the Angolan-Namiblan frontier and
massive, destructive and deadly penetration more than
150 kilometres inside the territory of the Republic of
Angola.
27. I would further point out the fact that for the last
several weeks attention has been focused on prepnrations for another important session which the General
Assembly has decided to devote to Namibia. Has it
not been one of the tactics of South Africa to foment a
crisis in the area every time the international community decides to raise the problem of Namibia7 There
can be no doubt that Pretoria thereby wishes once
againto irritate international opinion in order to divert
its attention, to create confusion by pushing urgent
matters into the background and to revive the cold war
which it has always used and abused to consolidate its
illegal presence in Namibia and to continue with
impunity its shameful policy of apartheld.
At all
events, that regime is not above such cynicism. Did
not “Pik” Botha just inform the SecretaryGeneral
furthermore that he is opposed to the forthcoming
emergency special session of the General Assembly?’
28. However that may be, we have as our job the
exalted and delicate task of maintaining peace and
security in the world, as it is our duty to preserve the
authority and prestige of the United Nations. So we
have no right to tolerate, on whatever pretext, the acts
of war that South Africa hasjust perpetrated against a
State Member of the Organization. We have no right to
accept the establishment of the law of thejungle in any
part of the world or to allow one of the States which
has adhered to the Charter to settle its internal
problems or problems of internaticqal conduct at the
expense of its neighbours.
29. South Africa must be condemned and chastised
for its acts today: it must be called tmon urgently to
withdraw all its droops from Angolan t&ritorf, unionditionally and forthwith: finally. it must be compelled
to pay io the People’s Repubiic of Angola complete
and adequatecompensation for the loss in human lives
and the material damage resulting from its unprovoked
acts of aggression.

30. But, for my delegation’s
part, we areconvinced
that it is of the greatesturgency to prevent the
repetitionof theseactsandto implement
speedilyand
toially resolution435(1978)on ihe indep&de&e of
Namibia.The Council could contributefurther bv
offeringall its assistance
andsupportto the work i;l
preparationfor the forthcomingemergencyspecial
sessionof the GeneralAssemblydevoted to the
situationintheterritory illegallyoccupiedby theracist
SouthAfrican Government.
31. In conclusion,please
allowmeto expressNiger’s
solidaritywith thefreedomfightersof the SouthWest
Africa People’sOrganization(SWAPO)andourbrothersof Angola,whom1beghereto acceptour deepand

sincere compassion for the losses that they have
suffered throughout these days of barbarous and
udustified acts of aggression.

also cal!s for the immediate withdrawal of its forces
from the territory of Angola-must now be comolemen:ed bv more effective decisions. The Charter
bakes proviiion for that, Council resolution 475(1980)
gives the course to be followed; its paragraph 7 refers
to the binding provisions of the Charter.

32. Mr. TEKAIA (Tunisia) ~ktwarrtation
.fim
Yesterday i2296th . meeting]
our brother
Mr. Elisio de Figueiredo, the representative of
Angola, gave us a v&y clear and most-moving account
of the matter which gave rise to this meeting of the
Security Council. Once again his country is thi victim
of deliberate aggressian by the military forces of the
racist South African rdgime. The innocent victims of
this massive and brutal deployment of the blind forces
of the South African army are many. As for the
material damagecaused, time will be neededto assess
that.

French):

37. For we believe that this ne’v aggression on the
very eve of the convening of the emergency special
session of the General Assembly to debate the
question of Namibia leaves no room for hope that
South Africa intends to put an end to its illegal
occupation of Namibia, no matter what resolution may
be adopted, unless it is accompaniedby machinery for
mandatory sanctions. !nternational peace and security, as well as the authority and the credibility of the
Security Council, would thereby be reinforced.

33. This tragedy cannot fail to bring to mind that of
the Palestinian people and the Israeli acts of aggression. The alliance between the neo-Nazi regime of
South Africa and the Zionist regime of Israel. their
common policy of oppression and repression and their
repeated and deliberate attacks against their respective neighbours have caused the Council to be permanently seized of the question of the Middle East and
that of southern Africa and regularly to debate those
items which have succeeded each other in a most
disconcerting manner.

38. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretation
from
French):
Once again, the Security Council is meeting
to consider the complaint of an Afric_apState against
the Republic of South Africa.
39. There have been many South African armed
attacks against Angola since 1975.But the operation
launched on 23 August 1981by South African armed
forces is exceptionally grave because of the scope,
duratiou and depth of the incursions. The facts
presemed by the representative of Angola are undeniable. since the South African authorities have themselves recognized them.

34. In each debate and in every case, the Council
deplores the casualties, expresses its indignationcr its
disapproval, declares that it is aware of the gravity of
the events of one or the other inveterate and impenitent aggressor and calls urgently for a peaceful
solution in the area of tension. Efforts are announced.
New praiseworthy initiatives are envisaged. But time
passes, any chance for peace is missed and the
situation in both regions-southern Africa and the
Middle East-deteriorates daily, creating a grave
threat to international peace and security.

40. My delegationlistened with great attention to the
particularly impressive and moving statement made by
Mr. de Figueiredo. We should like to assure him of our
total sympathy and to request him to transmit to the
families of the victims the condolences of the Government and peopleof my country.
41. France maintains relations of friendship and
growing co-operation with the People’s Republic of
Angola. Because of the gravity of the situation created
by the Government of South Africa, the Ambassador
of the Republic of South Africa in Paris was called to
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 26 August, where he
was informed of the strong reaction of the French
Government.

35. The indescribable aggression of which the
Angoian people are victims is an illustration, if one
were needed, of the deterioration of the situation in
southern Africa. It is a flagrant and manifest violation
of the sovereignty, independenceand territorial integrity of a State Member of the United Nations by the
forces of a rtgime reviled and shunned by the
international community. Corning on the very eve of
an emergency special Lessionof the General .4ssembly
on the question of Namibia. the Sor!th African
aggression against Angola acquires another dimension
and clearly reveals intentions that the Pretoria r&
gime is ashamed to confess. Thus it is imperative fol
the Council to act and, in accordance with the Charter, urgently to adopt the necessary measures and
sanctions.

42. My Government condemns in the strongest
possible way the unprovoked and unjustified invasion
of Angola by South Africa. That attack constitutes a
flagrant violation of the sovereignty of that country.
WC call for the immediatewithdrawal of South African
troops and for that country to respect the territorial
integrity of Angola.
43. South Africa’s conduct is inadmissible. The
arguments advanced bv Pretoria according to which
the attaclrs were allegedlymade in self-defence against
incursions bv SWAP0 fighters are not at all valid. The
territory of-the Republk of South Africa is not in
danger.

36. The statement that you, Sir, made at the end of
yesterday’s meeting [ibid.] as President by way of an
initial injunction against South Africa--a statement
which, while energetically condemnmg South Africa,
4

44, The problem lies elsewhere. The direc, cause of
the dangeious situation prevailing in southern Africa is
the uniustified maintenance in Namibia of a South
African presence and the refusal of the Pretoria
Government, on mendacious pretexts, t3 accept the
implementationof the United Nations settlement plan
for Namibia.
45. My country, which, together with its four partners
in the contact group, originated the proposal for the
settlement adopted by the United Nations, is convinced that a lasting solution to the tension now
prevailing in southern Africa requires the speediest
possible implementation of Council resolution 435
(1978). We s’hould like to express our hope that South
Africa will finally come to understand the importance
of what is at stake and that, before it is too late, it will
choose to adopt an attitude that conforms with
jnt~~ational=law~and its~own real interests,

51, With this latest invasion by South Africa of
Angolan territory, the responsibility and obligations of
my delegationin the Council have been reinforced and
our conviction further strengthened that South Africa
has been and continues to be a callous violator in
Angola of the sacred principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. of international law and. sadly and
even more poignantly, of human rights-ihe right to
personal dignity and the right to life. In the face of this
situation, what should the position of my delegation
be?
52. The question is as unnecessary as it is superfluous and 1mrlst, in clear and unambiguoust.erms that
leave no room for misinterpretation, assert that in the
position we adopted in 1980we remain as firm and as
unwavering as ever. We should stronnlv condemn
South Afrka for its repeated invasions bf Angolan
territory. We should demand the immediate and
unconditional cessation of the hostile activities by the
armed forces of South Africa in Angola. We should
demand the unconditional and immediate withdrawal
of those forces from Angolan territory. We should
demandthat the destruction caused by the invasion be
repaired or compensated for, including not only the
material damage,but also the human suffering and loss
of lives inflicted by South Africa. In our view, these
could be some df the basic elements of a draft
resolution that the Council should consider and adopt
at the conclusion of our deliberations,

46. For the time being, however, one can unfortunately only take note that by its behaviour towards its
neighbours and its claims, South Africa is but further
complicating the actions of those who would like to
bring about the peaceful accession of Namibia to an
internationally accepted independence.
47. In conclusion, my delegation would like to
associate itself with any Security Council initiative
that would strongly condemn South Africa’s intervention in Angola and call for the immediatewithdrawal of
its troops. The text should be drafted in terms that
would make it possible to keep options open for the
future.and to attract the broadest possible support.

53. This latest act of aggression by South Africa
appears to tell us that that country has no intention of
cbmplying with the United Nations plan for the
independenceof Namibia which at one time it had
accepted. This should be borne in mind in the light of
the impending emergency special session of the
aenerai Assembly ori thk Namibian situation. This
arrogant challengeby South Africa should be squarely
met. The broader dimension of this act of invasion by
South Africa of Angolan lerritory lies in the context of
the efforts of the -UnitedNationsto bring independenceto Namibiain anorderlyandpeacefulfashion.
One cannotescapethe impression
that theselatest
irresponsibleand reprehensible
acts of the racist
rdgitie of South Africa are part and parcelof its
sinisterscheme
to perpetuateits illegaloccupationof
Namibiaand10thwartthe implementation
of Security
Councilresolutions
385(1976)and435(1978).If it was
the intentionof SouthAfrica to createan impactand
confusethe issuesin the comingemergencyspecial
session,it is the view of my delegationthat South
Africa hascommitteda grossmiscalculation
andthat
all thosewho supportthe United Nationsplanfol
Namibianindependence
will persistin their support
andbe reinforcedin their convictions.

48, Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): Yesterday we heard
from the lips of the representative of Angola a heartrending description of the destruction caused in
Angola and the repressive atrocities visited upon the
unfortunate civilian population attendant to this latest
invasion and violation by South African military forces
@Angolan territory.
49, We were deeply moved by the statement of
hlr. de Figueiredo. He portrayed vivid images of what
has happened to women and young girls who have
suffered abuse and indignity, the callous disregard for
human lives and, most of all, the devastation and
havoc created by aerial attacks and bombardments
unleashed by the South African military columns. It
was an account that repeated in dimension and graphic
illustration the horrors that were visited upon the
Angolan peopleby another South African invasion in
the summer of 1980.
SO, WC all know how the members of the Security
Council felt and acted on that occasion. The President
of the Council, the Minister for External Relations of
Panama,Mr. Jorge Illueca, recalled to us, in his terse
statement of last night, the basic elements of the
resolution adopted by the Council at that time,
resolution 475 (1980). The President’s statement was
very timely at this stage of our debate.

54. It is thereforethe duty of the Councilto act on
thematterbeforeit with thegreatestdispatchandwith
a determinationto pursuewhat in conscienceit
believesshouldbethe right pathto taketo bolsterthe
movefor the independence
of Namibiaandto put an
5

Unlted States Administrationis encouragingthis
aggression,
andthestatement
madeby thespokesman
for the UnitedStatesState Departinentandby the
in the SecurityCouncil
55. In conclusion, I must say that, as we are meeting UnitedStatesrepresentative
here today, the rape, plunder and destruction of reflectthat [W.I.
Angola continue. The people and Government of
Angola cry out and yearn for the succour of the 62. It is abhorrentandappallingthat the aggressive
racist and fascistrdglmeof South Africa is still
community of nations, in the face of South Africa’s
armed aggression. It is our duty to act without any receivingmilitaryandeconomicaidfrom manyWesfurther delay and to adopt an appropriate resolution, if tern Powersandfrom the Zionistentity in occupied
Palestine,despitethe pertinent resolutionsof the
poseible, before the end of the dgy.
United Nationscallingfor sanctionsagainstSouth
Africa. Thosewho are helpingSouth Africa must
56. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan knowthat theyarehelpingour enemy,our mostbitter
Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a place at the andworstenemyin Africa. Thisinternationalhypocrisy mustcometo anend.Theymustchoosebetween
Council table and to make his statement.
Africa andthe enemies
of Africa.
57. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahirlya): 63.-As therepresentative
of a militantAfrican Arab
Mr. President. first of all 1 want most sincerely to country, ‘I shouldlike to expressour total solithank you for giving me this opportunity to participate darity with the peopleof Angola.We think that the
in this important debate of the Security Council. co-operation
betweentheracistrdgimein SouthAfrica
Panamaand Libya enjoy good relations of friendship andthe racist
regimecreatedin Palestine
is the basic
and co-operation. All of us are convinced that you, causeof theactsof aggression
perpetratedagainstthe
Mr. Jorge Enrique Illueca, Minister for External African and Arab peoples.This
aggression,
which
Relations of Panama, with your excellent ability and comesa few days before the emergencyspecial
experience, will direct the work of the Council with
session
of the GeneralAssemblyon Namibia,congreat competence.
firms the arroganceof the racist rdgimeand its
58. Once again, the Council is meeting to discuss a defianceof UnitedNationsresolutions.
very serious matter-the aggression of the racist
64. Peaceand securityin Africa are continuously
r6gime of South Africa against the People’s Republic threatenedby the existenceof the white minority
of Aggola.
r6gimein SouthAfrica and the illegaloccupationof
Namibia.Wemustdo all we canto preventtheracist
59. The people of Angola struggled for many years
rbgimeof South Africa from hurting and doing
and sacrificed countless lives and resources to achieve irreparabledamageto the independentStatesof
their independence.When they finally succeeded, the Afrlca._TheSecurityCouncilmusthandleits responracist regime of South Africa planned successive acts
sibility andtake the followingmeasures
in order to
of aggression against that country in order to prevent it guaranteethe independence,
sovereigntyand terrifrom achieving its social an-+economic development. torial integrity of Angola and the other front-line
African-States:first, imposesanctionsagainstSouth
60. The question under discussion today is very clear Africa, as providedin ChapterVII of the Charter;
and the facts have been the subject of several
secondly,condemnthe aggression
committedby the
communications brought to tbe attention of the Counracist r6;ime of South Africa againstthe People’s
cil. This is not the first act of aggression committed by
Re ublicof Angolaandthe violationof itssovereignty
South Africa against the peoples and States of Africa:
anf zerritorial integrity: thirdly, condemnthe utilizawe remember the death sentences passed by the racist
tion by SouthAfrica of the internationalTerritory of
regime on freedom fighters of SouthAfrica andsome Namibiato committhat aggression;
fourthly, secure
of that matter is still fresh in our minds shlce the
theimmediate
withdrawalof theforcesof SouthAfrica
Council dealt with it only the day before yesterday.
from Angolan territory; fifthly, ensure that South
We have in mind also the divers aggressions comAfrica respectsthe independence,
sovereigntyand
mitted against other front-line States, especially Zam- territorial integrity of Angola; sixthly, seeto it that
end to the periodic aggressive activities of South
Africa against Angola,

bia and Mozambique. We are also aware that Namibia
is still illegally occupied by the South African racist
regime and that the majority in South Africa is
suffering from apartheid.

South Africarefrahls from the utilization of Namibia to
initiate provocative acts of aggression against Angola:

and, seventhly, require South Africa to pay full
compensation for the damage inflicted on Angolaasa
result of the aggression.

61, The minority regime of South Africa continues in
its defiance of United Nations resolutions as well as of
international opinion. The imperialist Powers. especially the United States of America, continue to
support that regime in order to protect their imperialist
strategic and economic interests. It is clear that the

65. 1 should not like to conclude without reaffirming
the total support of the Socialist People’s
LibyanArab
Jamahiriya to the brother people of Angola, the
liberation movements in southern Africa and the frontline States against the racist rdgime of South Africa,
6

66, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker
is the representative
of Yugoslavia,
whom1invite to takea placeat theCounciltableand
to makehisstatement.
67. Mr, LAZAREVIC (Yugoslavia):Sir, 1 wish,on
behalfof theYugoslavdelegation,
to congratldate
you
on your assumption
of thepresidencyof the Security
Councilfor this month,as well as on your recent
appointment
asMinisterfor ExternalRelations
of your
country. I am convincedthat your experienceand
-diplomaticskill will contribute significantlyto the
adoptionof a decisionby the Councilwhichwill lead
theworldawayfromyet anothercrisisbroughtby the
brazenpolicy of theracistregimein Pretoria.
6% We havereceivedthe newsof the unprovoked
and ruthlessaggression
of the SouthAfrican racist
regimeagainstindependent,peace-lovingand nonalignedAngolawith embittermentand seriouscon-cem.This is not the first timethat SouthAfrica has
committed
actsof aggression
andusedStateterrorism
againstneighbouring
sovereignandindependent
African countries.This time, however, it is an action
which, in its scopeand potentialimplications,constitutesa most seriousendangering
of peaceand
securityin southernAfrica, a direct threat to world
peaceand a most direct challengeto the world
oiganizationand the Security Council.This act of
aggression
is a flagrantviolationof the Charterof the
United Nationsand of all normson which internationalrelationsarebasedandmayresultin a wider
conflictwith unforeseen
consequences.

71. We are shockedby the nroportionsand indiscriminat; seof SouthAfrican’military force against
innocentAngoolan
civilians.inflictingheavycasualties
anddestruction.Thisis obviouslya war dperationof
wide pror&lons performedby racist forces and
mercenariks,
with the deploymentof air force and
armour,A partof Aneolanterritory, to a depthof over
150kilomeires,hasbienoccupied-and
Angbiantowns
deepin the interiorarebeingbombed.That confirms
thai thisis notanacti0.t
L.-.nc,,mited
Iiproportions,but an
act of premeditated
aggression
againstthe peopleand
Stateof Angola.The SouthAfrican regimeis seeking
once againto underminethe freedomand independenceof peoplewho have, throughimmense
sacrifices,wontheirrightto freeandunhampered
developmentandan equalplaceamongsovereignStates.
72. Theattackagainstthesovereigntyandterritorial
integrity of Angola was met with understandable
concernandcondemnation
by the internationalcommunity, which is callingfor urgentand immediate
actionby theCouncilto stoptheaggression
andsecure
the withdrawalof the invadingforces.

73. The non-aligned
countries,whichfrom the very
beginninghaveassigned
priority to the eliminationof
colonialism
andracism,have,sincetheirfirst Summit
Conferenceheld at Belgrade20 yearsago, always
actively confirmedtheirsolidaritywith the peoples
of
southernAfrica andthe front-lineStates,aswell as
with all peoplessubjectedto foreignaggression
and
occupation.Angolaparticularlydeserves
suchsupport
becauseof its contributionto the eliminationof
colonialismand becauseof its solkiarity with the
of southernAfrica.
69. TheattackonAngolarepresents
the culmination liberationstruggleof the-peoples
of a seriesof actsaimedat the destabilisation
of 74. The nonalignedcountrieshadlongagopointed
neiahbourina
countriesin thewholerenionof southern out the dangerposedby the very existenceof the
Af&a, with-theobjectiveof prolongiigthe existence racistr&dme.aswellastheseriousencroachments
on
of the racistr&me andits nolicvof racialdiscrimhm- peace&d securityby SouthAfrica, qualifyingthem
lion, crpartheliandcolonialexploitation.
as flagrant violationsof the Charter. Thev have
demanded
that theCounciladopta decision&posing
70. SouthAfrica’s mostrecentaggression
haspro- sanctions
againstSouthAfrica underChapterVII of
duceda finher deteriorationof an already corn. theCharter.Thatdemand
hasbecome
evermoreacute
plex andtenseatmosphere
in internationalrelations, and moreuniversal.Countrieswhich maintainand
threateningthe foundationsof peaceand security, developrelationswih SouthAfrica and from which
Thislatestact of aggression,
whichcomeson theeve the SouthAfrican r4glmedrawsstrengthandencourof the emergencyspecialsessionof the General agementfor its policy of permanent
aggression
are in
Assemblyon Namibia,showsSouth Africa’s com- dangerof becomingaccomplices
andcaptivesof its
pletedisregardfor all previousdecisions
adoptedby aggressive
policy.
the Security Council and the GeneralAssembly
directed towardsthe terminationof its policy of
75. As a memberof the,Movementof Non-Aligned
violenceandits illegaloccupationof Namibia.South countries,Yugoslavia sharesthe concern of the
Africa hasonceagainusedthe Territory of Namibia interlldtionalcommunityandfeelsgreatcompassion
for launching
war operations
againstfront-lineStates. for the Governmentand peopleof Angola in these
It thereforebecomes
moreimperativethaneverfor the grave moments.In this connection,let me readthe
internationalcommunityto rake urgentmeasures
in statementby the FederalExecutive Councilof the
order to bringaboutthe completeindependence
of SocialistFederalRepublicof Yugoslaviaconcerning
Namibia.The South African action, calculatedto thismostrecentact of aggression
againstthePeople’s
delaytheprocess
of thedecolonization
of Namibiaand Republicof Angola:
secureSouthAfrica’spermanentpresence
thereand
“The Governmentof the SocialistFederalRethe further exploitationof the peopleand natural
resources
of Namibia,mustbeprevented.
public of Yugoslaviamoststronglycondemns
the
7

flagrant act of aggression of th,: South African racist
rdghne
against the indepenllent
and non-aligned
Peoole’s Reoublic of Anaolil and cxorcsses the full
support
and’ solidaritv
o?’ the peopies ~md nationalities of the Socialist
Federal
Reeuhlic
of Yuaoslavia with the people of Angola, in-defence
of thiir
national indcpendcnce
and sovereignty.
“The
Government
of Yugoslavia
requests
the
world organization
to condemn,
in accordance
with
the Charter
of the United
Nations,
this act of
aggression
which represents
a serious threat
to
-peace and security,
not only in that region, but in the
world at large, and to undertake
urgent and most
energetic
measures for an immediate
withdrawal
of
the aggressor from the People’s Republic of Angola.
“The aggressive
policy of the racist regime of
South Africa, which, by ruthless and blatant violation of the norms of conduct
of international
life,
threatens
the independence
and development
of
Angola and other neighbouring
countries,
is directed
towards
the annihilation
of the liberation
struggle
of the people of Namibia
under the leadership
of
their sole legitimate
representative,
the liberation
movement
of the South West Africa People’s Organization,
and towards
preventing
the decolonization
of Namibia.
“Expressing
its profound
concern,
the Government of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
on this occasion once again points out the necessity
of undertaking
concrete measures for partraining
the
aggressive
policy of the South African
r6gime and
the indispensability
of an urgent
solution
to the
question of Namibia,
in accordance
with resolutions
and decisions
adopted
by the United Nations,
the
Organization
of African
Unity and the conferences
of the non-aligncJ
countries.”
76. In conclusion,
I should like to point out that the
Security
Council, the principal organ charged with the
maintenance
of peace and security,
is facing a particular responsibility
in this extremely
serious situation. It is imperative
that it should undertake
urgent
and immediate
measures
to halt the aggression,
condemn
the aggressor,
secure the unconditional
withdrawal
of all racist military
forces from Angolan
territory
and. by the application
of measures
under
Chapter
VII of the Charter.
put an end to the racist
rigime’s
aggressive
policy against neighbouring
countries and pcoplcs in southern
Africa.
77. At this time of trial, it is indispensable
for all nonaligned countries,
as well as for the entire international
community.
lo express their active solidarity
with the
people of Angola.
Yugoslavia.
which is developing
relations of all-round
co-operation
and friendship
with
Angola,
relations which were strengthened
during the
liberation
struggle of the Angolan people. will support
every
measure
undertaken
by the Council
that is
directed
towards the tcrminalion
of aggression
and the

punishment
of the aggressor,
It will, within the limits
of its ability, render all possible support and assistance
at this moment to the people of Angola.
78. The PRESIDENT
(ittre,p,ertrliorl~or,~
Spanisk):
The next speaker is the representative
of India. 1 invite
him to be seated at the Council table and to make his
statement.
79. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India):
Mr. President,
I am
grateful
to you and to the other members
of the
Council for affording
my delegation
this opportunitv
to
make a statement -on- the grave
situatjdn
affeciing
international
peace and security
arising out of the
latest
round
of acts of aggression
an4 terrorism
committed
by the racist rdgime of South Africa against
the People’s
Republic
of Angola,
which amount to a
massive invasion.
The Council
is singularly
fortunate
to have the Minister
for External
Relations
of Panama
presiding
over its deliberations.
While congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption
of this onerous responsibility for the month of August, we are confident
that
your stature, wisdom and diplomatic
skill will serve to
guide the Council
towards
meaningful
and resolute
action when it is seized of such a serious matter.
I should also like to pay a tribute
to the representative of Niger for his contribution
during his presidency last month.
80. The Council is meeting today at the request of the
People’s Republic
of Angola in order to consider the
situation
resulting from South Africa’s
latest and most
serious acts of aggression
against a neighbouring
frontline State in southern
Africa. In unleashing
aggression
against the People’s
Republic
of Angola, the Pretoria
rdgime has not only ignored
the previous
dictates of
the Council,
but has in fact given further
proof of its
total and callous disregard
for world opinion.
The
representative
of the People’s Republic of Angola has,
in his moving statement
yesterday,
given details of the
escalation
of events culminating
in the present situation. The brutality
indulged
in by the South African
army and its mercenaries
and the wanton destruction
of life and property
perpetrated
by them are clearly
contrary
to all norms of civilized
behaviour.
81. The ostensible
pretext
for the latest series of
deliberate
attacks by the apurfheid
ligime
has once
again been that of the hot pursuit of SWAP0
freedom
fighters. In fact, South Africa has brazenly
utilized the
Territory
of Namibia.
still held under
its illegal
occupation,
as a spring-board
to launch a -.unpaign
of
terrorism,
intimidation
and destabilizdtion
against
Namibia’s
neighbours
in a vain effort to strengthen
its
hold over Namibia
and its csploitntion
of Ihe people
and resources
of that Territory.
South Afrcc:l d&
not
seem to have realized even now that the strupalc fog
the independence
of Namibia,
led by the s;ie and
authentic
reoresentative
of its pcoole, SWAPO.
cannot be coniained
any longer.‘So;th
Afriz;t.L
withdrawal
from Namibia
is inevit:lhlc
and c ‘ntlot bi
prevented
or delayed by these desperare
attempts.

82. The Govern
their full solidar
Angola and corn1
brave resistance
i
by South Africa
Africa’s
military
capability,
poses
Africa
bit ‘also 1
sive policies and
have-continued
s
encouragement
it
quarters
for ecol
reasons.
83. The world
what we sav he
Security
Coimcil
should forthwith
gest terms for its i
the violation
of
ritorial
integrity.
complete
and un
African
troops,
i
territory
of Ang
serious note of th
Africa’s
elan to
Namibia
ind to
United Nations p
resolution
435 (15

82. The Government and people of India reiterate
their full solidarity with the People’s Republic of
Angola and commend the Angolan people for their
brave resistance in countering these &stained attacks
bv South African forces. The fact is that South
Africa’s military might, together with its nuclear
cauability, noses a threat not only to the people of
Africa bbt ‘also to the entire wo;ld. Thesk aggressive policies and actions of South Africa could not
have’continued so blatantly but for the support and
encouragement it has received from certain Western.
quarters for economic and even so-called strategic
reasons.
83. The world may little note nor long remember
what we say here, but it will not forget what the
Security Council does here and now. The Council
should forthwith condemn South Africa in the strongest terms for its acts of aggressionagainst Angola and
the violation of that country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. It should demand the immediate,
complete and unconditional withdrawal of all South
African troops, auxiliaries and surrogates from the
territory of Angola.. The Council should also take
serious note of this latest action in the context of South
Africa’s plan to perpetuate its illegal occupation of
Namibia and to sabotage the implementationof the
United Nations planfor Namibia contained in Council
resolution 435 (1978). It is the policy of apartheid and

racial discrimination which is at the root of Pretoria’s
belligerence and that should be condemned once
more. The international community should also not
fail to express its support for and solidarity with the
people of Angola in their hour of ordeal.
84. It was not very long ago, last year, that in the
face of a similar grave situation the Security Council
issued such a condemnation and demand for comaliance bv South Africa Iresolution 47.5 (198O)I. NOW
ihat Souih Africa, in defiance of the Council, has
engaged in an action far greater in dimension and
brutality, can the Council afford to do less? This is no
time for vacillation, equivocation or prevarication. We
urge the members of the Council to live up to their
responsibility under the terms of the Charter and call
on them to take appropriate and resolute action,
including the application of provisions under Chap
ter VII. There is no other way by which South Africa’s
compliance can be secured.
The meeting

rose at 1.15 p-m,

NOTE
’ A1361461

i

7
