S/PV.8454

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8454th meeting

Wednesday, 30 January 2019, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Singer Weisinger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-02363 (E)
*1902363*

S/PV.8454

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: The people of Syria are suffering a
cold, hard winter, with freezing temperatures, snowfall
and heavy rain resulting in flooding, which is destroying
shelters and forcing tens of thousands more people to
move. Millions are living under tents or tarpaulins or
in damaged buildings, with no power or heating. There
are severe shortages of all the basics — from blankets
to baby milk to bandages.
Since late last year, the United Nations and its
partners have been raising funds to support Syrians
across the country with vital winter items, including
plastic sheeting to reinforce shelters, stoves and
heating fuel, blankets, jackets and winter clothes. We
have raised $81 million, which has allowed us to help
1.2 million people. Continued support is critical to
ensuring that all those in need can be reached.
The weather has been difficult for people in Idlib,
where the risk of military escalation continues to loom.
Over the second half of last year, I frequently highlighted
our growing concerns about the plight of 3 million
people in Idlib and neighbouring areas in north-west
Syria, where civilians simply have nowhere else to
flee should there be a full-scale military incursion into
the area. The September agreement between Russia
and Turkey was followed by a significant decrease in
ground fighting and air strikes. However, January saw
an increase in fighting among non-State armed groups,
placing civilians at risk and resulting in injury and
2/17

30/01/2019

death. Today I reiterate the importance of sustaining
the Russia-Turkey agreement, and I remind the Council
that a large-scale military operation in Idlib would have
catastrophic humanitarian implications.
Last month the Council extended the authorization
for the cross-border relief operation into Idlib.
Hundreds of thousands of people are reached each
month with lifesaving assistance through our crossborder operations. We must continue to be able to
provide food, medicine, tents, critical winter supplies
and other help.
Forty-two thousand people remain stranded in
Rukban, along the Syria-Jordan border. Conditions in
that informal settlement have continued to deteriorate
since the most recent humanitarian convoy to the area,
from 3 to 8 November. Eight infants have reportedly
died since last month. Again, the cold is making the
situation even worse. It is therefore critical that the
parties support a second convoy to Rukban. The
United Nations has been engaged on multiple fronts
to ensure it can happen, including by addressing
concerns expressed by the Russian Federation and the
Government of Syria about the security of the convoy
and monitoring arrangements for aid distributions.
The convoy will include more than 100 trucks of relief
supplies, focusing on food, winterization support and
health, nutrition, household and water and sanitation
items. The vaccination campaign from the first convoy
will be continued, and the team will conduct an
intention survey to help identify a durable solution for
those people in the informal settlement.
Monitoring will be further enhanced, from the
offloading site up to the distribution points where
beneficiaries collect their assistance, with about 250
United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent personnel
accompanying the convoy. The team plans to stay in
Rukban for at least a week to ensure sufficient time to
monitor distributions, carry out the intention survey
and vaccinate as many children as possible. In terms of
security, to avoid any interference, we have agreed that,
from the entry to the 55-kilometre exclusion zone up to
the offloading site, there will be a 5-kilometre buffer
zone between the armed groups present in the area and
the convoy. However, protection for the accompanying
personnel must be provided at the offloading point and
the accommodation site, and security is needed inside
the informal settlement, where distributions will take
place, where vaccination points will be established and
where enumerators will conduct the survey.
19-02363

30/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We received verbal approval on 27 January from
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Damascus for the
convoy to proceed. Security guarantees have also been
received from the Russian Federation and international
coalition forces. Planning is now under way for the
loading of the trucks to begin before the end of the
week, and for them to set off by 5 February. We call
on all parties to ensure that goes ahead without any
further delay.
Turning to the north-east of the country, we are
concerned about the humanitarian impact of ongoing
military operations in south-east Deir ez-Zor, where
thousands have been displaced and an unknown number
of people remain trapped under the control of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. Continuing and intense
air strikes and ground fighting have caused scores of
civilian casualties and damaged critical infrastructure.
About 20,000 people, most of them women
and children, have been displaced since December
from the Hajin area to Al-Hol camp in Hasakah
governorate. They have been exposed to hostilities,
explosive hazards, intense cold and prolonged security
screenings, throughout which they have received
minimal assistance. We have received reports of
25 children having died, either in transit or shortly
after reaching the camp. We are scaling up our efforts
to respond in Al-Hol, but people continue to arrive in
critical condition, with many reporting that they were
relocated involuntarily, that their documentation has
been confiscated, that their movement continues to be
restricted and that they would prefer to seek shelter with
family members or acquaintances in Deir ez-Zor. I call
on all parties once more to do their utmost to protect
civilians and allow them freedom of movement to seek
safety and basic services in a location of their choosing.
We have frequently reported to the Council about
the unacceptable risk that mines, unexploded ordnance
and other explosive hazards continue to pose across
Syria. I am therefore pleased to be able to confirm that
the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS)
yesterday launched its first project out of Damascus,
following the opening of its office last year. About
25 young Syrian men and women are being trained in
explosive hazard risk education. UNMAS remains ready
to deploy and assist with humanitarian mine action in
Raqqa, should such a deployment be authorized by
the authorities.

S/PV. 8454

Humanitarian organizations are fully mobilized
throughout Syria to meet the needs of the people. In
consultation with the Government and guided by
humanitarian principles, we are now finalizing our
2019 humanitarian needs overview. We are working to
ensure that our humanitarian response plan is completed
in advance of the upcoming Brussels conference. Those
documents are based on a thorough assessment of needs
undertaken over the course of the past year, including
in areas that have recently seen changes in control, such
as eastern Ghouta, south-west Idlib and the south of
the country.
Monitoring and evaluation remain central to
our efforts. In the past three months of 2018, for
example, the United Nations, with the agreement of the
Government, undertook nearly 1,000 missions across
Syria, 75 per cent of which were for monitoring and
evaluation purposes, thereby allowing us to understand
in greater detail and report credibly to donors on how
their money is being used.
I would like to conclude by reiterating some current
priorities for which we seek the Council’s help.
First, support from all Member States is needed
to ensure that the parties respect and protect civilians,
with particular attention to the north-west and northeast of the country. Once again, a full military offensive
in Idlib and the surrounding areas must be avoided at
all costs.
Secondly, the humanitarian convoy to Rukban must
be allowed to proceed as planned.
Thirdly, all parties must facilitate safe, regular and
sustained humanitarian access so that we can carry
out additional needs assessments, deliver to all areas
where needs are most severe and monitor the impact
our interventions.
Fourthly, to go back to where I started, financing
for the immediate lifesaving needs in Syria is needed
to help people through this bitter winter, but also to
ensure the humanitarian programmes in our 2019
humanitarian response plan are well funded. The
conference in Brussels on 13 and 14 March will be a
critical marker in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

19-023633/17

S/PV.8454

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for his valuable briefing. I would
also like to pay tribute to all humanitarian and medical
personnel for their efforts in the field to alleviate the
human suffering in Syria under very difficult and often
dangerous conditions, as the high number of aid workers
injured or killed shows. I will present this statement on
behalf of the co-penholders of the Syrian humanitarian
file — Belgium, Germany and Kuwait.
We meet today at the first Security Council
meeting in 2019 on the humanitarian situation in
Syria, moving on from 2018, which sadly witnessed
a continuation of the dire humanitarian situation
in Syria. It is appropriate here to take a moment to
review the situation. According to United Nations
statistics, there are almost 12 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance, more than 5 million of whom
are children. There are more than 5.6 million registered
refugees in the neighbouring countries, including
2.5 million children. More than 1 million people
live in hard-to-reach areas. Behind those alarming
numbers are countless stories of the continued human
suffering of Syrian civilians — children, women and
the elderly — who have become victims of one of the
most egregious conflicts of our times. As that human
suffering persists, the international community and,
in particular, the parties involved in the conflict must
work together to improve the humanitarian situation and
access in Syria in order to make a tangible difference
for civilians on the ground.
As we enter the new year, serious humanitarian
challenges on the ground remain. There are still
challenges,
obstacles
and
constraints,
either
bureaucratic, security or other, that limit sustainable
humanitarian access to those in need. We call on all
parties to continue to facilitate safe, unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access to all parts of Syria. We
emphasize the need for such assistance to reach those
in need in an impartial, non-discriminatory manner,
in accordance with humanitarian principles and based
on needs. Syria and the neighbouring countries are
witnessing a cold winter. That has exacerbated the dire
living conditions of many of those in need, which has
led to the deaths of a number of civilians, including
children, over the past few weeks. On 15 January,
UNICEF issued a statement that must move our
conscience and humanity:
4/17

30/01/2019

“The lives of babies continue to be cut short by
health conditions that are preventable or treatable.
There are no excuses for this in the twenty-first
century. This tragic man-made loss of life must
end now. ... History will judge us for these entirely
avoidable deaths.”
It is necessary to address the continued tragic
suffering of 42,000 people in Rukban camp whose
survival depends on the arrival of humanitarian
assistance. That is especially true for children and
women, who make up approximately 80 per cent of the
camp population. We had hoped that the most recent
convoy that arrived at the camp last November would
pave the way for sustainable humanitarian access to
the camp, but that has not yet materialized. Such lack
of access is unacceptable. As we have just heard from
Mr. Lowcock, things are moving forward on the latest
convoy, and we urge all parties concerned to cooperate
in order to enable immediate, sustainable, unimpeded
and safe access to Rukban and for the required approvals
to be granted swiftly.
The protection of civilians from conflict, death
and human rights violations has remained one of
the greatest challenges in the Syrian crisis since its
outbreak in 2011. We are following the developments
in northern Syria closely and reiterate that the RussianTurkish memorandum of understanding on a ceasefire
in Idlib, home to nearly 3 million people, half of whom
are internally displaced persons, needs to be sustained.
A ceasefire not only in Idlib but nation-wide would
enable the flow of humanitarian assistance and the
evacuation of the wounded and sick, in accordance with
international law and as provided for in resolution 2401
(2018). The situation in Idlib is fragile, and we all recall
the warning by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock that
a military operation in Idlib could lead to the worst
humanitarian disaster of the twenty-first century.
In recent weeks, fighting in different areas of Syria,
including Deir ez-Zor, has led to dozens of civilian
casualties. Persons displaced because of armed clashes
face serious dangers, such as being killed or hurt by
explosives and being without shelter, food or water
for prolonged periods in cold weather. The escalation
in violence has also destroyed civilian infrastructure.
We reaffirm that all parties must take all measures
to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure in
accordance with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We also call on the parties to the conflict to respect
19-02363

30/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Security Council resolutions pertaining to civilian
structures, in particular resolution 2286 (2016) on the
protection of hospitals and health facilities in conflict.
We strongly condemn the arbitrary detention and
torture of individuals in Syria, notably in prisons and
detention facilities, as well as the frequent kidnappings,
abductions, hostage-taking and forced disappearances,
and demand an immediate end to those practices and the
release of all arbitrarily detained persons, starting with
women and children, as well as the sick, the wounded,
persons with disabilities, elderly persons, humanitarian
personnel and journalists. The abduction and killing
of a humanitarian worker in Idlib earlier this year was
a shameful act, and we condemn it in the strongest
terms. That is a reminder to us all of the daily risks that
humanitarian workers face as they help others. Parties
to the conflict have an obligation not only to protect the
lives of humanitarian workers but also to ensure that
they can work unhindered and free of fear.
There should be accountability for those who have
committed violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We stand firm in our commitment
to fighting impunity. In that context, we renew our
support for the work of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism for Syria.

S/PV. 8454

of the United Nations and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
his briefing and for the important work that the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and its
partners are doing to support the Syrian people.
Last month, the Security Council renewed key
provisions of resolution 2165 (2014) (see S/PV.8423).
A fundamental principle of those provisions was
ensuring the safe, immediate and sustained delivery
of humanitarian aid to those in need in the most
direct and efficient manner possible. That includes
the approval and facilitation of aid deliveries from
Damascus to the Rukban internally displaced persons
camp. We are aware of reports that the Syrian regime
has finally issued verbal approval for the delivery of
urgently needed humanitarian aid to Rukban, as UnderSecretary-General Lowcock reported. The preliminary
approval of that convoy is a very welcome development.
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that what
is truly needed is unimpeded, sustained humanitarian
access, both in Rukban and throughout Syria.

We express our full support to the Special Envoy,
Mr. Geir Pedersen. We must work with him to advance
the political process, which is the only way to reach a
sustainable solution to the crisis and to avoid further
human suffering in Syria, through a political settlement
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).

A second convoy will permit aid workers from the
United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to
deliver food, medicine and winterization supplies, and
that delivery will save lives. We call on Damascus to
issue all outstanding written approvals and allow that
convoy to move forward without any further delay.
It is critical that the convoy include all the required
assistance, as determined by the United Nations. As
part of that delivery, the United Nations should also
be able to conduct a survey of the Rukban residents’
intentions. The intentions survey will help facilitate
the safe, voluntary, dignified and informed departures
from Rukban of those internally displaced persons
(IDPs) who wish to leave the encampment. We reiterate
that any departures of IDPs from Rukban must be
safe, dignified and voluntary. Residents must not be
coerced by the regime or its allies in any way. It is also
imperative that IDPs be permitted to relocate at the
time of their choosing and to a place of their choosing.

In conclusion, Belgium, Germany and Kuwait,
as co-penholders and significant donors to the
humanitarian response in Syria, will continue to
spare no effort to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people and to ensure that the Security Council upholds
its responsibilities in accordance with the Charter

The Syrian regime’s continued disregard of the
Security Council resolutions authorizing the delivery
of humanitarian aid is a reminder that we must remain
vigilant and that the Security Council must hold
Damascus accountable. The United States remains
committed to cooperating with both the United Nations

With regard to refugees, we would like to reiterate
that any return of Syrian refugees to their homes must
be a safe, voluntary and dignified return. There are
clearly defined conditions for this that must be met,
as set out in the thresholds for return established by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. Measures such as arbitrary detention
and expropriation, to name but a few, contravene any
efforts that would allow Syrians to return. We also
reject attempts to make demographic changes in Syria.

19-023635/17

S/PV.8454

The situation in the Middle East

30/01/2019

and Russia to alleviate humanitarian concerns in
Rukban and throughout Syria.

exercise maximum restraint and refrain from any action
that might increase the risk of humanitarian incidents.

The United States and the global coalition to defeat
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) have
provided the necessary security assurances to allow
the convoy to move forward, just as we did advance
of the November convoy. The United States is able to
support that effort thanks to the coalition’s liberation
of more than 99 per cent of the territory once held by
ISIS in Syria. Let me be clear. This does not mean the
end of the campaign to defeat ISIS, nor does it lessen
the United States commitment to the enduring defeat
of ISIS. We appreciate the contributions and continued
commitment of our international partners in the global
coalition. Stabilization assistance is critical to ensuring
the lasting defeat of ISIS. We also value and thank our
partners who have worked with us on the ground, and
will continue to work with them on stabilization efforts
in north-east Syria. There is much work that needs to
be done to help those liberated from ISIS to recover and
prevent the latter’s return.

Indonesia would like to highlight three points arising
from the briefing: first, the urgent need to alleviate the
humanitarian suffering; secondly, achieving a political
settlement; and, thirdly, avoiding escalation.

The United States continues to closely monitor
humanitarian conditions in Idlib province. United
Nations access to Idlib from Damascus remains virtually
impossible. Cross-border humanitarian assistance is
therefore an essential lifeline, and its delivery to the
intended beneficiaries must be allowed and facilitated.
To that end, it is important that the Council spare no
effort to ensure that the Turkish-Russian ceasefire
agreement in Idlib holds. The United States position on
Idlib is clear. Any military escalation by the regime and
its allies in Idlib would, as Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock said, be catastrophic for the millions of
people there and for the stability of Syria’s neighbours.
We must work together to safeguard the Idlib ceasefire
currently protecting 3 million Syrian civilians.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me join others in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for his briefing on the latest developments in the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We commend him and
his team for their very important work.
We are deeply troubled by the recent violent
attacks in several parts of Syria, which pose a serious
threat to civilians in the areas concerned. Those
attacks are undermining the current efforts to achieve
a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire in Syria. My
delegation therefore calls on all parties to the conflict to
6/17

First, Indonesia stresses the urgent need to lessen
the ongoing suffering of millions of people in Syria
who are in need of immediate humanitarian assistance.
My delegation believes that humanitarian needs in
Syria must be addressed as a matter of priority. That
is crucial, as approximately 11.7 million people remain
in need of humanitarian assistance, and some 5 million
of them are children. Moreover, more than 1 million
people are living in hard-to-reach areas, and the
winter season has particularly worsened the situation,
especially for children.
Nonetheless, we were pleased by the humanitarian
aid delivery to Rukban in November 2018. We are also
encouraged to hear from the Under-Secretary-General
that the second convoy is expected to deploy early next
week to deliver assistance to thousands of people in
need in Rukban, including women and children. We
urge all parties to ensure that the humanitarian effort
goes forward unimpeded, in the spirit of resolution
2449 (2018), which in its paragraph 1 stresses the need
for “principled, sustained and improved humanitarian
assistance to Syria in 2019”. It is therefore critical for
all parties to ensure rapid, safe and unhindered access
to all affected areas and civilians in need. Civilian lives
are at stake, and the international community needs to
provide humanitarian assistance.
Secondly, concerning a political settlement, it
is evident, as many have repeatedly stressed, that
the absence of a political solution will worsen the
humanitarian situation in Syria. To that end, Indonesia
continues to support a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process, facilitated by the United Nations, with
full respect for the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. Indonesia
welcomes the series of meetings conducted by Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen with the relevant parties in order
to find a peaceful solution to the conflict. We stand
ready to support the implementation of his mandate to
help end the conflict. My delegation also appreciates
the ongoing efforts and support of various countries in
advancing the peace process, in coordination with the
United Nations.
19-02363

30/01/2019

S/PV. 8454

The situation in the Middle East

Thirdly, with regard to avoiding escalation, which
is very critical, it is of great importance to ensure
that the conflict is not escalated in any way, as we
cannot afford any setback and ensuing humanitarian
consequences. We therefore reiterate our call on all
parties to stop all attacks and violence against civilians,
including civilian infrastructure, and to refrain from
any steps that might jeopardize the ongoing ceasefire
agreement. My delegation stresses that all parties must
work to guarantee the success of all humanitarian
efforts by observing all principles of international
humanitarian law.
There has been too much suffering for far too long.
Let us give peace a chance and turn the cycle of escalating
violence into one of dialogue and reconciliation. Finally,
as clearly stated by the Indonesian Foreign Minister last
week in this Chamber,
“all parties [must] ensure the success of that Syrianled, Syrian-owned United Nations-facilitated
process, which would lead to a concrete pathway to
peace” (S/PV.8449, p. 11).
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mark Lowcock for his briefing on
the humanitarian situation in Syria.
We share concerns about the situation in the Idlib
de-escalation zone — a territory that is under the de
facto control of fighters from the Al-Nusra Front
alliance with the Hayat Tahrir al-Sham owing to the
fact that the moderate armed opposition was forced out.
Violations of the ceasefire regime continue to increase.
Since the Russian-Turkish memorandum was signed
on 17 September 2018, over 1,000 violations of the
ceasefire agreement have been reported, leading to the
deaths of 65 people and the injury of more than 200
wounded. From the very beginning, we have said that
the freezing of a situation in the area where terrorists
are present would not last long. Such an approach
cannot be viewed as a long-term and sustainable option
for protecting the local population.
Unfortunately, developments concerning the
situation confirm that our views were right. In that
regard, following the talks between the Russian and
Turkish leaders in Moscow on 23 January, work was
stepped up to develop effective, feasible and agreed
measures with regard to the Idlib de-escalation zone.
In addition, at the Russian-Turkish summit, discussions
were conducted on cooperation in north-east Syria,
including by harnessing the potential of the existing

bilateral legal basis
terrorist efforts.

of

Turkish-Syrian

counter-

Our position remains unchanged. The best way
to stabilize the situation in north-west and north-east
Syria is to transfer those territories to the control of
the legitimate authority of the Syrian Arab Republic.
This will not only benefit Syria but will also ease
the concerns of neighbouring countries in terms of
protecting their national security. Stabilization is a
necessary precondition for making serious progress
on the humanitarian front. It will allow the Syrians
themselves to return to a normal life and will help
to prevent a situation from arising whereby ordinary
people start to feel kinship with terrorists. Joint efforts
must therefore to be made to improve the difficult social
and economic situation in the country, to rebuild what
has been destroyed by terrorists and to guarantee the
inalienable right of refugees and internally displaced
persons to return to their homes.
We deem it unethical — to say the least — to take
a selective approach to providing assistance to the
Syrian population. The politicization of humanitarian
assistance is unacceptable. One cannot just blame
the Syrian Government while choosing to ignore, for
example, what happened in Raqqa or what is currently
happening in Rukban.
Russia, despite the numerous concerns about
how humanitarian assistance is being handled in
Syria, always welcomes initiatives that will help the
population, as was the case with the extension of the
cross-border assistance mechanism and the organization
of humanitarian convoys in Rukban, as well as with the
second Rukban humanitarian convoy.
Despite the fact that the humanitarian situation
in Syria remains difficult, we cannot deny that there
have been some positive trends, as confirmed by
recent statistics from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. In areas that have been
stabilized and liberated from terrorists, normal life
is returning. Syrian refugees understand this and are
deciding to voluntarily return home, in the context
of a an increasingly sustainable process. With the
assistance of the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation
of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, tens of
crossing points have become functional, including one
aerial one, at Duvali, and a maritime one at Baniyas,
through which many thousands of people have returned
to Syria.

19-023637/17

S/PV.8454

The situation in the Middle East

Russia will continue to provide humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people on a non-politicized
basis. Since the beginning of the settlement process,
the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing
Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic has carried out
2,052 humanitarian actions, providing 3,238.5 tons
of humanitarian goods. Assistance is being stepped
up to rebuild infrastructure and to create conditions
conducive to the return of refugees. As of 27 January,
31,117 homes, 726 schools and 134 medical facilities
had been built, and 986 kilometres of roads had
been repaired.
We trust that those who are truly concerned about
the fate of ordinary Syrians will soon be able to set aside
their biased agendas and policies of unilateral sanctions
and commit to rebuilding what has been destroyed and
to restoring normality for the population.
In addition to the humanitarian and de-escalation
efforts undertaken, and jointly with our Turkish and
Iranian partners and in coordination with the United
Nations, we are continuing our painstaking work
on the political track and efforts to help launch the
constitutional committee in Geneva.
The visit by the Special Envoy, Geir Pedersen,
to Moscow on 21 January and his negotiations with
Foreign Minister Lavrov and Defence Minister
Shoygu confirmed the commitment to pursuing the
political process in Syria, with the assistance of the
United Nations.
We are convinced that the next meeting of the Astana
guarantors, in mid-February, will give further impetus
to the process of the settlement of the Syrian question.
We urge all those who really want to see peace return
to Syria to involve themselves constructively in our
efforts. The only path is that of honest cooperation, and
any attempt to impose opinions on the Special Envoy
or dissuade Arab countries from normalizing relations
with Damascus would be counterproductive indeed.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
briefing, which, as always, was very useful, and to
reiterate to him our admiration for his work as well
as that of his team in responding to the humanitarian
emergency in Syria. I wish also to commend Germany
and Belgium, which, along with Kuwait, will be
assuming the key function of co-penholders on Syria.
I also thank Sweden and Kuwait for their outstanding
work, particularly with regard to resolution 2449
8/17

30/01/2019

(2018), adopted last December, which renewed crossborder assistance.
It would be irresponsible if we were to downplay
the situation in Syria as the country enters its ninth year
of conflict, with the threat of further escalation still
very real. That is why we must remain fully mobilized
around three key priorities: maintaining the ceasefire
in Idlib and the protection of civilians; guaranteeing
humanitarian access; and ensuring a lasting political
solution in Syria.
Concerning the first priority, maintaining the
ceasefire in Idlib in the long run, the Russian-Turkish
agreement on Idlib made it possible to prevent a
further offensive, which would have had disastrous
humanitarian,
migratory
and
security-related
consequences throughout the region and would have
further diminished prospects for a political solution.
We supported the ceasefire that it made possible,
which is vital to stability in the region. The situation
in Idlib remains extremely tense, with terrorist groups
ramping up their efforts to control that zone. We cannot
rule out a worst-case scenario and therefore must do
everything possible to maintain the ceasefire over the
long term, in keeping with the commitments made at
the four-party summit held in Istanbul. This must be
an absolute priority for all stakeholders, as it is the
only way to protect the 3 million civilians who live in
Idlib, including medical and humanitarian personnel.
Everyone knows that since the beginning of the conflict,
hundreds of humanitarian workers have been killed or
wounded. We therefore need to hammer home the fact
that all parties need to respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law.
The second priority is ensuring humanitarian
access to the entire Syrian territory. The Syrian regime
is relentlessly pursuing its strategy of aid politicization
by constantly creating obstacles to the delivery of aid.
Indeed, the most minor of activities or displacements
on the part of humanitarian organizations are subject to
authorizations, which are handed out in dribs and drabs.
I would recall here also that the regime has not
hesitated to criminalize humanitarian organizations
for political reasons. It is particularly difficult to
understand that the regime can for more than two
months have been able to delay the convoy headed
for Rukban camp, where more than 40,000 people are
living under inhuman conditions. It is imperative that
a new convoy be deployed immediately. Once again
19-02363

30/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

we call on all actors with influence on the regime
to guarantee full, safe, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access throughout Syrian territory, in
keeping with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and international humanitarian law. This imperative of
access for humanitarian assistance should be respected
at all stages, from independent needs assessments to
the implementation and follow-up of humanitarian
projects, in order to ensure that aid reaches the most
vulnerable segments of the population.
In the areas that are not under the regime’s control,
it is vital that the entire international community
continue its efforts to help those who are in situations
of increasing uncertainty. Here I am thinking especially
of the north-eastern and north-western parts of the
country. In the north-east, our mobilization to respond
to the needs of the people must remain full-fledged,
as this is a humanitarian imperative and will also help
to prevent any resurgence of Da’esh in the region. In
the north-west, all actors must maintain the greatest
vigilance, given that Security Council-listed terrorist
groups — and here I am thinking in particular of Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham — have consolidated their civilian and
military control.
Finally, and lastly, I would reiterate that there can
be no sustainable humanitarian solution in the absence
of a credible political process. Syria is today at a
crossroads. While risks remain tremendous in Idlib and
elsewhere, we remain convinced that today, perhaps
for the first time in eight years, there is a very small
window of opportunity to find a way to resolve the
Syrian conflict. But that window of opportunity might
soon close. It is more important and urgent than ever
that everyone assume their responsibilities to establish
a credible political process, under the supervision of the
United Nations and in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). That is the task of the new Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Geir Pedersen, to whom we
reiterate our full support.
I would like to reiterate the distinction between
humanitarian aid and reconstruction. Humanitarian
aid is an immediate need, subject to the principles of
strict neutrality, impartiality and independence. It is
to be distinguished from reconstruction, which will
be possible only once an irreversible, inclusive and
credible political transition has begun. Moreover, let us
not forget that it is not the absence of reconstruction
that prevents the voluntary, safe and dignified return
of refugees; it is the absence of guarantees for their

S/PV. 8454

safety, in particular against arbitrary arrests, forced
conscription, forced expropriations and the loss of
identity documents. The continuation of those practices
by the Syrian regime in the areas over which it recently
regained control are completely unacceptable and should
be denounced as such. It is therefore not surprising that
very few refugees have chosen to return to Syria, as
demonstrated by the statistics from the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Against that backdrop, where the realm of the
possible is especially broad, I especially want to call
on all the members of the Security Council to rally
together to break the cycle of the Syrian tragedy and
create positive momentum with the view to reaching
an inclusive political settlement in Syria. Only credible
progress in the political process will make it possible
to achieve a lasting improvement in the humanitarian
situation and, in the long-term, make possible the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of refugees. As
the Council knows, France stands fully committed to
that end.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
comprehensive briefing delivered by Mr. Mark Lowcock
on the drastic humanitarian situation in Syria, which
has been exacerbated by severe weather conditions.
Peru follows with deep concern the development
of events in Syria and their impact on the civilian
population. The change in the balance of forces seen
in recent months has not been reflected to date in a
sustained cessation of hostilities, while much-needed
humanitarian assistance is still being provided in a
restricted manner. There are 11.7 million Syrians that
need it. We note with alarm that the control gained
by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in recent weeks over areas
in north-west Syria could lead to further escalations
of violence and suffering for civilians, given the
group’s obvious disregard for international law and
international humanitarian law.
We believe that, given that sensitive scenario, it is
crucial to prevent Idlib from becoming the scene of a new
humanitarian tragedy and a major factor of instability.
In that regard, Peru reaffirms its strong condemnation
of terrorism and the importance of brining to justice the
perpetrators of such acts, while also emphasizing that
the fight against that scourge cannot be used as a means
to justify endangering the lives of more than 3 million
people, most of whom are women and children.

19-023639/17

S/PV.8454

The situation in the Middle East

We also want to focus attention on the desperate
situation that 42,000 displaced people are facing
in Rukban, where food, clean water and medical
supplies are in short supply. Eight children lost their
lives in Rukban in the past month alone. Given those
grave circumstances, we urge the Syrian authorities
to expeditiously grant the respective authorizations to
the United Nations so that it can provide humanitarian
assistance in Rukban in a sustained manner. We also
underscore the main role of the State actors present in
the area to support those efforts.
In addition, we would like to highlight the
professionalism and sense of duty of United Nations
humanitarian personnel and humanitarian agencies
such as the Red Cross and Red Crescent, among others,
deployed in Syria. We believe that the international
community, and in particular the countries with the
greatest resources and those committed to peace and
stability, should support those efforts. In the immediate
term that means guaranteeing stable and predictable
funding for the 2019 humanitarian response plan
for Syria.
Lastly, in view of the uncertain scenario looming
over the Syrian people, we must recall the urgency of
making progress towards a political solution based on
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). All Syrian parties, especially the
Government, must engage constructively to that end,
together with the new Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Geir Pedersen, to whom we reiterate our
full support.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.
China attaches great importance to the humanitarian
situation in Syria. We commend the United Nations
and all other actors for their efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria.
Today, out of the nearly 20 million people living
in Syria, up to 12 million still require humanitarian
assistance. The north-west and north-east of the country
remain fragile. The conditions in the refugee camps in
Rukban are worrisome. The humanitarian situation,
particularly grave now that it is winter, faces a risk of
further deterioration. As large numbers of displaced
persons have returned home to Syria, repairing and
rebuilding housing, the water supply, the electricity
system and other infrastructure, as well as removing
10/17

30/01/2019

land mines and other explosive remnants of war, have
become a pressing priority.
At the same time, as the overall situation in Syria,
particularly the security situation, continues to stabilize,
a more favourable environment exists for improving
the humanitarian situation on the ground. United
Nations agencies and other actors will require security
guarantees to continue assessing the humanitarian
situation on the ground, deliver humanitarian supplies
and carry out other activities.
The Syrian parties should proceed by taking into
account the future of the country and the well-being of
their people, continue to abide by Council resolutions,
implement the previously reached agreements,
safeguard the increasingly improving security situation
and create conditions for further alleviating the
humanitarian situation. The international community
should further increase funding and material assistance
to the Syrian people. In the light of changes in the severity
of humanitarian needs, humanitarian aid operations
should be dynamically adapted and improved.
It is imperative to observe the United Nations
guiding principles on humanitarian relief and the
relevant provisions of international law, as well as to
ensure that the people in need of humanitarian relief
across all areas in Syria have timely access to it.
Operations in that respect should be placed under the
oversight of the United Nations throughout the process,
with greater transparency and due attention accorded
to stronger coordination with the Syrian Government.
Support for Syrian refugees and their host countries
should be scaled up to facilitate the return of refugees
and the reconstruction of infrastructure.
It has been China’s consistent position that political
negotiations are the only way to resolve the Syrian
issue. The fundamental easing of the humanitarian
situation on the ground will require further progress
in the establishment of a serious political process.
The international community should take advantage
of the current window of opportunity, firmly support
the role of the United Nations as the primary mediator,
lend its support for the work of the newly appointed
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, respect Syria’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
push the Syrian parties to uphold the Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led principle, abide by resolution 2254 (2015)
and seek a solution through negotiations — one that
enjoys the consensus of all parties. Council members
19-02363

30/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

should engage in thorough consultations and create
conditions conducive to a political settlement of the
Syrian issue.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this informative meeting on the
humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic and
congratulates Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, on his excellent briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire is particularly concerned about the
resurgence of fighting in north-west Syria, where peace
seemed to be returning gradually following the signing
by the Russian Federation and Turkey, on 17 September,
of the agreement establishing the demilitarized zone.
Following allegations of the use of chemical weapons
by armed groups in Aleppo and the total control of Idlib
province by the jihadist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham,
the situation is a serious obstacle to the ongoing
peace process. It also poses a real threat to the living
conditions of millions of civilians living in the area,
which is already facing a humanitarian crisis, with
more than 2 million people deprived of food, water and
health care.
In addition to Idlib province, other areas are also in
great need of humanitarian assistance. According to the
United Nations Children’s Fund, at least eight children
were killed in Rukban, a camp for displaced people in
southern Syria, while seven others died as their families
fled a jihadist stronghold in eastern Syria. My country
condemns the continued attacks and threats against
civilians, as well as the restrictions imposed on their
freedom of movement throughout Syria.
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates the need to ensure safe,
prompt, unhindered and sustainable humanitarian
access in order to provide the necessary assistance
to populations in distress in Syria. In that regard, we
welcome the Security Council’s one-year renewal,
on 13 December, of the United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic.
My delegation also commends the efforts of the
European Union that led to the adoption of a €1.6 billion
humanitarian aid budget in 2019, part of which will be
used to mitigate the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic
and to assist Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries.
In that connection, Côte d’Ivoire reminds all parties to
the conflict of their obligations to respect human rights
and international humanitarian law, including with
regard to the protection of civilians.

S/PV. 8454

Côte d’Ivoire believes that humanitarian aid to
Syria, which is of crucial importance for populations in
distress, would be more effectively delivered if a lasting
political solution were found to the crisis in the country.
We therefore call on all parties to the conflict to cease
hostilities and resolutely commit to implementing
the provisions of the agreement establishing the
demilitarized zone in Idlib province.
Convinced that the Syrian conflict cannot be
resolved militarily, my country urges the belligerents
to choose the path of negotiation under the auspices
of the United Nations and rely on the Astana and
Sochi processes.
In conclusion, my delegation also calls on the parties
to the conflict to agree on the effective establishment of
the constitutional committee responsible for drafting a
new constitution.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me join others in
thanking the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark
Lowcock, for the valuable and detailed briefing on
the humanitarian situation in Syria and, through him,
thanking all United Nations personnel for their great
job to help the Syrian people who are most in need.
We also thank Syria’s neighbouring countries for their
assistance, as well as the co-penholders on this issue
for their work. I think it sets a very good example that
the 10 elected members agreed to share the pen on this
issue. I hope that the five permanent members will take
away the lesson that they can work with the elected
10 on penholding on other issues, like peacekeeping
and sanctions.
The conflict in Syria has been raging unabated
for more than eight years, during which more
than 500,000 Syrians have died — approximately
3 per cent of the population in just eight years. In
addition, 6.2 million people — 34 per cent of the
population — have been internally displaced, and
11.7 million Syrians — 61 per cent — are in dire need
of humanitarian assistance. If we add the destruction of
physical and school infrastructure — schools, hospitals
and factories — and the millions disabled as a result of
the war and the millions of refugees in foreign lands, we
can ask ourselves if this was worth it. Was this worth
it? If we look at the destruction in just one region — in
Iraq, Yemen and Libya — we can ask ourselves whether
the Security Council can find a better way of resolving
those conflicts. After all, they all must end through

19-0236311/17

S/PV.8454

The situation in the Middle East

political negotiations, with people sitting around a
table. So, why destroy such a huge region on the scale
of destruction that we saw during the Second World
War in Europe and Asia? We hope to never again see
any region suffer this amount of destruction. We hope
that this is the last lesson for the Security Council. We
do not need the destruction of other regions. I hope that
it does not happen in Africa, or anywhere else. I think
that the Middle East is a good lesson that we need to
find better ways of resolving conflicts.
As this is my delegation’s first intervention on this
matter, I wish to commend the United Nations and its
agencies for all they have done to bring relief to the people
of Syria, particularly with regard to the coordination of
cross-border deliveries of essential goods, such as food
and medical aid. My delegation would like to reiterate the
Secretary-General’s statement, in his December report
(S/2018/1104), that without cross-border deliveries,
the United Nations would be unable to reach people
in need who are inaccessible through other means. In
that regard, we call on Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), under the leadership of
Mr. Lowcock, to continue its good work in coordinating
the humanitarian assistance programme in Syria, and
in particular in helping women, the frail and children.
We also request that OCHA continue to work with
the Government of Syria on multiple levels in order
to facilitate the early provision of authorization and
facilitation letters with all the necessary guarantees
for the convoys to reach areas where humanitarian
assistance is needed most, without any obstruction,
as outlined in resolution 2449 (2018), adopted by the
Council in December. In that context, we would like
to thank Russia and Turkey for their cooperation, and
the coalition partners for offering the protection that
Mr. Lowcock mentioned early in his briefing today. We
also welcome the financial contributions made to the
current humanitarian response plan.
In South Africa’s view, the humanitarian crisis in
Syria is greatly influenced by the political situation in
the country and that the dire humanitarian situation
cannot be improved without progress being made on
the political front. In that context, let me reiterate our
support for the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015) and the road map for the political future of Syria.
We would like to welcome the appointment of Mr. Geir
Pedersen as the new Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral. We are pleased to note that he has already
begun his work in earnest by engaging with all relevant
12/17

30/01/2019

role-players. We look forward to hearing from him in
February on the political process.
South Africa would like to urge all parties,
together with the Security Council, to work towards
the speedy establishment and convening of an inclusive
and balanced constitutional committee. That would
represent progress in the political dialogue and be a
step in the right direction for a sustainable, negotiated
political settlement to the situation in Syria. We
underscore our view that the only sustainable solution
to the situation in Syria is a negotiated political solution
through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue aimed at
achieving a transition reflecting the will of the Syrian
people and with a guarantee of protection for all Syrians.
Lastly, South Africa rejects in all respects any call
for regime change and external military interference
or any action contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations. South Africa continues to maintain that
democracy is an unassailable right of the Syrian people
and therefore remains convinced that, in a complex and
diverse society such as Syria’s, there can be no military
solution to the conflict. Political negotiations are the
only way.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to
thank Under Secretary-General Lowcock for his
comprehensive briefing. We commend his efforts and
fully support him.
Conflict in Syria has brought enormous suffering
to the civilian population. Today, we also have to
underline the very difficult winter conditions, in which
millions of people are in need of basic assistance. We
are deeply troubled by the recent negative impact of
armed conflict on civilians in many parts of Syria,
especially in the north-west and north-east of the
country. Any military operations, including those
aimed at combatting terrorists, should be fully in line
with international humanitarian and human rights law
so as to prevent harm to thousands of civilians. The
protection of civilians is not a choice; it is a legal
obligation of all sides to the conflict. Those who deny
such protection should be held accountable.
In Idlib governorate and surrounding areas,
where the fate of some 3 million people continues
to depend on the restraint exercised by the parties,
recent shelling and fighting in areas in and around the
demilitarized zone continue to result in civilian deaths
and injuries, the destruction of civilian infrastructure
and the displacement of the civilian population. We
19-02363

30/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

are also concerned by the risk of military escalation
and, in consequence, another great humanitarian
catastrophe. Civilians across Idlib and surrounding
areas have continued to face a range of protection
threats and massive humanitarian needs have persisted.
In this particular context, we consider the agreement
between Russia and Turkey on the Idlib de-escalation
zone to be a crucial move towards avoiding a
humanitarian catastrophe. At the same time we have to
stress — unfortunately, yet again — that all parties to
the conflict should ensure the full implementation of
the agreement.
We reiterate our call on all parties to the conflict to
implement the ceasefire so as to ensure unhindered and
safe humanitarian access for all humanitarian actors
to the whole territory of Syria. Despite the changes
in territorial control within Syria, the authorization
of humanitarian deliveries continues to be vital,
particularly in northern Syria. First, access to priority
areas — such as the Rukban area, as well as areas that
have recently changed control — ought to be granted,
including for cross-border deliveries of humanitarian
assistance. The first convoy to Rukban last November
was a positive step in the right direction. We should
underline nevertheless that its meaning was rather
symbolic when we take all the needs into consideration.
Therefore, we look forward to the speedy approval of a
facilitation letter by the Syrian authorities in order to
bring in the needed second convoy.
While underlining the obligation for the protection
of civilians and civilian infrastructure by all the parties
to the conflict, we insist on practical measures to
alleviate civilian suffering.
Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement remains the only way towards peace. This
requires a genuine political transition, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). In that context, let me express full
support for the new Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen. Tangible progress
in overcoming the stalemate in the political process is
of the utmost importance.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me begin, if I
may, by welcoming Belgium and Germany to the role,
with Kuwait, of humanitarian co-penholders and by
thanking Kuwait and Sweden for their outstanding
efforts, especially the renewal in December of

S/PV. 8454

resolution 2449 (2015), on cross-border aid to Syria, for
another year. Let me also set out the United Kingdom’s
full support for Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Pedersen and our ongoing belief that only a political
solution, based on resolution 2254 (2015), can bring
sustainable peace.
Today, I am going to focus my comments on
humanitarian issues. Let me take Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock’s four points as a guide.
First, in north-west Syria, the United Kingdom
is concerned about the growing presence of Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham and the implications of any increase
in violence for the ongoing humanitarian response. We
remain highly concerned for the 3 million vulnerable
people in the area — over 2 million of whom are
entirely reliant on cross-border aid. Fifty per cent of the
population of that area have been displaced from their
homes, sometimes multiple times, stretching scarce
resources beyond their limits and putting further strain
on host communities. We must not lose sight of the
risks. Under-Secretary-General Lowcock has spoken
of a catastrophic humanitarian impact if a military
intervention takes place. It is vital that the ceasefire
negotiated by Russia and Turkey be maintained.
The situation of the estimated 42,000 people in
Rukban remains of serious concern. Eight children have
died there in the past month. Sustained humanitarian
access is crucial. It is welcome to hear that verbal
approvals have been given and security guarantees
made. This must now be followed through on the
ground and in reality. The second convoy is vital, but
it will not alone solve the problem. Our focus must be
on ensuring quality access for the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners. That means access for the
United Nations to independently assess needs, deliver
assistance and monitor the impact of that assistance.
We urge the Syrian authorities and those with influence
over them to ensure that this happens. In 2018, the United
Nations asked the Syrian authorities to undertake 1,382
missions. Over half were never approved. We should all
be able to agree that this is unacceptable.
Let me say that I agree with the Russian
Ambassador’s comment that the politicization of
humanitarian assistance is unacceptable. In that
regard, the United Kingdom is deeply concerned
about conditions in former opposition-held areas that
the regime now controls. Claims that life there has
returned to normal are false. People there risk arbitrary

19-0236313/17

S/PV.8454

The situation in the Middle East

30/01/2019

detention, conscription and discrimination based on
their perceived attitude towards the Al-Assad regime.
That is clearly not an environment for a safe, dignified
and voluntary refugee return — the conditions set out
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.

Guinea remains very concerned about the civilians
who continue to be trapped in areas controlled by the
Islamic State. As Mr. Lowcock once stressed, the fate of
millions of Syrians depends on the restraint exercised
by the parties. To that end, further efforts are needed to
protect the civilian population.

Up to one-third of people living in areas that have
changed control in the past year are in so-called hardto-reach areas. They are hard to reach only because
the Syrian authorities do not allow the United Nations
sustained humanitarian presence in those areas and,
thus, humanitarian needs are particularly severe.
Again, this is unacceptable. The Syrian regime should
not politicize humanitarian assistance.

There are also ongoing concerns about protection
for people who have been moved to displaced persons
camps. The Rukban camp, as has been stressed at
this meeting, houses approximately 42,000 internally
displaced persons, who are de facto hostages of the
terrorist factions operating in the area and are now
facing very low temperatures and a lack of attention.
As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock underscored,
because of the cold and these difficult living conditions,
in just one month eight children died, most of them
under the age of four months. More children could
suffer the same fate in the coming weeks if they do not
receive medical assistance, protection and shelter.

For our part, the United Kingdom will continue
to fund humanitarian assistance according to need,
and not by any other criteria. Those funds from the
United Kingdom have been distributed by the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners all over Syria,
as set out in the various documents and reports of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and others. The Syrian crisis has been the object of the
United Kingdom’s biggest-ever humanitarian response.
We have mobilized $3.5 billion in support since 2012,
including a new commitment of over $450 million at
the most recent pledging conference in Brussels.
Let me close by saying I agree entirely with the
French Ambassador’s comments about reconstruction.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation would like to express its
gratitude for the convening of this meeting and to
Mr. Mark Lowcock and his entire team for the work
they are doing. We assure him once again of the ongoing
support of the Government of Equatorial Guinea for
the activities of humanitarian organizations in Syria,
including United Nations agencies and international
non-governmental organizations.
While it is true that the active conflict in Syria
has somewhat abated, ongoing clashes in the north
and south-east of the country continue to cause many
casualties and the destruction of civilian infrastructure,
as well as large-scale displacements. Indiscriminate
artillery attacks against civilians and civilian targets,
regardless of who is responsible for them, undoubtedly
lead to an increase in humanitarian needs and reaffirm
the need for civil protection. Moreover, humanitarian
access to the areas affected by the fighting is still
very restricted, and the Government of Equatorial
14/17

Faced with these dire conditions, Equatorial
Guinea is pleased to see the process under way to
deploy a second humanitarian convoy to Rukban, as
recommended by United Nations teams in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1104).
We also urge all the parties to the conflict to urgently
guarantee the deployment to Rukban of the humanitarian
convoy, including mobile hospitals, in accordance with
resolution 2449 (2018).
The announced gradual withdrawal of United
States troops from Syria should not be a green light
for further clashes. Indeed, a Turkish offensive against
the Kurdish militia of the People’s Protection Units
could further exacerbate the war situation. It should
be remembered that the priority in both northern and
south-eastern Syria is to neutralize all terrorist factions
of the Islamic State.
The very high sums disbursed so far for the
reconstruction of the country — approximately
$109 million — and the alarming figures of the
conflict, which include more than 300,000 dead since
the beginning of the war, more than 6 million displaced
persons in the country, more than 5 million displaced
persons around the world, and more than 6 million
people suffering from acute food insecurity, among
other statistics, demonstrate the horror of the war and
the need to put an end to this incessant struggle.
In conclusion, as the eighth year of this conflict
draws to a close, as has been emphasized, the only way
19-02363

30/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

out of the situation in Syria is to find a peaceful and
diplomatic solution. This unbearable conflict must end
for the sake of the Syrian people and for the future of
the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.
I thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his report and
for the work that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has been doing to meet the needs
of the more than 11 million people affected by the
conflict in Syria. As this is the first time I have taken
the floor on this subject, I should like to recognize and
commend Mr. Lowcock, his team and so many others
on the ground.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
alarming. There is a continuing crisis of displaced
persons and major challenges remain in terms of access
those affected. The number of people in acute need in
Syria continues to reach alarming levels, and women
and children continue to be disproportionately affected.
I believe that this situation has been made very clear to
us by Mr. Lowcock’s briefing and the reports that reach
us from the various humanitarian actors on the ground
under truly difficult and complex circumstances, both
for the affected people and for themselves.
We have listened carefully to the constant warnings
about the challenges faced by humanitarian actors in
providing a humanitarian response that is sustained,
based on need and in strict adherence to humanitarian
principles, which on many occasions relate to very
high levels of insecurity. I also highlight the efforts
undertaken to assist the millions of displaced persons
and the thousands who continue to seek better living
conditions for their families. We also share the concerns
already expressed at this meeting with regard to the
protection of civilians, in particular in regions where
there have recently been hostilities and especially with
regard to the need to maintain sustained humanitarian
assistance in hard-to-reach areas and for humanitarian
access in general.
Against this background, I shall focus my comments
on the three points I have just mentioned.
First, we note with attention and great concern the
fact that the protection challenges that arise from the
displacement of civilians as a result of the hostilities
in several regions of the country, where an estimated

S/PV. 8454

25,000 people have had to flee under terrible conditions,
which have been exacerbated by the impact of a harsh
winter and the rains in the region of recent weeks.
According to reports, these conditions have claimed the
lives of seven children. For that reason, we call in the
most urgent terms on the parties to the conflict to take
the measures necessary to save and protect the lives of
the civilian population, especially women and children,
in accordance with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law. The parties to the conflict
must also allow the free movement of those people,
after having exhausted the due investigation processes
required for their relocation. Moreover, we believe
that the dignity of those people, as well as their right
to decide where to go after being forced to leave
their homes and abandon their belongings, must be
respected. Furthermore, it seems to us that by this year,
humanitarian action throughout most of the country
should support communities that are gradually hoping
to rebuild their lives and work towards creating an
enabling environment for their development and access
to basic services for vulnerable populations.
Secondly, with regard to the Rukban camp, we view
positively the arrangements under way for the delivery
of much-needed aid to the thousands of people there.
The deplorable situation seen last November has been
exacerbated by the onset of winter and the lack of health
facilities and personnel to care for the sick, in particular
children. Assistance must be delivered urgently. We
therefore urge the relevant authorities to pay the utmost
attention to that issue in order to alleviate the suffering
of those people in terms of health, food security,
medicines, drinking water and essential winter items.
Access to that very remote area must be sustained and
based on needs assessments so that such assistance can
reach those areas where it is needed.
Thirdly, in a new context, where 54 per cent of
those with acute needs are in areas controlled by the
Syrian Government, we believe that it is vital to work
hard to increase national capacities to meet those
needs. We believe that it is important to integrate the
affected communities into that process, making them
agents of their own recovery and providing them with
the necessary conditions to build a new future. I cannot
fail to mention here the key role that Syrian women will
play in that recovery process. As an important step,
we understand that it is necessary to be able to carry
out needs assessments. In that way, we will pave the

19-0236315/17

S/PV.8454

The situation in the Middle East

30/01/2019

way for comprehensive rehabilitation and building the
resilience of those communities.

those who have good intentions towards my country
and those who harbour ill intentions towards it.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that the resolution
of the crisis situation faced by the Syrian people can be
found only once the conditions are in place for a political
settlement in the country, based on the principles of
inclusiveness and constructive dialogue, leading to
solutions for and by the Syrians with the participation
of all sectors of Syrian society.

The Security Council has adopted eight resolutions
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. It has held
hundreds of meetings and considered nearly 60 reports
on this topic. However, all those resolutions, meetings
and reports will not alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people until they address the root causes of
their suffering. In that regard, I would like to make
the following points, which may help members of the
Council to understand the root causes of the suffering
of the Syrians that they alluded to in their statements.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Mr. Lowcock and thank him for his briefing to the
Security Council.
Since the start of the terrorist war imposed on my
country, Syria, the Syrian Government has spared no
effort in meeting all the humanitarian needs of those
Syrians affected by that unprecedented terrorist war.
My country has always sought to cooperate with the
United Nations and with its humanitarian agencies
in line with the guiding principles set out in General
Assembly resolution 46/182, including respect for State
sovereignty. The Syrian Government has therefore taken
a number of measures to allow the United Nations to
operate in Syria effectively and safely during the years
of the crisis and to gradually expand its humanitarian
work. I underline the words “effectively” and “safely”
because over the past eight years of the so-called Syrian
crisis, no United Nations humanitarian worker has been
under threat in Syria. There was a price to that because
many officers and soldiers of our armed forces had to
sacrifice their lives in order to save United Nations
humanitarian workers.
I once again emphasize that the Syrian Government
stands ready to cooperate with the United Nations
and Member States that are working in good faith
to improve the humanitarian situation, support the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in
Syria and provide the necessary environment to ensure
the return of Syrian refugees and displaced persons in
safety and dignity. We must not forget that sustainable
development must be achieved in Syria in parallel with
the provision of humanitarian assistance. Those two
tracks should not be separated. It can clearly be seen
16/17

First, we firmly believe that we would have been
able to make greater progress together if some partners
within the United Nations had committed themselves
from the beginning to the principles of humanitarian
action, including impartiality, non-politicization and
full cooperation and coordination with the Syrian
Government as the main party responsible for providing
for the needs of Syrians. Even members of the Council
that are the co-penholders on the Syrian humanitarian
issue did not coordinate or consult with the Syrian
Government. In that regard, we express our satisfaction
over the positive meetings and continued honest
dialogue with Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, as well as other
representatives of the Secretariat, whether in Damascus
or in New York. We hope that those meetings will help
us to make further progress this year at the humanitarian
and development levels without any political pressure
or diktats from donors. We believe that humanitarian
action is noble, not a tool for political subjugation.
Secondly, over the past years, we have called on
the authors of the reports not to include information
provided by so-called open sources or by Arab or
foreign media hostile to my country. We warned many
times against some Member States relying on false
information and misleading reports in dealing with the
situation in Syria. The past years have proved us right.
We have provided considerable evidence to the Council
in our letters and statements. Those lies include the
fabricated stories of a child called Omran in Aleppo
or Hassan Diab in Douma. In December 2016, the
Egyptian Interior Ministry arrested five adults and two
children who were filming fabricated bloody scenes in
the city of Port Said in Egypt in order to disseminate
that video footage and to allege that it took place in
the Syrian city of Aleppo. There are also lies fabricated
by the so-called White Helmets under the guidance of
19-02363

30/01/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the intelligence services of certain Western States with
regard to allegations of the use of chemical weapons,
which give some permanent members of the Council
the pretext they need to launch one act of aggression
after another against my country without international
legitimacy. It seems those countries follow two tracks:
a legitimate one within the Council and an illegitimate
one outside it.
I would like to give the Council another piece of
evidence. Germany’s Der Spiegel magazine announced
that one of its reporters, Klaus Relotius, an international
award-winning journalist, had fabricated news articles
when reporting on the crisis in Syria That means that
the Der Spiegel — the mirror — did not reflect the
situation faithfully.
Thirdly, the following measures, inter alia, must be
taken to end the suffering of Syrians.
There must be full commitment to respecting
Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity,
as set out in the Council’s resolutions. There must
also be full commitment to supporting the efforts of
the Syrian Government, both at the humanitarian and
development levels, while avoiding any practices that
might violate those lofty principles, such as crossborder operations by agencies with hostile agendas
based in neighbouring countries and participating in
violating my country’s sovereignty.
There must be genuine cooperation with the Syrian
Government to eliminate the remnants of armed
terrorist groups, while also ending all support to
terrorism being provided by well-known Governments.
We underscore that, in order to eradicate the Al-Nusra
Front terrorist group, which is on the Council’s list of
terrorist organizations and is currently operating in
Idlib, the efforts of the international community must
be consolidated in line with Council resolutions on
counter-terrorism.

S/PV. 8454

There must be an end to the illegal presence
of American, British, French and Turkish forces
on Syrian soil. Those forces support terrorism and
hinder humanitarian action, as we saw in the case of
the Rukban camp, which is in an area controlled by
American forces. There is also a need to stop the illegal
international coalition from committing any further
crimes against Syria, which have led to the death or
injury of thousands of Syrian civilians, most of them
women and children, as well as to the destruction of the
country’s infrastructure.
There must be commitment to United Nations
resolutions that reaffirm the illegitimacy of all
unilateral coercive measures, which have largely and
adversely impacted the lives of Syrians. Such measures,
adopted by the United States and some of its allies,
impede Syrians’ access to their basic daily needs and
amount to economic terrorism against certain targeted
countries, including my own. They seek to destabilize
countries through imposing economic measures, after
having failed to do so through political intervention,
military aggression and supporting terrorism.
My country stresses its commitment to a solution
based on a Syrian-lead and Syrian-owned political
process. Special Envoy Geir Pedersen visited Syria
a few days ago. We emphasised to him that we stand
ready to cooperate with him to facilitate a Syrian-led
dialogue in order to reach a political solution to the
crisis in Syria in line with the interests of all Syrians,
so as to eliminate terrorism, end any illegitimate
foreign presence in Syria and safeguard Syria’s unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

19-0236317/17
