Reeolutiom adopted on the reporu of the Fourth Commiuee

1051 (XI). Procedures for the consideration of
communications relating to the ce1aation of
the transmiHion of information under
Article 73 e of the Charter
The General Assembly,
Considering that, by ~esolutic_m 222 _(III) of 3
November 1948 it considered 1t essential that the
United Nations be informed of any change in the constitutional position and status of ~ny N on-Self-~verning Territory as a result of which the responsible
Government concerned thinks it unnecessary to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter of
the United Nations, and requested any Member concerned to communicate to the Secretary-General appropriate information on such a change,
Noting that resolution 448 (V) of 12 December 1950
requested the Comm~tte~ on lnforma!ion from Nc_mSelf-Governing Terntones to examme information
transmitted in pursuance of resolution 222 (III),
Noting that the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories has examined communications from the Members concerned relating to
the cessation of the transmission of information in
respect of Puerto Rico, Greenland, the Netherlands
Antilles and Surinam,
Considering that, in accordance with resolution 850
(IX) of 22 Nov~mber 1954, the ~etho~s and procedures to be followed in the cons1derat1on of such
communications were to be studied further,
Considering that, in the examination of communications relating to the cessation of the transmission of
information, questions may arise requiring primary
consideration by the General Assembly at its regular
sessions,
1. Decides that, notwithstanding the provisions of
resolution 448 (V) of 12 December 1950, communications relating to the cessation of the transmission of
information in respect of a Non-Self-Governing Territory, transmitted to the Secretary-General by the Members concerned, should be referred directly to the
General Assembly;
2. Considers that the General Assembly should, as
indicated in resolutions 742 (VIII) of 27 November
1953 and 850 (IX) of 22 November 1954, examine
cases of the cessation of the transmission of information, with particular emphasis on the manner in which
the right of self-determination has been attained and
freely exercised;
3. Considers that the General Assembly, as circumstances may make appropriate, should adopt such conclusions as it deems fit, or should refer points for
study to the Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories or any such future committee
which may be established, or should take other measures to reach conclusions in the interests of the inhabitants of the Territory concerned.

27

tories 12 it is suggested that the printed edition of the
Secretary-General's summaries of information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories should, in two years
out of three, be replaced by fascicles produced by the
offset process,
Considering that there should be no lowering in the
standards of reproduction or distribution of information on Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Considering that the new system should be regarded
as an experiment without prejudice to the future,
Invites the Secretary-General to prepare a report
for the twlefth session of the General Assembly showing the comparative costs of the various methods of
reproducing the summaries of information, so that
the General Assembly may be provided with the opportunity of examining the relative advantages of both
systems of reproduction and distribution of the summaries of information from Non-Self-Governing Territories and of making appropriate arrangements for the
future.
657th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.

1053 (XI). Progreu achieved by the Non-Self.
Governing Territorie1 in pursuance of
Chapter XI of the Charter

1052 (XI). Summaries of information concerning Non-Self-Governing Territorie1

The General Assembly,
Considering that Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations makes provision for the regular transmission to the Secretary-General of information on
conditions in the Territories whose peoples have not
yet attained a full measure of self-government, and
that General Assembly resolution 218 (III) of 3 November 1948, establishes a system for the transmission
of such information and for the preparation of summaries of the information so transmitted,
Considering that, by resolutions 551 (VI) of 7
December 1951 and 930 (X) of 8 November 1955, the
Standard Form for the g.•idance of Members in the
preparation of information ~1as been adapted in the
light of experience,
Noting that resolution 932 (X) of 8 November
1955 suggests that an examination of the progress
achieved in the Non-Self-Governing Territories since
the establishment of the United Nations, based on the
information received under Article 73 e of the Charter,
would be highly desirable,
Noting that, although the Administering Members
have annually supplied reports on the progress in
Territories under their administration, there does not
exist in an appropriate form a record of such progress
as has been made since the establishment of the United
Nations,
Considering that the principal points indicated by
the Secretary-General in his report of 28 September
195618 form a satisfactory basis for such a record,
l. N ates with appreciation the assistance provided
to the Secretary-General, in giving effect to General
Assembly resolution 932 (X) of 8 November 1955,
by the International Labour Organisation, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the

The General Assembly,
Having noted that in the 1956 report of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Terri-

,. /"/,id., Supplement No. 15 (A/3127).
11
Ibid., Eleventh Session, Annexes, agenda item JS, document A/3196.

657th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.

28

General AHembly-Eleventh ~eNlon

World Health Organization and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the specialized agencies concerned, to prepare,
for submission to the General Assembly at its fourteenth session, a report on the progress that has taken
place in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, in those
fields on which information has been transmitted, in
accordance with the objectives set forth in Chapter
XI of the Charter, since the establishment of the United
Nations;
3. Invites the specialized agencies concerned to collaborate with the Secretary-General in the preparation
of the report ;
4. Considers that the report should be based on
the information transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter and on the supplemental information supplied
to the secretariats of the United Nations and of the
specialized agencies by the Administering Members
ocncerned;
5. Invites the Administering Members to include in
the information regularly transmitted by them under
Article 73 e of the Charter such information as may be
practicable for the preparation of the report, including
a survey of the principles and practical measures showing general trends in the Territories concerned as
indicated in section C of the explanatory preface of
the Standard Form for the guidance of Members in
the preparation of information to be transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter ;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to keep the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories regularly informed of the progress of the report
provided for in the present resolution.

657th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.

the Government of the Union of South Africa as the
Mandatory Power, and in particular draws the attention of the Government of the Union of South Africa
to those recommendations in respect of:
(a) The progressive transfer of responsibility to
representative, executive and legislative institutions
proper to the Territory;
( b) The revision of existing policies and practices
of "Native" administration in accordance with the
spirit of the Mandates System;
( c) The extension to all the inhabitants of representation in the existing territorial legislature;
( d) The basing of public employment on qualifications other than race and the progressive training of
non-Europeans for higher posts in the Administration;
( e) The review and revision of the land settlement
policy;
(f) The discontinuance of residential restrictions
based on a policy of racial separation, or apartheid,
and the repeal of laws of the Territory having racially
discriminatory restrictions ;
(g) The immediate elimination from the law and
practice of the Territory of the existing discriminatory
restrictions upon freedom of movement ;
(h) The elimination of racial" discrimination from
the educational svstem and the establishment of a
programme for the progressive unification of the
system;
5. Invites the Government of the Union of South
Africa to submit to the United Nations information
concerning its consideration of these conclusions and
recommendations and the action taken by it in each case
in order to ensure the fulfilment of its obligations and
responsibilities under the Mandate.

661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

1054 (XI). Report of the Committee on South
West Africa

1055 (XI). Status of the Territory of South
West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the third report and observation
submitted to it, in accordance with its resolutions
749 A (VIII) of 28 November 1953 and 941 (X) of
3 December 1955, by the Committee on South West
Africa concerning conditions in the Territory of South
West Africa,14
1. Expresses its appreciation of the work of the
Committee on South West Africa ;
2. Approves the report of the Committee concerning conditions in the Territory of South West Africa;
3. Notes with concern that, for the third year in
succession, the Committee has been unable to escape
the conclusion that conditions in the Territory are for
the most part, and particularly for the "Native" majority, still far from meeting in a reasonable way the
standards implicit in the purposes of the Mandates
System;
4. Approves and endorses accordingly, and without prejudice to the solution of the broader issues raised
by the Committee concerning the situation in the Territory, all the conclusions and recommendations of the
Committee as to the action which should be t;ken by

The General Assembly,
Having recommended, by its resolution 65 (I) of 14
December 1946, 141 (II) of 1 November 1947, 227
(III) of 26 November 1948, 337 (IV) of 6 December
1949, 449 B (V) of 13 December 1950, 570 B (VI)
of 19 January 1952, 749 B (VIII) of 28 November
1953, 852 (IX) of 23 November 1954 and' 940 (X) of 3
December 1955, that the Mandated Territory of South
West Africa be placed under the International Trusteeship System, and having repeatedly invited the Government of the Union of South Africa to propose, for
the consideration of the General Assembly, a trusteeship agreement for South West Africa,
Having accepted, by its resolution 449 A (V) of
13 December 1950, the advisory opinion15 of 11 July
1950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa,
Considering that, in accordance with Chapter XII
of the Charter of the United Nations, all Mandated
Territories which have not achieved independence have
been brought under the International Trusteeship System with the sole exception of the Territory of South
West Africa,

"Ibid., Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/3151 and
Corr.I), annex II.

Opinion: J.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 128.

"'International status of South-West

Africa, Advisory
