UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/49
30 December 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3729th meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 December 1996 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
between Iraq and Kuwait", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council notes that the Special Commission and the
Government of Iraq previously agreed that the investigation of unilateral
destruction of proscribed items is a fundamental area to accelerate the
verification of the Iraqi Declarations. In this regard, the Council
deplores the refusal by Iraq to allow the Special Commission to remove
approximately 130 missile engines from Iraq for analysis by a team of
international experts under the Special Commission. The Council notes that
such action complicates the implementation by the Special Commission of its
mandate.
"The Security Council reaffirms that a full accounting for Iraq's
missiles with a range greater than 150 kilometres is a necessary
prerequisite to enable the Commission to report that Iraq has complied with
the requirements of section C of resolution 687 (1991). The Council fully
supports the intention of the Special Commission to carry out thoroughly
the examination and analysis in the missile area, either on the basis of
dispatching international teams of experts to Iraq or examining the
relevant items abroad.
"The Security Council reminds the Government of Iraq of its obligation
to comply with the provisions of the relevant resolutions and the need to
cooperate fully with the Special Commission in order to enable it to report
that the requirements of section C of resolution 687 (1991) are met. In
this perspective, the Council affirms that Iraq is required to allow the
Special Commission to remove the missile engines from its territory. The
Council welcomes any proposal from Member States to offer their national
facilities to the Special Commission in order to enable it to conduct the
necessary analysis, if and when the Commission deems it necessary.

96-37777 (E)

301296

/...

S/PRST/1996/49
English
Page 2

"The Security Council strongly reaffirms its full support for the
Special Commission in the conduct of its mandate under the relevant
resolutions of the Council. The Council reaffirms the right and privileges
of UNSCOM as stated in its previous relevant resolutions and in particular
its resolutions 687 (1991), 707 (1991) and 715 (1991)."

-----
