4. Calls upon all States to continue to apply or to
establish strict control of the export to the parties to the
conflict of chemical products serving for the production of
chemical weapons;
5. Decides to remain seized of the matter and expresses
its determination to review the implementation of the
present resolution.

"'The members of the Council take note of the
statement made by the Secretary-General to them on
14 March 1988. They encourage him to continue his
efforts as endorsed by the Council to secure implementation of resolution 598 ( 1987) and, in this connection,
support his intention to invite the Governments of the
Islamic Republic of [ran and lraq to send, at the
earliest possible date, their foreign ministers, or another senior official, as a special emissary to New York to
enter into urgent and intensive consultations with the
Secretary-General. They request the Secretary-General
to submit to the Security Council, within three weeks,
the report on his consultations with the two sides.
'"The members of the Council reaffirm their determination in accordance with paragraph I O of resolution
598 (1987), to consider promptly, in the light of the
Secretary-General's renewed efforts to secure implementation of that resolution, further effective steps
to ensure compliance with it.'"

Adopted unanimously at th,•
2812th meetinf,!.

Decisions

At its 2823rd meeting, on 8 August 1988, the Council
proceeded with the discussion of the item entitled "The
situation between Iran and Iraq".

At the same meeting, the President, on behalf of the
Council, invited the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to take a place at the Council table.

At its 2812th meeting, on 9 May I 988, the Council
proceeded with the discussion of the item entitled "The
situation between Iran and Iraq: report of the mission
dispatched by the Secretary-General to investigate allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the conflict between
the Islamic Republic of [ran and Iraq (SI 19823 and
Corr. I). "

At the same meeting, the President. on behalf of the
Council, invited the representative of Iraq to take a place at
the Council table.

11

Resolution 612 (1988)

At the same meeting, the Secretary-General made the
following statement:'°
"Members of the Council are aware that, over the past
two weeks, I have been engaged in intensive diplomatic
activity aimed at achieving the implementation of Security Council resolution 598 (1987) of 20 July 1987.
"As a result of these efforts and in exercise of the
mandate given to me by the Council, I now call upon the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq to observe a cease-fire
and to discontinue all military action on land, at sea and
in the air as of 0300 (GMT) on 20 August 1988. I have
been assured by the two parties to the conflict that they
will observe this cease-fire in the context of the full
implementation of resolution 598 ( 1987).
"The Governments of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
of Iraq have also agreed to the deployment of United
Nations observers as of the time and date of the ceasefire.
"I shall extend to the Islamic Republic of Iran and to
lraq a formal invitation to send their representatives to
Geneva on 25 August for direct talks under my auspices.
I am sending letters in this connection to both sides.
"On the date of the cease-fire, I shall confirm that I am
making the necessary preparations aimed at carrying out
the mandate entrusted to me by resolution 598 ( 1987)

of9 May 1988

The Security Council,
Having considered the report of 25 April 1988" of the
mission dispatched by the Secretary-General to investigate
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the conflict
between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq,
Dismayed by the mission's conclusions that chemical
weapons continue to be used in the conflict and that their
use has been on an even more intensive scale than before,
l. Affirms the urgent necessity of strict observance of
the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of
Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17
June 1925;'
2. Condemns vigorously the continued use of chemical
weapons in the conflict between the Islamic Republic of
Iran and Iraq contrary to the obligations under the Geneva
Protocol;
3. Expects both sides to refrain from the future use of
chemical weapons in accordance with their obligations
•nder the Geneva Protocol;
0

37
See Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-third lea,;
Supplement for April, May and June 1988.
38
Ibid., document S/19823 and Corr. I.
39
League of Nations, 11-eaty Series, vol. XCIV ()929), No. 2138.

""S/20095.

10
