i

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1738) . . , . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10983) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

slPV.1738

” ‘!

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. I .j are normally published in quarterly

Supplements of the Official Records of tire Security Coumil. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopt,ed before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-EIGHTH

Held in New York on Tuesday,
&&&nt:

Mr. John SCALI (United States of America).

4. My delegation has already had occasion, at the end of
our recent debate on the question of the Middle East, to
say how much we admired the way in which your
predecessor in the Chair, Sir Colin Crowe, conducted that
particularly delicate phase of the Council’s work in July.
My remarks in this context would not be complete,
however, if I did not pay a tribute to Mr. Jamieson also for
the competent guidance he gave the Council during the first
weeks of July. And, to conclude this United Kingdom
chapter of my statement, may I offer a warm word of
welcome to Sir Donald Maitland.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1738)

2.

1973, at 3 p.m.

3. Mr. WOLTE (Austria): Mr. President, before addressing
myself to the subject-matter on our agenda, may I
congratulate you on behalf of my delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August and assure you of my delegation’s full
and whole-hearted co-operation in carrying out your
functions and those of the Council.

Present:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

1. Adoption

14 Aqust

MEETING

of the agenda.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10983).
The meeting was called to order at 4.20 pm.

5. The Austrian Government has repeatedly expressed its
hope for a peaceful settlement of the problem of the
Middle East. Consequently, my Government has deplored
all acts of violence which run counter to efforts to attain a
just and peaceful solution for that troubled region of our
world.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent Reprs
sentative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/10983)

6. It was with those basic objectives in mind that, on 26
July 1973, before this Council [1735th meeting], my
delegation again expressed the hope that the search for
peace would continue and that no avenue would be left
unexplored to bring the parties closer to an agreement and
to attaining a peaceful settlement.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1736th meeting, yesterday afternoon, I shall
now, with the consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel to take places at the Council
table in order to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote.

7. My Government also holds the view that certain means,
however legitimate the goals might be in the pursuit of
which they are employed, must be considered inadmissible
in all circumstances and at all times. The rejection of
violence as an instrument of international politics not only
results from the Charter of the United Nations but is the
only policy which a country like mine can adopt as its
guideline in international affairs.

Ar
the invitation
of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
(Lebanon)
and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Security Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I shall next, in accordance with our
previous
decisions, and with the consent of the CounciI,
invite the representatives of Iraq, Egypt and the People’s
Democratic
Republic of Yemen to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

8. My Government views in that perspective the specific
question of which, upon the request of the Governments of
Lebanon and Iraq, the Security Council is at present seized.
We therefore feel compelled to make our position quite
clear. The interception of a Lebanese civilian airliner by
Israeli fighter-planes over Lebanese territory constituted an
act which violated the sovereignty of Lebanon. A particularly serious element is added by the fact that the action
is contrary to the letter and the spirit of the conventions on

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. K. AEShaikhly
(Iraq),
Mr. A. E. Abdel Meguid (Egypt) and Mr. A. S.
A&ta1
(Democratic
Yemen) took the places reserved for
t~lern at the side of the Council chamber.
1

areas of the Middle East and other innocent people will be
victims of such senseless and irresponsible acts constituting
an official policy.

the safety of international
civil aviation and that it
endangered the lives and personal safety of human beings.
9. Acts of this nature will not bring us closer to the road
towards peace. At the same time we cannot fail to see the
deeply deplorable sequence of measures and countermeasures, of violence and counter-violence, in the context
of the Middle East problem as a whole. Only 12 days ago, it
was with great distress that the Austrian people came to
witness a new wave of acts of violence in connexion with
the Middle East, when, at the airport of Athens, an
Austrian tourist was killed by terrorists during this recent
assault on innocent persons. During the same incident
members of the Austrian contingent of the United Nations
Forces on Cyprus, who were on their way home from their
peace-keeping mission, were injured, The fact, however,
that Palestinian organizations have disclaimed responsibility
for the attack can be interpreted as a step in the right
direction.

15. We have the belief and conviction that at this veIy
moment other, more hideous and sinister actions are being
hatched in the Israeli incubators of war and mischief, and
that once again this Council will be faced with similar
complaints.
16. The facts underlying the complaints brought te the
Council by Iraq [S/10984] and Lebanon [S/10983] are by
all counts grave. Those facts are not in dispute. A civilian
Lebanese aircraft chartered to an Iraqi airline and carrying
civilian passengers mainly of Iraqi and Lebanese nationality
was intercepted over Lebanese airspace by the Israel1 sir
force and was forced to land on a military airfield in Israel.
No more blatant and flagrant violation of the rules of
international law could be imagined, and my delegation
unreservedly condemns that act of international air piracy
committed by Israel.

IO. Yet the complaint before us concerns the action of a
State Member of the United Nations directed against the
sovereign rights of another Member State, and my delegation is therefore prepared to support a draft resolution
which will adequately pronounce itself on this most
regrettable incident.

17. In defending the indefensible, the representative ef
Israel yesteday had the nerve to insult the collective
intelligence of this Council by stating that the Council was
convened to discuss a mere two-hour detention of sr,
aeroplane for the purpose of weeding out what he calted
international murderers-just
as though the airfield en
which the aircraft was forced to land was but a routin’s
military check-point. The representative of Israel could not
have forgotten the carnage that resulted from lasl Feb.
ruary’s downing of a Libyan aeroplane by the Israeli air
force. Certainly, the Israeli Government cannot have the
effrontery to claim credit for the sanity of the pilot of the
plane it diverted on 10 August.

11. Mr. IBRAHIM (Sudan): Mr. President, knowing very
we11 your personal qualities of patience and wisdom, my
&legation is very hopeful that under your leadership and
guidance our deliberations will be most fruitful. Let me,
therefore, in the name of the Sudanese delegation congratulate you on Your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the present month and, through You,
express our deep appreciation for the admirable manner in
which the United Kingdom delegation discharged its honourable responsibilities last month.

18. Israel’s last act of air piracy confronts this Council
with a very grave responsibility, a responsibility it must live
up to. The Israeli act involves questions of grave import.
First is the violation of the airspace of Lebanon, which in
the view of my delegation is an act of aggression and
therefore constitutes a violation of the Lebanese-Israeli
Armistice Agreement of 1949. HOW long can the Council
expect Lebanon to tolerate the repeated infringementof its
territorial integrity by Israel? For in the view of rn~
delegation the patience of Lebanon has been severely
taxed, and should an explosion result in that part of’be
world it would not be becauseno voice was raised in
warning. Let us only rememberCzechoslovakiaandPoland
desperately alerting the conscience of humanity during
those hard days of Hitler and Himmler and their blood.
thirsty arrogant clique.

12. We take this opportunity
to welcome Sir Donald
Maitland, assuring him that the co-operation my delegation
abundantly extended to his experienced and respected
predecessor, Sir Colin Crowe, will be made available to him
at all times.
13. This is not the first time that a Member State has
requested the Security Council to meet to consider the
violation of its sovereignty and territorial sanctity by Israel;
nor, most regrettably, will it be the last time. IsraeI has in
public statements declared that it will go on doing what it is
doing now and that it knows of no national boundaries or
laws of any State which are immune from its repeated
atticks or encroachments. That is the declared policy of
Israel, the official policy of Israel, the confirmed policy of
Israel. And this is-to say it in other words-that
a State
Member of this Organization is actively involved in iuternational terrorism and lawlessness and civil aircraft and
innocent passengers are increasingly becoming potential
targets for that arrogant and self-righteous blind policy.

19. A second aspect of Israeli action that must concern
the Council is the threat to the safe#yof internationslcibil
aviation. My delegation, for one, cannot accept the srgb
n-rent implicit in the statement of the representative
af
Israel that to cure an alcoholic one must servehimand
oneself alcohol, The International Guild of Air Pib$
rejected it; even the Israeli Air Pilot Associationrejected
It.
The Council also must reject it, and must give ceacr*ts
expression to its disapproval of those Israeli actsand
intentions.

14. Yesterday, it was the Libyan aircraft in which more
than 100 passengers were massacred with callous precision,
Today, it is another civil aeroplane forced by military
aircraft to land on a military airstrip. Tomorrow,
other
2

20. The events of 10 August cannot adequately be
discussed separately from the context of the MiddIe East
question. The root-cause of the problem of all those events
cannot be anything but the occupation of Arab territories
by Israel and the denial of the Palestinian people’s right to
their national home. The Council will do well for its own
reputation by taking a long, hard look back at its decisions
regarding similar events which have been disregarded:

and Jehovah’s wrath. The members of this Council listened
to the Israeli representative admonishing them to adhere to
the resolutions of the United Nations and to its Charter,
But what about the more than 300 resolutions on the
Palestinian question?
23. Yesterday the members of this Council listened to the
Israeli representative saying that the sanctity of human lives
comes before the sanctity of national air space-meaning
only Israeli lives, for what about the Libyan aircraft?
Yesteiday, listening to the Israeli representative we could
not but recall Ben Curion’s words in the first days of Israel,
that Israel would be the supreme court of the world. Well,
we have witnessed for 25 years the sort of justice that
“supreme court” chooses to administer. Yesterday this
Council was informed by Mr, Tekoah of the generous
gesture of his Government in releasing the plane and its
passengers after two hours of intimidation, interrogation,
and humiliation. What was the Council supposed to do:
thank the Government of Israel or congratulate it? AS to
what would have happened if the pilot of the hijacked
plane had refused to comply with the orders of the military
interceptors, as did the pilot of the Libyan plane, we leave
it to Mr. Tekoah to enlighten us. He knows better. As to
what would have happened had there been Palestinians
aboard the plane, we leave it to the records of the
Commission on Human Rights to give us ample documentation on that-according
to Mr. Tekoah, of course, onesided, biased United Nations documentation. The Israeli
representative, yesterday, went so far as to commit his
Government to the cause of peace with its neighbours. But
pledge or no pledge, verbal commitment or no verbal
commitment, the bellicosity of Israel is already known to
friend and foe alike. History tells us that every time the
Israeli representative speaks about peace he means war. This
was the case immediately after the armistice of 1948, and
once again in 1956, to say nothing about their public
statements before the 1967 aggression. One Yiddish saying
goes “The tavern cannot corrupt a good man, the synagogue cannot reform a bad one”; another: “If you are
bitter at heart, sugar in the mouth will not help you”.

(a)
29-31 December 1~68: Lebanese complaint against
Israeli air attack against the civil international airport of
Beirut
on 28 December 1968. Decision: resolution
262 (1968) of 31 December 1968, condemning Israel for its
premeditated military action and issuing a solemn warning
to Israel that if such acts were to be repeated the Council
would have to consider further steps to give effect to its
decisions;

(bl 27 March-l April 1969: Jordanian compl$nt concerning Israeli air attacks against the area of Sult on 26 March
1969. Decision: resolution 26.5 (1969) of 1 April 1969,
deploring the loss of civilian life, condemning the recent
premeditated
air attacks launched by Israel on Jordanian
villages and populated areas and once again warning that if
such attacks were to be repeated the Council would have to
meet to consider further and more effective steps as
envisaged in the Charter to ensure against their repetition;
{cl 13-26 August 1969: Lebanese complaint concerning
Israeli air attack against villages in southern Lebanon.
Decision:
resolution 270 (1969) of 26 August 1969, condemning the premeditated air attack by Israel on villages in
southern
Lebanon and deploring all violent incidents in
violation of the cease-fire;

(d) 23-26 June 1972: Lebanese and Syrian complaints
concerning
Israeli ground and air attacks against Lebanon
on 21, 22 and 23 June 1972. Decision: resolution
316 (1972) of 26 June 1972, calling upon Israel strictly to
abide by its resolutions and to refrain from all military acts
against Lebanon, and condemning the repeated attacks of
Israeli forces on Lebanese territory and popuIation.

24. Finally as we have amply shown, the register of this
Council is full of condemnations-but
to no practical
purpose. This Council has had enough of condemnations
that serve no practical purpose. Action now, prompt, firm
and effective. Justice now, or there will be no peace,
tranquillity, or safety in the Middle East or in the world at
large. Nothing short of applying sanctions against Israel will
make Israel pause and think twice before it embarks on any
similar adventure, or make it learn that this Council has
political will, real authority and self-respect.

21.

it appears that Israel’s defiance of Council resolutions
intensifies
in direct proportion to the increase in the
number of resolutions, It is because this Council does not
match words with deeds that Israel can afford to disregard
its warnings,
disdain its condemnations, deride its decisions,
calling them one-sided, and run amock at its pleasure,
instructing
its representative, Mr. Tekoah, once again to
appear before this Council to add insult to injury, confident
that the guardian angel of Israel is always on the alert and
always within reach. But let us not forget that Israel, when
it so behoves its selfish interests and its plans, can unleash
its ingratitude
till, like a Delilah, it incapacitates a giant
Samson.

25. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President, I
should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
current month and to pledge to you my delegation’s
co-operation in the discharge of your important and
difficult task. I should also like to express my delegation’s
congratulations ancl thanks to your predecessor in the
Chair, Sir Colin Crowe of the United Kingdom, from whose
wisdom and diplomatic skill the Security Council greatly
benefited when it discussed the Middle East problem last
month. This meeting also affords my delegation the

22. Yet Israel behaves in persistent, systematic and reckless defiance of the Security Council, as if a veto in this
Council
is perpetually in its pawn. That is why Israel’s
representative
to the United Nations could afford yesterday
to speak at the top of his voice, in spite of the deed,
threatening
Lebanon, Iraq, Syria and all the Arafats and
Habashes with fire and brimstone, with Jupiter’s lightning
3

.

opportunity
to welcome the new representative
United Kingdom, Sir Donald M&land.

Security Council cannot maintain its credibility and author.
ity as the organ of the United Nations primarily responsible
for international peaceand security if it remainsunableto
act againstIsrael’scontinued defianceof its decisions.

of the

26. We are now met once again to consider a most flagrant
violation by Israel of Lebanon’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. I cannot but express my delegation’s deep regret
that the Security Council last month missed the opportunity to make a concrete contribution to the solution of
the Middle East problem by rejecting the draft resolution
fs/IO974/
submitted by the eight non-aligned members of
the Council. This missed opportunity
seems to have
encouraged Israel to give a repeat performance of its
previous vioIations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon, barely three months after the Security
Council’s condemnation of Israeli incursions into Lebanese
territory.

31. If the Council is againprevented from taking action h
dealingwith the matter with which we arenow seized,this
clear violation of international law and existing conventions, it will meanthat the Council in effect acquiescesin
Israel’sactionsand policy of terrorism. The inevitable result
of such an acquiescencewill be the encouragementof
Israel’s lawlessness,
with results that no one can foresee.
Israel’sterrorist actions in the air may provoke the same
action from others. The Council, of course, must realize
that the gamecan be played not only by Israel; others can
play it as well. Once the processof action and counteraction, of terrorism and counter-terrorism in the air, is set
in motion, then the safety of international civil aviation will
be completely jeopardized. The Israeli precedent can be
used by other countries to perform the same act of
terrorism againstan airline of any other country when it is
consideredhelpful to their interests.

27. The position of Indonesia with regard to the Israeli
violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon was already made clear in my statement of 17
April 1973 [I 708th meeting], when the Council considered
the Israeli raid into Beirut. On the same occasion my
delegation expressed its considered view that acts of
violence and terrorism
resulting from the Middle East
problem cannot be considered apart from their root causes,
namely, the injustice inflicted for so long upon the
Palestinians and the continued occupation by force of arms
of Arab territories by Israel. The views of Indonesia with
regard to the problems of the Middle East need no further
elaboration, as they were already made known in my
statement during the debates on this problem last month. I
have no wish to restate those views in the present debate.

32. My delegationhopes that the Council, now that it has
the clear facts before it, will live up to its responsibilities
under the Charter. My delegation expects that the Council
may now find itself willing to expressin unequivocal terms
its unanimous condemnation of Israeli violations of
Lebanon sovereignty and territorial integrity aswe11asits
acts of terrorism and to take appropriate measuresto
prevent their future repetition.
33. The PRESIDENT: I should like to recall that the
Council decided, at the preceding meeting, to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedureto AmbassadorEl-Shibib to addressthe Council.
In accordancewith that decision, I now invite Ambassador
El-Shebibto take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

28. The facts of the matter now before us are clear. Israeli
air force planes intruded into Lebanese airspace and forced
a Lebanese civtiian airliner under charter to Iraqi Airways
to land on an Israeli military airfield. This act was clearly a
case of premeditated State terrorism committed by the
Government of Israel in contravention of existing international conventions. It was lucky for everybody on board
that the pilot decided to bow to Israeli military force even
though the plane was in Lebanese airspace. Imagine if he
had decided otherwise: a repetition of what happened to a
Libyan airliner about six months ago might well have
occurred.

34. Mr. EL-SHIBIB: Mr. President, allow me to expressto
you and to the other membersof the Security Councilmy
appreciation for allowing me to addresson behalf of the
Leagueof Arab States this meetingof the Security Council.
35. Yesterday my friend and colleague, Ambassador
Ghorra of Lebanon, observedthat he took little pleasurein
having to come before the Council and that only the
repeatedacts of aggressionagainsthis country necessitated
his doing so. Let me say that I very much share that
sentiment, but the seriousnessof the issue before the
Council demandsthat I take some of the Council’s very
valuable time. Indeed, I come here with the deepestfeeling
of concern, not only becauseof the fact that this is the
most naked caseof Israeli aggression,but alsobecauseof
the unique and unparalleled implications of this Israeli act
of terrorismfor the whole world.

29. The Government of Israel did not deny the facts. It
even went so far as to declare that it is going to continue
such acts of State terrorism as a policy. Acts of violence
committed by desperateindividuals or groupsof individuals
who have been chased from their homeland and denied
their rights are one thing. Of course, we cannot condone
those acts which lead to the lossof life of innocent victims.
But acts of terrorism committed by a Government as its
avowed policy are quite a different matter which certainly
merits condemnation by this Council. The Council should
not only condemn; it should find ways and meansto
prevent such acts from happening in the future.

36. As the Council is well aware, air piracy and hijacking
of civilian aircraft have not beenconfined to the areaof the
Middle East, nor is the recent hijacking of the Lebanese
airliner the first, nor will it be the last, of such incidents.
What is so dangerousand unique about Israeli piracy is that
it is an act of national policy by a State Member of United

30. The CounciI has aIready too often missed opportunities to contribute in a concrete mannerto a solution of
the Middle East problem. The piling up of missedopportunities cannot but harm the authority of the Council. The
4

Nations, an act authorized, carried out and defended by the
highest authorities of the State of Israel. If this act were an
isolated incident or, let us say, a blunder by the authorities
of Israel, then it would be looked at in a different light. But
the hijacking of the Lebanese aircraft has only crystallized a
fact which has probably been known to most of us here,
and certainly known to the people of the Arab world,
namely, that this act of piracy is but a part of a well
executed State policy of using State terrorism in its most
murderous form against the Ahab people and especially the
people of Palestine.

42. Are we to accept Israel’s self-arrogated right to kidnap,
try, execute or imprison citizens of other countries who
have committed no offence on Israeli territory? The Times
of London of 9 August had this to say on this Israeli
self-arrogated right: “It is difficult to imagine a more
blatant affront to legality than to sieze a foreign national in
foreign territory
and try him for a crime committed
abroad.” The Times further stated that if this practice is
condoned or accepted “nobody will be safe from the agents
of some ruthless foreign Power”.
43. I should like to deal with the aspect of the targets
against whom Israeli State terrorism is directed. The label
of “murderous terrorist”, often attached by the Israelis to
their victims or intended victims, needs to be carefully
examined by those who have been taught by events not to
take Israeli words at their face value. Is it people like
Ghassan Kanafani, the Palestinian writer and intellectual,
who was blown to pieces with his IS-year-old niece when
he tried to start his car recently in Beirut? Or people like
Mr. Anis Sayegh, another writer and intellectual, who was
maimed by a letter-bomb addressed to him at his office?
Or are they the three resistance leaders who were murdered
with members of their families in their homes in Beirut on
10 October 1972 by Israeli commandos? Do the Palestinians and Arab intellectuals murdered in Paris, Rome and
Norway fit into the Israeli catalogue of murderers and
hijackers?

37, Yesterday the Israeli representative spoke before this
Council not in apology or repentance for a reprehensible
act of his Government that jeopardized the lives of over 80
passengers and threatened to disrupt the fabric of civil
aviation the world over. On the contrary, he spoke with
arrogance and defiance. He did not regret an act that has
been condemned ail over the world. He did not promise the
Council that it would not be repeated. Indeed, he was as
arrogant as was his Defence Minister in promising that
Israeli piracy and other forms of State terrorism would be
continued in the future.
38.

L should like to discuss some of the obvious aspects of

the hijacking of the Lebanese airliner. The first implication
is that Israel has shown total and complete disregard for the
lives of innocent heople by hijacking and forcing a civilian
aircraft to land, not long after it had shot down a Libyan
civil aircraft, causing the death of 115 passengers when that
plane strayed over occupied Sinai. One need not be
over-imaginative
to picture the fate of the 82 innocent
passengers if the pilot had disregarded or misunderstood Ihe
signals of the Israeli military planes, since he was flying over
Lebanese territory in a Lebanese aircraft. We should ask
ourselves whether the approximately 80 passengers would
have met the fate of the 115 unfortunate passengers of the
Libyan plane.

44. My contention is that the Israeli Government is waging
a war of annihiIation against the Palestinian people by
murdering their national leaders and intellectuals and all
those who inspire them to struggle for their nationhood, so
that the Palestinian people will be rendered into what the
Zionists wish them to be: a mass of refugees devoid of
national consciousness; a herd of sheep with no sense of
purpose or direction.
45. During the last debate on the Middle East the Israeli
representative spoke on the draft resolution which was
submitted to this Council by the non-aligned countries
(S/10974/ and which stated the following in its preamble:
“Conscious that the rights of the Palestinians have to be
safeguarded”. As the members of the Council are well
aware, 13 members of the Council voted in favour of that
draft resolution, and China, which did not participate in the
vote, is well known for its determined support of and
solidarity with the people of Palestine. Even the United
States, which vetoed that draft resolution, had previously
declared in the joint communiqud issued by President
Nixon and General-Secretary Brezhnev the necessity of
safeguarding the interest of the Palestinian people.

39. Many hypocritical statements may have been uttered
in this chamber in the past, but none can surpass that of the
Israeli representative when he lectured us yesterday that his
Government
valued the sanctity of human lives over that of

air space.
40. The second aspect that I wish to bring to the attention
of the Council is the declared Israeli motives for its air
piracy and its world-wide implications. The Israeli representative and other Israeli officials have stated that their
purpose
was to apprehend some Palestinian leaders or
“terrorists”,
as they wish to call them, who were presumed
to be aboard the Lebanese aircraft.

46. But let us examine what the Israeli representative
thinks of Palestinian rights. During that debate and commenting on the paragraph dealing with Palestinian rights in
the aforementioned draft resolution, Mr. Tekoah stated the
following before the Council on 25 July 1973: “the draft
resolution would have the effect of giving succour and
encouragement to hijackers and to murderers” 11734th
meeting, pura. 551. So, in Mr. Tekoah’s view, all Palestinians are hijackers and murderers-and
14 of you are
sitting here to give them succour, support and satisfaction.
Recognizing their legitimate rights is, according to

There are, as is well known, over 2.5 milion Palestinians living all over the Middle East and there are
hundreds,
if not thousands, of Palestinians-intellectuals,
popular leaders, resistance leaders and freedom fighterswho
travel all over the world and not necessarily in
Lebanese or Arab airlines, they use all available means of air
transport. Are we to understand that any aircraft which
carries a Palestinian figure and which comes within range of
Israeli
fighter planes is to be the subject of future
41.

hijacking?
5

Mr. Tekoah, giving succour and encouragement to murderers and hijackers. Nothing can make it clearer that Israel
is waging a war of annihilation against any manifestation of
the Palestinian national consciousness.

with grenades and knives by Jewish troops of the Irgun
entirely under the control and direction of their chiefs.”
Grenier described Jewish
scene :

47. In this terrorist war waged by the Israeli Government
it is perhaps worth while to remember who is the sinner and
who is the sinned against. On 23 September 1972 the
magazine Spectator of London-by
no means a proArab-had this to say:

troops

whom

he met on the

“

. men and women armed with pistols, submachine.
guns: grenades and large knives, most of which were still
blood-stained.”
50. Was not Mr. Begin sitting until recently as a Minister
of State without portfolio in the Israeli Cabinet? And is lie
not at present a very respected leader of the Israeli
Knesset? Who harbours and honours murderers and saboteurs?

“But it is worth recalling that, in the dispute between
the Palestinians and the Israelis, it is the Palestinians who
have been sinned against and not the Israelis: it is the
Palestinians who have lost their lands and their houses
and their hope of a national home: it is the Palestinians
who are the refugees, the victims.”

51. With reference to those described as “criminals and
murderers” by Israel and who are hunted and assassinated
by Israeli agents all over the world, I happen to know two
of them. One, Wael Zwaiter, was recently murdered by
Israeli agents in Rome. Levia Rokah, Rome correspondent
of the Israeli daily Duuar, wrote the following about that
murder in the Israeli monthly New Outlook in December
1972:

Commenting in the same article on the Israeli reprisal
against Lebanon and Syria after the Munich incident,
Spectator said :
“If Governments are to bring the present outbreak of
guerilla or terrorist activity to an end, then the Governments themselves cannot behave like the guerrillas or the
terrorists. This is recognized generally; but not, apparently, by the State of Israel. No other civilized State
would respond to a Munich incident in the way that Israel
did; and this is just as well, for if it became the rule for
States to behave like cowboys the fragile international
order which now subsists would be destroyed in the
Middle East as elsewhere.”

“It was very easy to kill Wael; he was not armed. He
most probably would not have known how to use a
weapon had he been armed-and he was not guarded. He
was a man with a great pain in his heart which he carried
everywhere: the pain of his people suffering.”
52. The other victim was Kamal Nasser, one of three
Palestinians assassinated in their homes on 10 April during
the infamous Israeli raid on Beirut. Kamal was a poet, a
writer, but, above all, a kind and gentle human being. 1
cannot speak about him without emotion for we were
friends over many years. Sarah Gay Damman wrote an
article in The New York Times on 27 April this year, under
the title “Remembering a victim in Palestine”, about a
meeting she had with him in 1970 in Amman. She had
brought him some pictures and letters from his family who
were in the occupied West Bank of Jordan and whom he
could not see because the Israeli authorities had previously
expelled him from the West Bank. She wrote: “That night
Kamal found us. ‘You have pictures? How are they? You
saw them? Wonderful. Are they well? Was Jerusalem
beautiful? ’ ” She went on: “He sat in the lobby of the
hotel and studied the pictures, asked questions, read the
notes. Then he said: ‘Some day, some day. I know our
nation. We will forget our enmity and live like brothers.‘”
After the Israeli raid Kamal was found sprawled on his back
in his Beirut apartment; 80 bullets riddIed his body, 5 of
them having been fired into his mouth. It was perhaps
because he tried to be a spokesman for his people or
perhaps because in that hotel lobby in Amman he had
spoken those words of peace to Sarah Gay Damman. His
body, sprawled on the bare floor of his apartment, made s
figure of the Cross. But, then, there are so many crossesin
the sad history of Palestine.

48. I shall refer now very briefly to the repeated charge
made by the Israeli representative that Arab Governments
harbour Palestinian terrorists. Firstly, let me ask the Israeli
representative if his Government is willing, as it has
repeatedly been called upon by the United Nations to do,
to allow the peopIe of Palestine to return to their towns,
villages and homes from which they were forcibly expelled
so that they can cease being refugees in the various Arab
countries.
49. Secondly, let me ask him: Who made a practice of
honouring murderers and saboteurs? For instance, let me
ask: Where is the murderer of Count Bernadotte? And
what about Marcelle Minioux, the heroine of the infamous
Lavone affair, in which theatres in Alexandria and Cairo
were bombed and the American Information Center was
bombed, straining relations at the time between Egypt and
the United States. Who was at her recent wedding and gave
her away but the Prime Minister of Israel, Where is the hero
of the Deir Yassin massacre? I would like very briefly to
describe what that massacre meant. The following is taken
from a book which contains an account of this horrible
outrage given by Jacques Grenicr, chief delegate of the
International Red Cross, who, at the risk of his life, was
able to reach the village and to witness the aftermath of the
tragedy. I quote from that book:

53. In conclusion, may I say that it has become all too
obvious that a State in the Middle East, a Member of the
United Nations, has allowed itself to break all recognized
tenets of international law, trampled on the Charter of the

“Three hundred persons were massacred, without any
military reason or provocation of any kind. Old men,
women, children, newly born were savagely murdered
6

--

United Nations and dropped any pretence to act like a
civilized State. If once again Israel is allowed to get away
with another act of lawlessness and the Council fails in its
responsibility to safeguard international peace and security,
then not only the Middle East but the whole world will be
facing untold dangers.

61. The United States deplores this violation of Lebanese
sovereignty. We deplore this violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and of the rule of law in international civil
aviation. Fortunately, no lives were lost and no material
damage was incurred in this latest incident. While this does
not modify our concern, we strongly urge all parties to
retain a sense of perspective and prevent this incident from
leading to further reprisals and counter-reprisals. It is high
time to call a full stop to all such acts and related acts and
threats of violence.

54. Mr. MADDY (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
The statement of the Guinean delegation will be very brief
because the nature and the character of the event which has
led to our meeting again are not new, It is a question of the
repeated violations of the principles of the Charter-the
ill-considered attitude of Israel towards the national sovereignty of the Arab countries in general and Lebanon in
particular. After the tragedy of the Libyan Boeing aircraft
which cost the lives of innocent passengers-a tragedy still
fresh in our minds-Israel
has just committed another
. kidnapping by diverting a civilian airliner.

62. The representative of Israel has explained that the
purpose of his Government’s action in diverting the airliner
was to apprehend individuals responsible for terrorist acts.
My Government has been second to none in its condemnation of international terrorism, in the search for new
Instruments of international law to counter terrorism, and
in urging other Governments to take a strong stand and
adopt effective measures against those who endanger and
take innocent lives in the name of serving a political cause.
National and international efforts to control terrorism must
go forward. They must, however, go forward within and
not outside the law. The commitment to the rule of law in
international affairs, including the field of international
civil aviation, imposes certain restraints on the methods
Governments can use to protect themselves against those
who operate outside the law.

55, The argument which Israel brandishes in an attempt to
defend itself moves us as much as the act itself, because
that act was in fact an operation designed to liquidate the
leaders of a revolutionary popular liberation movement.
However, history has taught us that liquidating the leaders
of a popular liberation movement does not liquidate a
struggling people. The cause that this people is defending is
not jeopardized, for a people that is fully aware and
organized is invincible.

63. My Government believes actions such as Israel’s
diversion of a civil airliner on 10 August are unjustified and
likely only to bring about counter-action on an increasing
scale. Resort to any type of aerial kidnapping seriously
jeopardizes the lives and safety of innocent bystanders. The
United States Government has made strenuous efforts in
and outside the United Nations to reach international
agreement on measures that would protect such “third
parties” who have no connexion with the political dispute
giving rise to the use of armed force. We have also made
strenuous efforts to improve the security of international
civil aviation through multilateral agreements and will
continue our efforts at the meetings of the International
Civil Aviation Organization which convene in Rome later
this month.

56. In the face of the repeated aggressions of Israel against
the Palestinian and Arab peoples, the Security Council,
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace and
security, must take a lofty view and adopt the necessary
measures to avoid a repetition of such acts by Israel, acts
which my delegation unreservedly condemns.
57. Before I conclude, Mr. President, may I offer you my
heartiest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of our Council and assure you of the co-operation of
my delegation.
58. The PRESIDENT: As there are no other names on the
list of speakers at the present time, I shall take the
opportunity
to lay aside my gavel as President of the
Council and speak as the representative of the UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.

64. Such practices as diverting civil aircraft constitute
highly dangerous precedents for the safe and reliable
conduct of international relations, commerce and travel.

59. The issue before us today is clear. In recent years the
wodd’has seen threats to the safety of civil aviation increase
at an alarming rate. We must find ways to reduce and
ultimately eliminate such threats to the free and peaceful
use of the world’s airways. Travel by air, as was travel by
sea in an earlier age, must be insulated and protected from
unlawful
interference. It must no longer be a pawn in
international conflicts.

65. Last April, in this Council, I observed:
“The cycle of violence in this part of the world not
only is continuing but has also taken on newer and uglier
dimensions. To the shame of all mankind, acts of violence
and terror, ofTen striking down innocent people, are on
the verge of becoming a routine foot-note to the tragic
and unresolved Arab-Israeli conflict.” f 1708th meeting,
para. 64.1

60. In this latest incident, information from Lebanese and
Israeli Government authorities has established that a civil
airliner en route from Beirut to Baghdad with 76 passengers
aboard was intercepted by Israeli fighter aircraft over
Lebanese territory on 10 August and forced to land in
Israel. There can be no doubt that such actions by their
very nature place the lives of the innocent persons aboard
an aircraft in danger.

66. Unhappily, events in the past few weeks provide no
evidence to contradict that melancholy conclusion. We
hardly need reminding that only a few weeks ago two
gunmen opened fire senselessly in the midst of a crowded
international air terminal in Athens, murdering three
innocent travellers and wounding dozens of innocent
7

people and the safety of international travel. There can be
no double standard here. There must be one Iaw for all.

bystanders. Just weeks before that, a Japanese airliner was
hijacked and destroyed and its passengers subjected to
harsh threats and extreme danger. Last February, 106
persons on a Libyan airliner were the trggic victims of this
same pattern of Golence and counter-violence.

69. The record of the United Nations in dealitlg with the
over-all problem of international terrorism is not, so far, a
record of which we can be proud. However, the Security
Council is meeting today to deal with a specific complaint
about a specific incident. It should deal promptly with that
complaint on the basis of the facts while keeping in
perspective the broader issues.

67. We are all aware that this cycle is a reflection of the
tensions and hatreds growing out of the unresolved ArabIsraeli conflict. We are all aware that the ultimate solution
lies in a just and lasting settlement of that dispute on the
basis of resolution 242 (1967). Pending this much-desired
solution, however, we all have an obligation to seek to
prevent that dispute from moving up another, uglier notch,
to seek to prevent its taking an even higher toll of innocent
lives.

70. Our task now is to unite on a resolution to express tl~e
common attitude of this world body towards the regrettable and deplorable incident under discussion. Let us do so
with the intention that the decision we make will mark a
turning-point where men and women dedicated to peace,
with their eyes fixed on the future as well as on the present,
determine that the fabric of international society requires
that they reject unlawful interference with civil aviation
from whatever quarter and for whatever motive.

68. The United States has consistently joined other
members of this Council to express its grave concern over
the threat to innocent human lives resulting from hijacking
and other unlawful or unwarranted interference with civil
aviation. We would join again in urging all States, all
individuals and all political groups in the area to refrain
from actions which would imperil the lives of innocent

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

8

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Units
sont en vente dans les librairies
et Ies agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraira
ou adresscz-voua
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Genove.
ICAIC

~OJINUMTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

MSAAHMR

OP~AHWSA~MN

PUBLICACIONES

DE

Ofi%EflHHEHHhIX

LAS

NACIONES

HAWiH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estAn en venta en librerias
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
Unidas, Section
de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or

equivalent

in other

currencies)

y casas distria: Naciones

73-82001-November

1979-%~ffo
