UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/19
24 April 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3657th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 April 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 4 April 1996 on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) (S/1996/248 and Add.1) pursuant to paragraph 21 of Security
Council resolution 1045 (1996) of 8 February 1996.
"The Security Council notes that some progress has been achieved
during the past two months in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol,
although it has been limited and has not fulfilled the hopes generated by
the meeting between President dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi in Libreville,
Gabon, on 1 March 1996. The Council stresses the importance it attaches to
the full implementation of the Protocol. The Council reminds
President dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi of their commitments and urges them to
take the necessary actions to move the peace process forward.
"The Security Council notes that the Uniaõ Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) has quartered more than 20,000 of its
forces, but expresses concern over delays in the quartering of UNITA troops
and urges UNITA to move expeditiously to achieve full quartering of its
troops. The Council expresses concern about the quality of weapons
surrendered by UNITA and urges UNITA to fulfil its commitment to turn over
all of its arms, ammunition and military equipment as the quartering
process continues. It reiterates that the quartering process is a crucial
component of the peace process and stresses the need for quartering to be
credible and fully verifiable. The Council expresses its concern at the
statements made by Dr. Savimbi on 13 March 1996 and 27 March 1996. In this
context, the Council urges all Angolan leaders to consider carefully the
effect of public statements on the climate of confidence necessary to
nurture the peace process. It also urges UNITA to release all remaining
prisoners.
"The Security Council recognizes with satisfaction the progress by the
Government of Angola in the implementation of its commitments under the
96-10400 (E)

240496

/...

S/PRST/1996/19
English
Page 2

Lusaka Protocol and the current timetable, and encourages the Government to
continue this progress. The Council emphasizes the importance of
completion of the Calendar of Actions for April, including, inter alia, the
continuation of the pull-back of government forces from areas near UNITA
quartering sites, the return of the Rapid Reaction Police to barracks, the
resolution of the question of amnesty for UNITA officials, and the adoption
of a plan to disarm the civilian population, as well as the quartering of
UNITA troops. The Council encourages the two parties to complete the
integration of UNITA into the Angolan armed forces.
"The Security Council also encourages the Government to grant
UNAVEM III the requisite facilities for the establishment of an independent
United Nations radio.
"The Security Council stresses its concern at the extensive presence
of landmines throughout Angola and expresses support for the efforts of the
United Nations, the Government and non-governmental organizations to
address this problem. The Council urges the Government and UNITA to
destroy their stockpiles of anti-personnel landmines. It encourages them
to make a meaningful public gesture towards destruction of landmines which
could have a positive effect on public confidence and the free circulation
of people and goods.
"The Security Council notes with concern credible reports of
continuing purchases and delivery of weapons to Angola and considers that
such actions are contrary to paragraph 12 of resolution 976 (1995) of
8 February 1995 and undermine confidence in the peace process. The Council
reaffirms the obligation of all States to implement fully the provisions of
paragraph 19 of resolution 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993.
"The Security Council emphasizes that the ultimate responsibility for
restoring peace rests with the Angolans themselves. The Council reminds
the parties that extension of the mandate of UNAVEM III will be based, to a
large part, on progress by the two parties towards meeting the goals set by
the Lusaka Protocol.
"The Security Council condemns the incident on 3 April 1996 which
resulted in the death of two UNAVEM III personnel, the wounding of a third,
and the death of a humanitarian assistance official, and reiterates the
importance it attaches to the safety and security of UNAVEM III and
humanitarian assistance personnel. The Council notes the cooperation
offered by the Angolan Government and UNITA with the investigation by
UNAVEM III of this deplorable incident.
"The Security Council reiterates its gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the staff of UNAVEM III, and the
three observer countries whose unflagging service to the cause of peace has
been outstanding. The Council will continue to monitor the situation
inAngola closely and requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep it
informed of progress in the Angolan peace process."
-----
