NAT'IONS

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
nd
MEETING: 18 SEPTEMBER 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1452) . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . , . . . . ‘. . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda

Page
1

.,, ... .., ... ..... ..... ... ... ,.. ..,.,..

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Israel to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8794)
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8805)
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8806) . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1452

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Present:

Algeria, Br
Hungary,
Soviet Sol
Britain ant

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1. Adopti

2. The sit
Lettc
Perma
Nation
Count
LeaI
Repre!
dresse
(S/88(
Lett’
Repre:
Unitec
Securi

The age

Letter da
tb

the F

Letter da
resenta
the Pre:
Letter d;
resenta
Nation:
Counci

1. The
previous1
consent
Israel an
discussio

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SECOND MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday;18 September 1968, at 4!.30 p.m.
President: Mr. G. IGNATIEFF

(Canada).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l452)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Israel to the’ United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8794)
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8805)
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8806).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8794)
letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the llfiited Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/8805)
Letter dated 8 September 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8806)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Israel and the United Arab Republic to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel)
and Mr. M. A. El K0n.v (United Arab Republic) took places
at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its examination of the item before it.
3. Before the Council begins its discussion, I should like to
draw members’ attention to a number of reports received
from the Secretary-General since the Council last discussed
this question a week ago; those reports transmit supplemental information from the Chief of Staff of UNTSO and
have been circulated in documents S/7930/Add.83 to 87.
4. In addition, the Secretary-General has provided me with
three sets of photographs taken by the United Nations
military observers in the Suez Canal area. One of those sets
of photographs relates to the inquiry into the mining
incident of 10 September, described in document S/7930/
Add.8 1; the other two, to damage suffered by United
Nations installations, reported in document S/7930/
Add.83, paragraphs 3 and 4. I shall pass these photographs
around the table during the meeting; if members of the
Council wish to examine them in greater detail, they may
be inspected in Mr. Chai’s office, room 3519.
5. We adjourned our last meeting on the understanding
that members of the Council would hold themselves
available for consultations and for further consideration of
the item on our agenda in the light of those consultations.
That was on 11 September. Since then the President has
been conducting consultations with all members of the
Council on a daily basis, with a view to determining what
further constructive steps could be taken by this Council in
the light of the three complaints set out on the agenda
before us, and taking into account the reports from General
Odd Bull on the incidents in the area. These consultations
have obviously not moved as quickly as some members of
the Council might have wished. Nevertheless, patience does
seem to have its reward and I am now in a position to
present to the Council a draft resolution which reflects the
agreement obtainable on this subject at this time among the
greatest possible number of members of the COUP.
On
the basis of the informal understanding reached among
members of the Council, I should now like to read out the
draft resolution and shall subsequently ask members of the
Council to take a decision on it in the usual manner, that is
by means of a vote. The draft resolution reads as follows:
“The Security Council,
‘Recalling the declaration of the Presitient of the
Security Council of 9 September 1968, as made at the
1448th meeting of the Council,

“Gravely concerned about the deteriorating situation in
the Middle East,

end the violence; it was a requirement to respect the
cease-fire. OUr action met the immediate and urgent need,I
have 110 doubt that it wasright to act aswe did that night,I
have no doubt that our action contributed to maintaining
the cease-firethrough the past ten days of tension.

“Convinced that all Members of the United Nations
should co-operate towards a peaceful settlement in the
Middle East,

11. There were other direct results of our endeavoursthough encouragement came not so much from cur
speeches
asfrom the statementsof the parties.

“1. Insists that the cease-fire ordered by the Security
Council in its resolutions must be rigorously respected;
“2. Reaffirm
its resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, and urges all the parties to extend their
fullest co-operation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the speedy fulfilment of the mandate entrusted to him under that resolution.”

12. In his first report [S/793O/Add. 74/ GeneralOdd Bull
told us that Ambassador Gohar
of the United Arab
Republic had given an assuranceof the continued and
unqualified adherenceof the United Arab Republicto the
cease-fireand to the agreedarrangementsto give effect to it
on the Canal.“Continued and unqualified”: thosewerethe
words of the United Arab Republic, the wordsthat it USed
from the beginning. Certainly that was a most valuable
assurance.AmbassadorBCrard very rightly emphasized
its
importancewhen he spoketo uson 10 September(1449th
meeting].

I have asked the Secretariat to circulate the text so that all
members may have it before them.
6. With the consent of the members of the Council, I
propose that the Council now proceed to vote on the draft
resolution just read out.

13. We have the recent and explicit assuranceof the
United Arab Republic that the cease-firewill be respected,

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia,
France, Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.

14. We have had equally clear statementsfrom the Israel
Government. I say againthat we welcomedthe decisionof
the Israel Government to come to the Council-a decision
to seek an escapefrom escalatingviolence. Ambassador
Tekoah told us wlm
hc spoke to us on 5 September:
“Israel hasturned to the Security Council with onepurpose
in mind: to find in it support for strengtheningthe fabricof
the cease-fireestablishedby the Security Council.” [1447th
nzcctirzg,para. 93./ Again a most important assurance.

Against: None.
Abstaining: Algeria.
The draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none,
with I abstention. 1

15. Conscqucntly we had one clear courseto follow. We
had to rely 011 the assurances
we had beengiven.Wetrusted
that they were given in good faith. Anyone who broke
those assurances
would certainly carry a very heavy and
grave responsibility. It was right to reaffirm the declaration
we author?& our President to make. It was right to
concentrate on the immediate purpose which is allimportant to everything else-the maintemanceof the
cease-fireon the Canal.

7. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those members of
the Council that have inscribed their names on my list to
speak after the vote.
8. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): We have been a
long time anxiously considering what best we can do to
prevent further violence and to clear the way to peaceful
progress through the efforts of Ambassador Jarring. During
these protracted and painstaking consultations we have
admired the patience and persistence of our President.
Without his forbearance and guidance we could scarcely
have reached a positive conclusion.

16. IIZ that aim General Odd Bull and his observershave
thrcmghout played an admirable part. We commendtheir
speedy,persistentand courageousactions. We call on both
sidesto give them greater support and every facility to
perform their task.

9. He helped us to take one important step straight away.
When the news came of the serious events and loss of life
along the Canal on 8 September we met without delay. We
proceeded that night to authorize our President to malce an
important declaration [1448th meeting, para. 731. It was in
the best traditions of the Council that we should meet
immediately to check and stop violence, We did not fail to
act at once,

17. Certainly there are other issueswhich demandour
attention, We are greatly concerned about breachesof the
cease-firein the Jordan Valley and in Syria. Wemustnever
forget our obligation to the vast number of refugeesnow
facing another winter of suffering. We areconstantlyaware
that we need to save and speedand support the Jarring
mission,We shall pursue the aims I have stated. But our
obvious and primary duty was to bring our Present
discussionto an early end and open the way to Progress
towards a settlement by concentrating on the immediate
aim of restoring ilIlC1 IllaiIltiIiIliIlg
the cease-fireOn the
Canal.

10. That action must not be belittled. It expressed the
overwhelming desire of the Council; it was a clear call to
1 Seeresolution 258 (1968).
2

18. For
resolutiOII

the great6
from Viol6

19: We 1
step.It is
forward 1
clared pr
peacefulB
20. The
United AI

21. Mr. :
becomev(
authoritie
the alreac
seriesof
Arab ter.
nature. T:
aim of CC
objectives
for basic
attention
their aggi
territories
of the U1
intensifyi
hopeequ
quarters,
additiona
22. DesI
distortion
standing
this respf
thembrie
23. It is
1967 Isr:
Arab cou
ted their
it througl
territories
shouldbe
policies0
24. It is
occupied
still,

to

1

continuec
the back
leaders,ii
the know

25. A t1
adopted
Represen,
secure tl
resolutior
different
ment am
Council
Jarring ir

18. For that reason we had no hesitation in supporting the
resolution we have just passed. None of .us can doubt aat
the greatest contribution to a settlement will be a turning
from Giolence.

from the very beginning indicated its readiness to implement that resolution and its willingness to co-operate with
the Special Representative, Israel has, despite false assertions to the contrary, constantly refused to act in the same
manner. All Israeli references to the Security Council
resolutions are vague, limited and qualified.

19: We take only one step today; but it is an important
step, It is a necessary step if the way is to be cleared to go
forward without delay-to go forward to transform
declared principles and purposes into the realities of a
peaceful settlement.
20. The PRESIDENT:
United Arab Republic.

26. No amount of verbal eloquence on the part of the
Israeli representative or of his authorities can alter those
facts. Neither the complaint of Israel nor the distortions of
facts contained in the statements of the Israeli representative and the Israeli leaders can diminish Israel’s responsibility for the present situation in the Middle East. It should
be kept in mind that the tense situation in the Middle East
today is the immediate result of Israeli aggression and
Israel’s continued and persistent policy of occupation of
Arab territories, and its refusal to comply with the
resolution of the Security Council.

I call on the representative of the

21. Mr, EL KONY (United Arab Republic): By now it has
become very clear that the policies carried out by the Israeli
authorities have two main objectives. The first is iu inflame
the already tense situation in the area by embarking on a
series of attacks which, coupled with the occupation of
Arab territories, can only accentuate their provocative
nature, The second is a tactical campaign with the avowed
aim of confusing the issues and distorting the facts. These
objectives of Israeli policy are no longer a secret to anyone,
for basic to Israeli thinking is their endeavour to divert the
attention of the Council and world public opinion from
their aggression and their continued occupation of Arab
territories in violation of the basic principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. In the process, and by deliberately
intensifying the causes of friction in the Middle East, they
hope equally to create an atmosphere of pressure on certain
quarters, out of which they may procure for themselves
additional supplies of arms and funds.

27. It is CyniCal on the part of the Israeli authorities and
their supporters to consider as provocation any protective
action the Arab people in these territories take in defence
of their legitimate rights, and their opposition to the
oppressing forces
of occupation. The real, grave and
Cont~V-ling provocation is the occupation of Arab territories.
28. The real intentions of Israel with regard to Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November were
unwittingly disclosed the other day by Mr. Tekoah when he
stated before the Council: “in speaking of ‘fundamental’
resolutions, I said, and I quote, ‘the fundamental resolutions . . . of a cease fire’. That was the reference-not to the
resolution of 22 November.” [1449th meeting, para. 157.1
This
a rather extraordinary
kind of interpretation.
Mr. Tekoah did not hesitate to confer on the cease-fire
resolutions the nature of “fundamental resolutions”-these
cease-fire resolutions which by their very essence are of a
temporary nature and in accordance with their very
provisions are but a first step. At the same time he did not
shrink from denying the fundamental nature of resolution
242 (1967), which was adopted unanimously after great
efforts and long and tedious consultations. The refusal of
Israel to implement Security Council resolution 242 (1967)
obviously stresses the fact that Israel is bent on aggression,
that Israel is inclined towards belligerence, that Israel does
not want peace.

22. Despite all those tactics, the confusion and the
distortions created by the Israeli authorities, and notwithstanding the support lent to Israel and its representatives in
this respect, the facts remain clear. I should like to recall
them briefly.
23. It is a fact-and let us never forget it-that on 5 June
1967 Israel launched a treacherous attack against three
Arab countries and invaded their territories. Having admitted their wanton aggression, they are at present maintaining
it through the oppression of the inhabitants of the occupied
territories. The references to aggression and aggressors
should be confined solely to those who have founded their
policies on aggression: namely, Israel.
24. It is also a fact that the Arab territories tl?at have been
occupied by the Israeli armed forces since June 1967 are
still, to the present day, occupied by those forces. The
continued occupation of those territories, viewed against
the background of the repeated statements of Israeli
leaders, is an ominous phenomenon and can only confirm
the knowledge of the sinister Israeli expansionist designs.

29. The Security Council should discharge its responsibility and request forthwith the compliance of Israel with
resolution 242 (1967). The Council should not allow Israel
to use its obstructive tactics to divert the Council’s
attention from the basic elements-which I have expounded
on at length-that underlie the situation in the Middle East.
30. The realization by the world community of the
dangers inherent in the present situation resulting from the
occupation by foreign armed forces of Arab territories has
very recently become more acute. On 15 September at
Algiers the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity adopted the following
resolution:

25. A third fact is that ten months ago this very Council
adopted a resolution [242 (1967)/ by which a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General was designated to
Secure the implementation of the provisions of that
resolution. It is worth recording in this connexion the
different positions taken on the one side by my Government and on the other by Israel towards the Security
Council resolution in general and towards Ambassador
Jarring in particular. While the United Arab Republic has

“‘Having heard the statement of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the United Arab Republic, 011the situation in
3

the Middle East in general and the United Arab Republic
in particular,

38. It must be our primary concern to seek to establish an
honourable and just peace based on resolution 242 (1967).

“1. Takes note of the statement made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the United Arab Republic;

39. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): My delegation voted in
favour of the resolution which has now been adopted by
the Security Council because we consider that it contains
the main elements relevant both to the over-all situation in
the Middle East and to the incidents which have been
discussed in the course of the debate which we are now
about to conclude.

“2. Reaffirms, in this respect, its support for the
United Arab Republic;
“3. Calls for the withdrawal of foreign troops from all
Arab territories occupied since 5 June 1967, in accordance with the resolution taken by the Security Council on
22 November 1967, and appeals to all member States of
the Organization of African Unity to use their influence
to ensure a strict implementation of this resolution.”

40. My delegation has time and again emphasized that the
cease-fire must be strictly maintained by all concerned, not
only in order to avoid losses of life, human suffering and
material damage but also because any violation of the
cease-fire has an adverse effect upon the efforts to bring
about a peaceful solution of the problems of the Middle
East. This point is covered by paragraph 1 of the resolution.

31. When my Government decided to bring to the
attention of the Security Council the latest Israeli attack
against the cities of the west bank of the Suez Canal, it
expected that the Council would take prompt action and
condemn Israel for that act of flagrant aggression. Unfortunately, the action of the Council has been delayed and
later obstructed by the intransigence of Israel and its
supporters.

41. From the discussion of the incidents which have been
the subject of our present debate, the importance of the
role played by General Odd Bull and his observers in the
Suez Canal sector is obvious. I want to say that we
understand paragraph 1 to underline the obligations of the
parties in that sector to continue, indeed to strengthen,
their co-operation with General Odd Bull and his observers.

32. This is regrettable and is rendered even more regrettable by the fact that the inaction of the Council can only
encourage Israel to pursue with impunity its policies of
aggression.

42. My delegation voted in favour of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. In doing so at
that meeting I strongly urged all the parties involved to
extend their full co-operation and goodwill to the Special
Representative in the exercise of his most difficult and
equally important task and in the realization of the high
principles embodied in resolution 242 (1967). We therefore
whole-heartedly welcome the reaffirmation of that resolution and the call upon the parties to extend their fullest
co-operation to Ambassador Jarring in the fulfilment of his
mandate under that resolution-that
is, as is said in
paragraph 3 : “to establish and maintain contacts with the
States concerned in order to promote agreement and assist
efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement in
accordance with the provisions and principles in this
resdlution?’

33. In conclusion, I should like to stress again that the
only solution for the problems in the Middle East is the
speedy implementation of resolution 242 (1967).
34. Mr. JARA RECALDE (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish}: My delegation cast its vote in favour of the draft
resolution which was distributed to us just now so that it
might be adopted by a large majority. It did so in the belief
that any appeal to secure the implementation of the
cease-fire and to prevent renewed acts of violence would
heIp to create an atmosphere more conducive to the
exchange of practical ideas which could lead to a just
solution of the conflict. To that end, it is also the duty of
the parties to give every possible support and co-operation
to the Secretary-General’s representative, Mr, Jarring, in his
untiring and persevering efforts to bring his difficult task to
a successful conclusion.

43. There is no doubt that Ambassador Jarring has done
and is doing what was expected of him, and that in a most
outstanding manner. But without the co-operation of the
parties he cannot make substantial progress in the direction
of that peaceful and accepted settlement called for in
resolution 242 (1967).

35. I have to point out, at the same time? that my
delegation, faithful to .its traditional policy of repudiating
all acts of violence and breaches of the cease-fire, cannot
fail to condemn the incident referred to by the representative of Israei in his letter of 2 September to the President of
the Security Council (S/8794/,
and which led to our
present deliberations.

44. We believe that the time has now indeed come for the
parties to move with imagination and courage towards a
solution.
45. Mr. YUNUS (Pakistan): A short while ago my delegation voted in favour of the resolution that you read out to
the Council, Mr. President, although it reflects only a part
of the action which we should have liked this Council to
take. We have done so in a spirit of co-operation and hope.
All of us here, indeed the entire membership of the United
&tiOllS,
desire peace in the Middle East. It is towards the
achievement of this noble end that this Council has SO far
directed all its wisdom and resources and adopted resolu-

36. Scrupulous observance of the cease-fire by the parties
to the dispute and the renunciation of all acts of violence
are the prerequisites for the creation of a climate conducive
to constructive dialogue.
37. We are convinced that any act of violence, whatever its
form, can only inflame passions and thus render even more
difficult the peaceful solution of this protracted conflict.
4

tion 242 (1967) on 22 November 1967. We believe that it is
ln the full, effective and speedy implementation of that
resolution that the best hope of bringing a durable peace to
the Middle East lies. Every time the Security Council meets
to consider a violation or breach of the cease-fire and
confines its action merely to repeating a call to the parties
to observe the cease-fire, without insisting on a speedy
implementation of resolution 242 (1967), we submit that it
prolongs the agony of the Arab inhabitants of the areas
militarily occupied by Israel.

52. The Security Council cannot today shirk its responsibility, which is to consider the very substance of the Middle
Eastern problem.
53. All the efforts made during the past twenty yean to
remove from the scene those most immediately concerned,
namelY, the Palestinian people, by reducing them to the
status of refugees, have proved vain; the heroic resistance of
the Palestinian people has achieved an international resonance and dimension, however much the usurpers would
like to silence it.

46. When we stress the need for the implementation of
resolution 242 (1967) we do not even for a moment
minimize the importance of respect for the cease-fire by the
parties in the area. Respect for the observance of the
cease-fire, however, is nat an end in itself.

54. Our Purpose in briefly recalling the basic causes of the
tragedy of the Middle East was to emphasize the particular
responsibility of this Organization in the matter during the
last twenty Years. We also wished to state that the time had
come for the Security Council, whose principal function it
is to maintain international peace and security, to require
the immediate cessation of the Israeli occupation of the
territOrieS
of sovereign States, Members of thjs Organ&ation, and to take all necessary steps to contribute to the
restoration of ‘the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people. No real solution to the tragedy of the Middle
East will be achieved so long as the Security Council fails to
tackle the very roots of the evil. To ignore this reality and
to be content with provisional solutions can only postpone
the inevitable.

47. In fact, peace-keeping and peace-making in the Middle
East are inseparably linked together. The former can hardly
be emphasized without equally stressing the need for the
latter. It is the conspicuous absence of a rational juxtaposition of these two essential elements from the cease-fire
resolutions of June 1967 that has led to the present
situation.
48. Tension is rising again in. the Middle East. It is our
fervent hope that the situation in the area wilI not worsen
and that the unqualified reaffirmation by this Council of
resolution 242 (1967) will help in creating conditions
which will lead to the speedy and full implementation of
that resolution, providing a sound basis for the construction
of a durable and lasting peace in the Middle East.

55. Consequently, Mr. President, my delegation had no
choice but to abstain from votirig on the draft resolution
which you read out to the Council.
56. Mr. DE ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil): My delegation
wishes to state very briefly the reasons why it cast an
affirmative vote on the resolution which the Council has
just adopted.

49. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French):
During our recent discussions of the item which is still on
the Council’s agenda, the Algerian delegation made it quite
clear that provisional solutions which were perpetuated
could only aggravate the political situation. We are convinced that this aggravation of the situation will persist
until such time as the causes of which it is the effect have
been adequately dealt with. Those causes lie in the military
occupation of the territories of sovereign States.

57. The text is the result of lengthy and exhaustive
negotiations which have been conducted under your able
guidance, Mr. President, and all of us are aware of the
difficulties which we have met along the way. We are much
indebted to you.
58. On this question of the Middle East, a problem of
semantics is now added to the political problem, which is
quite complex in and of itself. The word “acts” is now
supposed to denote the acts of one particular party, while
the word “action” is generally thought of as denoting an
action by the other party. There are semantic subtleties
around the concepts of “maintenance”, “establishment” or
“restoration” of the peace. There is the additional question
of the emphasis to be placed on peace-keeping, which is
supposed to be in the interest of one of the contending
parties, and on peace-making, which is construed to be of
special interest to the other side. Cease-fire should be
mentioned, but should not be mentioned too often lest it
be inferred that we visualize a permanent Cease-fire-g S@P
short of the permanent settlement which we are bound to
seek. The whole question is by now impregnated with
semantics; and semantics can sometimes be as delicate and
explosive as plain politics.

50. The mere toleration of such a situation, which has
now subsisted for over a year, is a flagrant violation of the
United Nations Charter and a challenge to its authority. We
continue to believe that the source of the dangerous tension
which prevails throughout the Middle East is Israel’s
constant aggression and its stubborn determination to
pursue a policy of territorial expansion at the expense of
the Arab countries-not
the incidents which are but the
expressions of that policy.
51. Moreover, through the escalation of the faits accomplis which Israel has perpetrated sjnce the outset of the
crisis in the Middle East, and through the acquiescence and
support of certain Powers, Israel has been strengthened in
its belief that it may one day reach what are purported to
be its biblical frontiers. In our view, failure to require the
immediate withdrawal of Israel’s forces of occupation from
SovereignArab territories constitutes direct encouragement
to the maintenance of the occupation or at the least to its
exploitation as bargaining coin.

59. We mention all these facts in order to make it quite
clear that, although acceptable to us, the text that we have
5

voted for does not reflect fully the views of my delegation.
We would have favoured a more detailed analysis and
consideration of the specific violations of the cease-fire
which were brought by the parties to the attention of the
Security Council, and we would have welcomed provisions
of a more stringent nature on the absolute necessity of
mutual respect for the cease-fire commitments. We would
likewise have welcomed a strengthening of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization set up under the
authority of General Odd Bull.
60. None the less, the text as finally adopted presents
some extremely valuable features, namely.
61. Firstly, it reaffirms the Plesident’s declaration of
9 September requiring strict observance of the cease-fire
(1448th meeting, para. 73J.
62. Secondly, it stresses the necessity for all Members of
the United Nations to co-operate towards a peaceful
settlement of the question of the Middle East. We consider
that this paragraph entails, inter &a, an implicit appeal to
the major Powers to strive towards mutual understanding
on the all-important question of the supply of armaments
and implements of war. We have stressed this point of the
arms escalation on different occasions and it is our earnest
opinion that some day, somehow, the Council will have to
tackle this problem from a much more direct and definite
approach. The third paragraph of the preamble contains, in
our view, the basis for further action by the Security
Council in this particulat field.
63. Thirdly, it strikes an acceptable balance between the
concepts of peace-keeping and p5ace-making, and it stems
from the premise that the responsibility of the Security
Council is the achievement of a permanent political
decision, nut that of concentrating on isolated incidents,
acts of violence, or violations of the ccacc-fire.
64. Fourthly, we are happy to see th:li it r&firms
rcsolulion 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, which contains the principles and provisions for a fair and equitable
solution of the problem.
65, Fifthly, it extends full support to the task of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Gunnar Jarring, in his efforts towards reconciling the
views of the contending parties towards a final settlement.
66. These are positive points which compensate for any
possible shortcomings. We have cast an affirmative vote on
the resolution on the assumption and in the hope that it
will contribute to a definite settlement of the question of
the Middle East, and with the clear understanding that it is
not directed against anyone but is clearly directed towards
pence and security in the area. For the delegation of Brazil
this is an occasion not only for the explanation of vote, but
also for tfie expression of a hope.
67. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): First OF all,
Mr. President, I should like to join those who have already
expressed to you their appreciation and their admiration
for the role which you have played in the conduct of the
negotiations that have brought us back to the table here

today. I think it is fair to say that your patience, your
forbearance and your wisdom were not only instrumental
but indeed an absolutely vital element in producing the
important resolution which the Council has adopted today
by such an overwhelming vote.
68. The serious incidents in the Suez Canal sector which
have been the subject of this Council’s public and private
deliberations over the last two weeks have been a matter of
deep concern to my Government. This concern has been all
the deeper because of the fact that the incidents involved
took place in a sector which had been relatively quiet for
nearly a year. As Ambassador Ball emphasized to the
Council on 11 September (1451st meeting], we have been
concerned that the situation in the Suez area could become
very dangerous indeed unless the parties on both sides of
the Canal exercised the restraint and the forbearance
necessary to ensure a scrupulous observance of the ceasefire.
69. For those reasons we considered it essential that the
Council should insist, as it did in the resolution just
adopted, upon rigorous respect for the cease-fire which the
Council had ordered in past resolutions, and that we should
thereby supplement and strengthen through a formal
resolution the declaration which the President was authorized by the Council to read out on 9 September requiring
the parties to observe the cease-fire.
70. Now in addition to those points, I should like to
observe that, as Council members, we must all be distressed
at the reports circulated to us today of the damage done to
United Nations installations on both sides of the Canal
during the incidents of 8 September. General Odd Bull has
now reported in document S/7930/Add.86 that he has
made strong protests to both Israel and the United Arab
Republic against actions during that incident which placed
the safety of United Nations staff in grave and unnecessary
danger. In those actions, control centres and several
observation posts were hit in such a way that, to use
General Odd Bull’s words, the possibility of error was most
unlikely. I feel confident that other members of the
Council have in mind, as we do, that a resolution insisting
upon rigorous respect for the cease-fire clearly also covers
what General Bull has asked for, namely, effective measures
to prevent the recurrence of any action which places the
safety of the United Nations staff in the area in unnecessary
danger-a staff which, after all, serves as the agent of this
Council and performs an indispensable role in supervising a
cease-fire that has been ordered in our resolutions.
‘71. The need to arrest a further deterioration of the
situation in the Middle East through a rigorous respect for
the cease-fire now becomes all the more critical and urgent
as we look to the immediate future, to Ambassador
Jarring’s return to New York and the continuation of his
peace-making efforts here. I think no one would refuse to
agree that this is a critical and important moment for the
parties, as well as for Ambassador Jarring’s mission, and
thereby a critical and important moment in the pursuit of
peace. And none can fail, therefore, to see that the Council
had a clear responsibility to make its own contribution to
that process. My delegation believes the Council has done
so in this most recent step of urging directly the parties

concerned to extend their fullest co-operation to Ambassador Jarring in the speedy fulfilment of his mandate. That
mandate, as the representative of Denmark has just reminded us, is set forth clearly in Security Council resolution 242 (1967): “to establish and maintain contacts with
the States concerned in order to promote agreement and
assist efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement
jn accordance with the provisions and principles in this
resolution.”

November. II-I our view, reaffirmation of resolution
242 (1967) at this time should be regarded as a constructive
renewal Of Security COUnCil
support for the provisions and
principles so carefully outlined in that resolution, At the
Sametime, taking into account the many months that have
passed s&e resolution 242 (1967) was adopted, it seemed
to mY delegation both appropriate and necessary to urge all
the Parties to extend their fullest co-operation to Ambassador Jarring in the speedy fulfilment of the mandate
entrusted to him, as outlined in paragraph 3 of that
resolution.

72. The operative elements of the resolution we have just
adopted today, in our judgement, wisely and properly place
demands and obligations on’ all of the parties. We have
insisted that the cease-fire should be rigorously respected
by all and all are urged to co-operate to the maximum in
the achievement of a settlement.

79. ln adopting the resolution presented at the opening of
this meeting, the Security Council has exercised its authority and has acted with a sense of responsibility in the face
of a dangerous and deteriorating situation. I can only hope
that the Council’s action will serve as a deterrent to
escalation of violence in the Middle East and that, as I
suggested in a previous statement, both parties in the Suez
Canal sector with which we have been concerned in these
discussions will strictly abide by the assurances given of full
respect for the cease-fire.

73. I think that we cannot conclude this meeting without
expressing one additional word of concern about further
obstacles to peace in the area which have been brought to
our attention by documents submitted just last night. Our
basic fears and apprehensions about the implications of the
Suez incidents have been reinforced by incidents in the
Israel-Jordan sector of the cease-fire. Those documents have
been put before the Council today. Accordingly, in
concluding these comments on the resolution, I should like
to take this opportunity of urging that all the Governments
in the area should recognize that this resolution we have
just adopted is in both language and intent directed to all
sectors of the cease-fire.

80. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): After thorough discussion and
lengthy consultations, the Security Council has concluded
its consideration of the question of the recent incidents and
violations of the cease fire in the Suez Canal zone.
81. The resolution which the Council has just adopted on
this question is basically adequate to the needs of the
moment and to the situation as it has in fact developed in
that region.

74. The PRESIDENT: As I have no further speakers on
my list, I should like to speak briefly as the representative
of CANADA.

82. The violations of the cease-fire in the Suez Canal zone
were the direct result of Israel’s continuing policy of
aggression towards the Arab States, and its refusal to
comply with the Security Council’s decision and to
withdraw
its forces from the Arab territories it has
occupied. Until quite recently Israel was systematically
directing its fresh acts of aggression principally against
Jordan;
now the Israeli extremists are also intensifying their
aggression in the cease-fire area with the United Arab
Republic, that is, in the Suez Canal sector.

75. In so doing, 1 should like to single out four points
pertaining to the question we have been considering which
my Government regards as most important. They are not
new, but they bear repetition.
7G. Firstly, the goal of this Council and of the States
directly concerned in the area must surely be to further the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Secondly, progress towards that goal, through the mission
entrusted to the Secretary-General’s distinguished representative, is only impeded by outbreaks of violence which
increase tension in the area. Thirdly, the cease-fire resolu.tions adopted by the Council require the prevention by the
parties of any and all violations of the ceasefire. Fourthly,
it is incumbent upon the parties to extend the fullest
co-operation to the Chief of Staff of UNTSO. It is indeed in
their interests so to do, for such co-operation will contribute significantly to the maintenance of the cease-fire in
the area.

83.+ Attempts have been made here in the Security Council
to represent the situation as though the responsibility for
the incidents provoked by Israel rested with the United
Arab Republic rather than with Israel. All such manoeUvrCs,
however, have collapsed like a house of cards. Nothing
remains of the tale of the three helmets and the mysterious
footprints in the sand in connexion with the so-called
incident of 26 August, nor of that of the alleged Egyptian
mine, the detonation of which was used as a pretext for
shelling the west bank of the Suez Canal. That shelling, as
we now know from the official documents submitted bY
General Odd Bull, caused heavy casualties and considerable
material damage.

77. As regards the fourth point, I should like to take this
opportunity to express, through the Secretary-General, our
appreciation of the dedication to duty in hazardous
circumstances which has marked the work of the United
Nations military observers in the Suez Canal sector. This
Council, it seems to me, is indebted to them for their
reports and for their highly valuable contribution to the
maintenance of the cease-fire.

84. Details of the consequences of this new act of
aggression and of Israel’s violation of the Security Council’s
resolutions on a cease-fire are now known from the report
of tile Chief of Staff of UNTSO. General Odd Bull’s report
(s/7g3o/AdcE.83/ states that, as a result of the shelling bY

78. We in this Council cannot falter in our support of
resolution 242 (1967), which was adopted unanimously last
7

the Israeli artillery on 8 September, twenty-six persons on
the west bank of the Suez Canal were killed, and more than
100 wounded. Two hundred and fifty buildings were
destroyed or damaged. Members of the Security Council
have seen this for themselves today from the photographs
which half of them have already examined. Hospitals,
schools, houses of worship, power stations, water supply
and many other buildings have been destroyed. Such are
the tragic consequences of this new act of aggression.

ance with the resolution taken by the Security Council cn
22 November 1967, and appeals to all member States cf
.the Organization of African Unity to use their influence
to ensure a strict implementation of this resolution.”
This resolution adopted by a high-level African body is
clearly directed against those who have been seeking to
obstruct compliance with the Security Council resolution
of 22 November 1967 and who are now seeking to prevent
the implementation of that resolution.

85. And once the deceit was exposed and the truth made
known, it became clear that the responsibility for all this
lies wholly with Israel.

91. All sincere supporters of a peaceful settlement ia he
Near East may note with satisfaction that the realizaticaof
the need for the earliest possible implementation of he
Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967 hasalso
been apparent in the statements of the majority of the
representatives of States members of the Security Councfl,
This realization is now expressed in the decision which the
Council has just adopted.

86. Conclusive evidence has been given in the Council that
in both cases there was clear provocation on Israel’s part
and that in both cases there was aggressive intent. Such are
the facts.
87. In the course of the discussion another fact became
even more evident, namely, that, while continuing its
previous policy towards the Arab States, Israel is placing
every obstacle in the way of efforts to achieve a political
settlement in the Near East, is disregarding Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 and is thereby
virtually paralyzing the activities of the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Mr. Jarring.

92. The council’s confirmation of that resolution is
particularly significant because, since the time of its adop.
tion, that resolution has not once been mentionedin
Security Council resolutions.In reaffirming that resolution
and thereby the need for its implementation, the Security
Council urgently calls upon all parties to co-operatemore
fully with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in securingthe earliest possiblefulfilment of the
responsibilitieslaid upon him by that resolution.Weall
know what thoseresponsibilitieswere. They wereto assist
in securingcompliancewith the provisionsof that resolution, and in the first place with the demandfor the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from the Arab territories
occupiedby them, and to take all the other stepsto bring
about a political settlementin the Near East, providedfor
in that resolution.Thisis a stepin the right direction.

88. Obviously, in such circumstances, the Seclirity Council’s task and duty, in considering the latest incidents in the
Near East, was not only to emphasize the need for strict
observance of the cease-fire resolutions, but also to take a
further step forward by placing particular emphasis on the
need for the earliest possible impIementation of its resolution of 22 November 1967, providing for a political
settlement in that area.

93. The Security Council’s declaration in favour of the
speediest
possibleimplementationof that resolutionismost
timely. That is the main point, the basicsignificance
of the
decisionwhich the Council hasjust adopted. Thenextstep
is the implementationof that resolution and that depends
wholly upon Israel, since the Arab States havelongsince
expressedtheir readinessto carry out all the provisions
of
that resolution. But the matter does not rest with Israel
alone; it restsalso with thosewho support it. If they too
are preparedto work towards a political settlementin the
Near East, as provided for and stipulated in the Security
Council resolution of 22 November 1967, then SUCK a
settlementcancomeinto being.

89. In that connexion, the USSR delegation considers it
essential to point out once more that only through the
implementation of that resolution, which calls for the
immediate withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from Arab
territories occupied as a result of the aggression of June
1967, can the tension be eased and the necessary conditions
ensured for a political settlement in the Near East. Until
this is done, there can be no peace or tranquillity in that
region.
90. The overwhelming majority of the world’s States
demand the earliest possible liquidation of the consequences of the Israeli aggression against the Arab States
through the immediate implementation of the Security
Council resolution of 22 November 1967. In that connexion, the Council’s special attention must begdrawn to a very
recent international document, a resolution’adopted a few
days ago by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the member countries of the Organization of
African Unity, expressing the will of all Africa, of all the
peoples of that great continent. In that resolution, as was
pointed out by the representative of the United Arab
Republic, Mr. El Kony, the Assembly of the Organization
of African Unity:

95. In conclusion,we cannot fail to note, in connexion
with the item under discussion,the significantandconstructive contribution made by the representativeof the
United Arab Republic, Mr. El Kony, to the Council’swork
and to the ConsuItationsamongits members,a contribution
which led to the elaborationof the draft resolutionadopted
by the Council.

“CaZls for the withdrawal
of foreign troops from all
Arab territories occupied since 5 June 1967, in accord-

96. Finally, we should like to take this opportunityto
expressour sympathy and deep condolencesto the rePre-

94. As far asthe Soviet Union is concerned,it isprepared,
asit hasbeenfrom the outset, to do everything possible
to
that end.

8

sentative of another friendly Arab State, Mr. El-Farra, the
representative of Jordan, on the death of a close relative,
Judge Shawki El-Fairy, an eminent representative of the
Palestinian people, who was a victim of the policy of
violence and terror carried out by the Israeli authorities in
occupied Arab territory.
97. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative of

98. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The Security Council debate
initiated by the Israel complaint of 2 September against
Egyptian aggression has come to an end.
99. I should like to express to you, Mr. President, our
appreciation for the perspicacity, understanding and skill
with which you have guided our deliberations. Our appreciation is extended to you and to those members of the
Security Council who realized the gravity of the Egyptian
attacks, the seriousness of the situ’ation engendered by
them, and expressed their concern about these acts of
hostility and the danger inherent in their continuation.
100. It is regrettable that the resolution adopted does not
reflect these views, bears little relation to the complaint we
submitted, and falls short of effective equitable action to
halt Egyptian aggression. This is particularly so as there can
be no reasonable doubt regarding the facts of the situation,
supported as they are by a convincing body of conclusive
evidence.
101. It is clear from which side came the unprovoked
blows on the cease-fire. It is clear from which side
originated the mine-laying raids, the ambushes, the widefront assault by artillery, mortar and tanks. It is clear on
which side vehicles were being blown up and people killed,
maimed or captured. It is clear which side announced a
change of attitude towards the observance of the cease-fire
and proclaimed a policy of preventive military operations.
102. The resolution ignores these facts. It is, unfortunately, another expression of the double standard that mars
the work of the Security Council on the Middle East
question. In its detachment from the Israeli complaint it in
fact discriminates against Israel, against Israel’s right to full
security from Egyptian attacks under the cease-fire, against
the Israeli dead, wounded and captured in wanton Egyptian
violations of the cease-fire.
103. TO stay Egyptian acts of aggression and in an
endeavour to allay the tension engendered by them, Israel
has had recourse to all available United Nations machinery:
the United Nations military observers, General Odd Bull,
the Security Council. Our requests were simple and
modest-to condemn the military attacks against Israel, to

call on Egypt to prevent their recurrence, to ascertain the
fate of the Israeli soldier abducted by the Egyptians on 26
August and to return him to Israel.
104. We now leave the Security Council table disappointed again and disenchanted. The outcome of the deliberations can under no circumstances be regarded as a satisfactory response to our just complaint, nor does it accord fully
with the responsibilities of the Security Council under the
United Nations Charter.
105. The Security Council deliberations have, however,
helped to unmask Egypt’s attitude and designs. Public
opinion in the entire world has not failed to take notice of
Egypt’s aggressive policy and actions, which threaten the
maintenance of the cease-fire, and of Egypt’s callous
attempt to shirk responsibility. The outcome of the debate
cannot detract from the gravity of this responsibility.
106. The resolution calls on the parties to observe the
cease-fire and to co-operate with the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Ambassador Jarring. My delegation
has taken note of the fact that the Arab member of the
Security Council did not give his support to this resolution.
107. Israel co-operates and will continue to co-operate
with Ambassador Jarring towards the attainment of agreement on a just and lasting peace. Israel will continue to
observe scrupulously the cease-fire with Egypt on the basis
of reciprocity. Israel will continue to insist that Egypt
should prevent any attacks in violation of the cease-fire.
Israel will continue to demand the return of the captured
Israeli soldier. Israel will continue to fulfil its obligations to
protect its citizens, military and civilian, and the territories
under its control.
108. The PRESIDENT: As there are no further speakers
on my list, I take it that we have completed our
consideration of the item on our agenda for today. In
noting this fact, I would be remiss if I did not thank the
members of the Council for their kind remarks addressed to
me and for their own patience and co-operation in making
today’s decision possible.
109. Before adjourning the meeting, I wish to announce
that, in the light of informal consultations, the next
meeting of the Security Council will be held at eleven
o’oclock in the morning on Friday, 20 September. At that
time, with the consent of the Council, we shall take up the
question contained in the letter from the representatives of
Pakistan and Senegal distributed in document S/8819 dated
17 September 1968.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publicotionr
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
moy
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be

obtained
or write

from bookstores
ond distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

throughout
New
York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
der Nations
Unies
sent
diporitoires
du monde entier.
Informez-vows
Nations
Uni&,
Section
des venter,
New York

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Los publicociones

PUBLICACIONES
de las Naciones

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: SUS.

UNIES

en vente
dons
les librairies
et les agencer
ouprbr
de votre librairie
ou odrerrez-vour
6:
ou Genive.

DE LAS
Unidas

en lodar
portes
del mundo.
Conrulte
Venlas,
Nueva
York o Ginebro.

DES NATIONS

NACIONES

esldn

en vento

a su librero

o dirijare

0.50 (or equivalent

UNIDAS
en librerior

in other

y coscu

o: Nociones

currencies)

Unidar,

dirtribuidoras
Secci6n

de

35794-October

1972-2,050
