UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/12
17 March 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3509th meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 March 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Georgia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the interim report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Republic of Georgia
(S/1995/181). The Council also welcomes the recent efforts of the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy which enjoy the Council’s full support.
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia and calls upon the parties
to achieve a comprehensive settlement of the conflict, including on the
political status of Abkhazia.
"The Security Council notes that there has been little overall
progress in achieving a comprehensive political settlement and that a
stalemate exists with respect to the return of refugees and displaced
persons.
"The Security Council takes note of the movement which has occurred in
the political talks which resumed in Geneva from 7 to 9 February 1995 and
calls upon the parties to exert determined efforts towards achieving
substantive progress during the next round of talks.
"The Security Council notes with concern that despite the efforts of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the CIS peacekeeping force, the security situation, in the Gali region in particular,
has deteriorated, causing great difficulty in the delivery of humanitarian
supplies. The Council also notes with concern that reports of human rights
abuses, largely against the Georgian population, have become more frequent.
The Council calls upon the parties to provide a secure environment,
inter alia, to provide security for returning refugees and displaced
persons and to ensure that international relief supplies can be delivered
safely.

95-07517 (E)

170395

/...

S/PRST/1995/12
English
Page 2

"The Security Council is deeply concerned about the lack of progress
regarding the return of refugees and displaced persons. The Council
deplores the continued obstruction on this issue displayed by the Abkhaz
authorities and, in particular, the position taken by those authorities in
the recent meeting of the Quadripartite Commission in Moscow. The Council
expects the parties to implement fully their obligations under the
Quadripartite Agreement on voluntary return of refugees and displaced
persons (S/1994/397, annex II). The Council urges the Abkhaz authorities
to agree to a timetable on the basis of that proposed by UNHCR. The
Council notes that cooperation between UNOMIG and UNHCR is critical to the
safe and orderly return of refugees and displaced persons.
"The Security Council, while welcoming the pledge that has been
announced to the voluntary fund in support of the implementation of the
Agreement on a Cease-fire and Separation of Forces, notes the lack of
contributions to this fund and reiterates its encouragement to Member
States to make contributions to the voluntary fund in support of the
implementation of the Agreement on a Cease-fire and Separation of Forces
and/or for humanitarian aspects including demining, as specified by the
donors. The Council also welcomes all other relevant humanitarian
contributions of Member States.
"The Security Council welcomes the steps taken by UNOMIG and the CIS
peace-keeping force aimed at improving conditions for the safe and orderly
return of refugees and displaced persons. The Council notes UNOMIG’s
increased patrolling and looks forward to further information on
intensification of its activities within its mandate. The Council also
welcomes the strengthening of cooperation between UNOMIG and the OSCE
representatives in Georgia.
"The Security Council agrees with the observation of the SecretaryGeneral that, with patience and perseverance, solutions can be found to the
situation in Abkhazia, Republic of Georgia. The Council underlines that
without progress in this direction it will not be possible to maintain the
support of the international community.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
