United Nations

A/54/PV.83

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fourth session

83rd plenary meeting
Friday, 17 December 1999, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Reports of the Third Committee
The President: This morning, the General Assembly
will consider the reports of the Third Committee on agenda
items 106 to 116 and 12.
I request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Mr. Naif Bin Bandar Al-Sudairy of Saudi Arabia, to
introduce in one intervention the reports of the Third
Committee.
Mr. Al-Sudairy (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
have the honour to present for consideration the following
reports of the Third Committee on the agenda items
allocated to it by the General Assembly.
Under agenda item 106, entitled “Social development,
including questions relating to the world social situation and
to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family”, the
Third Committee recommends in document A/54/595,
paragraph 27, the adoption of five draft resolutions and, in
paragraph 28, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 107, entitled “Crime prevention
and criminal justice”, the Third Committee recommends in
document A/54/596, paragraph 31, the adoption of seven
draft resolutions and, in paragraph 32, the adoption of one
draft decision.

00-27729 (E)

Under agenda item 108, entitled “International drug
control”, the Committee recommends in document
A/54/597, paragraph 7, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under agenda item 109, entitled “Advancement of
women”, the Committee recommends in document
A/54/598 and Corr. 1 and 2, paragraph 34, the adoption
of eight draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 110, entitled “Implementation of
the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on
Women”, the Third Committee recommends in document
A/54/599 and Corr. 1, paragraph 11, the adoption of two
draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 111, entitled “Report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons and humanitarian questions”, the Committee
recommends in document A/54/600, paragraph 19, the
adoption of five draft resolutions.
I would like to draw the attention of the Assembly
to paragraph 7 of the report, which concerns draft
resolution A/C.3/54/L.91, entitled “Follow-up to the
Regional Conference to Address the Problems of
Refugees, Displaced Persons, Other Forms of Involuntary
Displacement and Returnees in the Countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States and Relevant
Neighbouring States”. The name of Georgia should be
deleted from the list of sponsors.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original speeches only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178. Corrections will
be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Under agenda item 112, entitled “Promotion and
protection of the rights of children”, the Third Committee
recommends in document A/54/601, paragraph 12, the
adoption of two draft resolutions and, in paragraph 13, the
adoption of one draft decision.
Regarding agenda item 113, there is a correction to
page 7 of the Arabic text of document A/54/602.
Under this agenda item, entitled “Programme of
activities of the International Decade of the World’s
Indigenous People”, the Third Committee recommends in
document A/54/602, paragraph 9, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under agenda item 114, entitled “Elimination of
racism and racial discrimination”, the Committee
recommends in document A/54/603, paragraph 16, the
adoption of two draft resolutions and, in paragraph 17, the
adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 115, entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”, the Third Committee recommends in
document A/54/604, paragraph 17, the adoption of three
draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 116 (c), entitled “Human rights
situations and reports of special rapporteurs and
representatives”, the Third Committee recommends in
document A/54/605/Add.3, paragraph 62, the adoption of
10 draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 116 (d), entitled “Comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action”, the Third Committee indicates
in its report (A/54/605/Add.4) that no proposals were
submitted and no action was taken under the sub-item.
Under agenda item 116 (e), entitled “Report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights”, the
Third Committee indicates in its report (A/54/605/Add.5)
that no proposals were submitted and no action was taken
under the sub-item.

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
like to thank the Chairman of the Committee, the ViceChairmen, the Secretariat and the interpreters for their
efforts to ensure the success of our work.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Third
Committee that are before it today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote or position. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Third
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records. May I remind
members that under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401 the
General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting unless that delegation’s vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Third
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Third Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. This means
that where recorded votes and separate votes were taken,
we will do the same. I should also hope that we may
proceed to adopt without a vote those recommendations
that were adopted without a vote in the Third Committee.

Agenda item 106 (continued)
Under agenda item 12, entitled “Report of the
Economic and Social Council”, the Third Committee
recommends in document A/54/606, paragraph 8, the
adoption of two draft resolutions.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the members of the
Asian Group, who have given me the honour of
representing them as a member of the Bureau. I would also

2

Social development, including questions relating to the
world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled
persons and the family
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/595)

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
The President: The Assembly has before it five draft
resolutions recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 27 of its report and one draft decision
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 28 of
the same report.

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and
Beyond”, which the Third Committee recommended for
adoption. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.

The Assembly will now take a decision on the five
draft resolutions and the draft decision one by one. After all
the decisions have been taken, representatives will again
have the opportunity to explain their votes or positions.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Policies
and programmes involving youth”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/120).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution II, entitled “Implementation of the World
Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons: towards
a society for all in the twenty-first century”, without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/121).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution III, entitled “ A United Nations literacy decade:
education for all”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 54/122).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution IV, entitled “Cooperatives in social
development”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 54/123).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution V, entitled “Follow-up to the International Year
of the Family”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 54/124).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision, entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the World

The President: I call on the representative of the
United States of America for an explanation of position.
Mr. Rabby (United States of America): The United
States regrets not having been able to co-sponsor
resolution 54/121 on the implementation of the World
Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons. We
joined in the consensus, but we would like to note that
the United States cannot support the language in the third
preambular paragraph, which amounts to a reaffirmation
by all of the States supporting this resolution of
obligations which they have not all, in fact, undertaken.
We would like to emphasize, however, our
Government’s commitment to the advancement and
protection of the rights of persons with disabilities.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
106.

Agenda item 107
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/596)
The President: The Assembly has before it seven
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 31 of its report and one draft decision,
recommended by the Third Committee in paragraph 32 of
the same report. The Assembly will take a decision on the
seven draft resolutions and the draft decision one by one.
After all the decisions have been taken, representatives
will again have the opportunity to explain their vote.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Tenth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/125).

3

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
The President: Draft resolution II, entitled “Draft
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the draft protocols thereto”, was adopted by the
Third Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/126).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Activities of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of
a Convention against Transnational Organized Crime: illicit
manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, their parts and
components and ammunition, as well as consideration of
the need to develop an instrument on the illicit
manufacturing of and trafficking in explosives”. Draft
resolution III was adopted by the Third Committee without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft resolution?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 54/127).
The President: Draft resolution IV, entitled “Action
against corruption”, was adopted by the Third Committee
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly too wishes
to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 54/128).
The President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“High-level Political Signing Conference for the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime”. The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
54/131).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision, entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on the elimination of violence against
women”, recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 32 of its report. May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to adopt the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: I call on the representative of
Uganda on a point of order.
Ms. Otiti (Uganda): With respect to draft resolution
VI, just adopted as resolution 54/130, I wish to recall
that, as indicated in the Third Committee by the
Chairman of the African Group, the correct name of the
institution to which the draft resolution refers is the
United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders. I would request
that this correction be reflected in the final text of
resolution 54/130.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 107?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 108
International drug control

Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 54/129).
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/597)
The President: Draft resolution VI, entitled “African
Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders”, was adopted by the Third Committee without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft resolution?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 54/130).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Strengthening the United Nations Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Programme, in particular its technical
cooperation capacity”. Draft resolution VII was adopted by
the Third Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes also to adopt the draft resolution?

4

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The draft resolution, entitled “International
cooperation against the world drug problem”, was adopted
by the Third Committee without a vote. May I take it that
the General Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft
resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/132).

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 108?
It was so decided.

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
The President: Draft resolution II, entitled
“International Day for the Elimination of Violence against
Women”, was adopted by the Third Committee without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly too wishes to
adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/134).

Agenda item 109 (continued)
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/598 and
Corr.1 and Corr.2)

The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution III, entitled “Improvement of the situation of
women in rural areas”, without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 54/135).

The President: The Assembly has before it eight draft
resolutions recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 34 of its report.
I call on the representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Austria-Garcia (Philippines): I wish to make a
correction to draft resolution VI, to reflect agreement that
was reached in the Third Committee. Paragraph 11 of that
draft resolution should read as follows:
“Also encourages concerned Governments,
particularly those of the countries of origin and
destination, to adopt measures or strengthen existing
ones to regulate the recruitment and deployment of
women migrant workers, including considering the
adoption of appropriate legal measures against
intermediaries who deliberately encourage the
clandestine movement of workers and who exploit
women migrant workers”.

The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution IV, entitled “United Nations Development Fund
for Women”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 54/136).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution V, entitled “Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women”, without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 54/137).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution VI, entitled “Violence against women migrant
workers”, without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?

I thank the delegation of Finland in connection with
this correction.

Draft resolution VI, as orally corrected, was adopted
(resolution 54/138).

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on all eight draft resolutions, one by one, after
which members will have an opportunity to explain their
positions.

The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution VII, entitled “Improvement of the status of
women in the Secretariat”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Traditional
or customary practices affecting the health of women and
girls”, which was adopted by the Third Committee without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft resolution?

Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution 54/139).

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/133).

The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution VIII, entitled “Revitalization and strengthening
of the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

5

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution 54/140).
The President: I call on the representative of Brazil
on a point of order.
Mrs. Nicodemus (Brazil): I would request the
Secretariat to note in document A/54/598 that Brazil is an
original co-sponsor of resolution 54/134 on the International
Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women.
The President: I call on the representative of
Morocco on a point of order.
Mrs. Afifi (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would like
it to be noted that my delegation wishes to join the
sponsors of resolution 54/133 on traditional or customary
practices affecting the health of women and girls.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Russian Federation on a point of order.
Mr. Rogov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The delegation of the Russian Federation would refer to
resolution 54/140 on revitalization and strengthening of the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women. In operative paragraph 10,
following the words “in the Web site of the Institute”, the
words “should be ensured” should be added so that the
resolution is fully consistent with the draft as adopted by
the Third Committee in document A/C.3/54/L.89.
The President: I call on the representative of Ecuador
on a point of order.
Ms. Martínez (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to speak in reference to resolution 54/134
on the International Day for the Elimination of Violence
Against Women. Like Brazil, Ecuador is also a co-sponsor
of the resolution and we ask that our sponsorship be
reflected in the report.
Mr. Simón Padrós (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation became a co-sponsor of the draft resolution
on the United Nations Development Fund for Women, now
resolution 54/136, at the time of its adoption in the Third
Committee. I wish to state that for the record now, as our
sponsorship is not reflected in the report in document
A/54/598.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): Slovenia joined the list of cosponsors on resolution 54/134, entitled “International Day

6

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
for the Elimination of Violence against Women”, and we
would request our sponsorship to be reflected accordingly.
Mr. Yu Wenzhe (China)(spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation is also one of the sponsors of draft
resolution III on improvement of the situation of women
in rural areas. I hope that China’s name will also be
added to the list of sponsors.
Mr. García González (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation also wishes to refer to the draft
resolution entitled “United Nations Development Fund for
women”. In the Third Committee, my delegation also
became a sponsor of this draft, and we would like that to
be reflected in the record.
The President: I am advised by the Secretariat that
the corrections being made now were made in the
Committee and will be added as corrigenda to the report.
They were not actually omitted; they will be duly
reflected in the corrigenda.
Mr. Aliyu (Nigeria): My delegation would also like
to join as a sponsor of draft resolution II, “International
Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women”.
The President: That will be added.
Ms. de Armas García (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation also regrets that it has to refer back to the
draft resolution on improvement of the situation of
women in rural areas. We would like to make it clear that
my delegation had also joined in sponsoring that draft
when it was adopted in the Third Committee, and we are
not shown on record, so we would also appreciate that
correction being made.

Agenda item 110
Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World
Conference on Women
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/599 and
Corr.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.
The General Assembly shall first turn to draft
resolution I, entitled “Follow-up to the Fourth World

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Conference on Women and full implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/141).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution II,
entitled “Preparations for the special session of the General
Assembly entitled Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century'”. The
Third Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/142).
Ms. Kangaskorpi (Finland): I have the honour, on
behalf of the European Union, to explain our position in
connection with the two resolutions just adopted.
The Central and Eastern European countries associated
with the European Union — Bulgaria, Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia — and the associated countries Cyprus and
Malta, as well as the European Free Trade Association
(EFTA) country member of the European Economic Area
(EEA), Iceland, align themselves with this explanation of
vote.
The European Union would like to share our views
regarding the arrangements for the participation of nongovernmental organizations in the Beijing + 5 special
session. The European Union has joined the consensus in
adopting the resolutions and can support their content.
While paragraph 16 of draft resolution II and
corresponding paragraph 15 of draft resolution I remain
valid, further discussion, in light of the new developments
concerning non-governmental organization participation in
the follow-up processes, is required. Since the adoption of
draft resolution II in March of this year, new experience
has been gained and new developments have taken place.
Agreement was reached regarding the arrangements for
accreditation and participation of non-governmental
organizations in the ICPD + 5 special session held in
June and later, in August, for next year’s Copenhagen + 5
special session.
In light of these recent developments, we feel that it
is important that women’s organizations are treated on an
equal basis with non-governmental organizations which are
participating in other, similar follow-up processes.

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
The European Union discussed the issue of
participation by non-governmental organizations
informally during the negotiation process in the Third
Committee but decided not to pursue the issue, as it is a
matter to be addressed by the Preparatory Committee.
Non-governmental organization participation was
discussed during the Beijing + 5 informal consultations a
couple of weeks ago, and the European Union also raised
the question of accreditation of those non-governmental
organizations not covered by the existing arrangements.
Since the Beijing Conference in 1995, new nongovernmental organizations have emerged as a result of
the momentum created by the Conference itself. These
include a number of small national organizations which
are unable to participate in the work of the United
Nations on a regular basis. For these organizations, the
process of applying for the Economic and Social Council
consultative status to participate in this particular special
session only would not be reasonable and, indeed, would
not be meaningful from a practical point of view,
especially taking into account the workload faced by the
Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations. To
widen the accreditation for non-governmental
organizations other than those having Economic and
Social Council consultative status or which participated in
the Beijing Conference would provide the interested nongovernmental organizations or women’s groups with the
possibility to attend this particular special session.
Only a short while ago, consensus was reached
among delegations on the arrangements for participation
by non-governmental organizations in the context of the
ICPD + 5 conference and the Copenhagen + 5
preparatory process, including addressing the participation
of organizations which did not attend those Conferences
or which do not have Economic and Social Council
consultative status.
We believe that these arrangements would provide
us with a good basis for our discussions. As regards the
arrangements concerning the participation of the nongovernmental organizations in the plenary, the African
Group made a proposal in the informal consultations of
the Preparatory Committee which we welcomed. We hope
that a final agreement on all the arrangements for
participation by non-governmental organizations in the
Beijing + 5 special session will be reached before we
enter the substantive negotiations in the Preparatory
Committee in March 2000.

7

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
After all, non-governmental organizations, in particular
women’s organizations, play a vital role in the
implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action and
continue to be an indispensable force for gender equality.
Therefore, wide attendance at the special session is
essential.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Algeria, who has asked to speak on a point of order.
Mrs. Mesdoua (Algeria) (spoke in French): It was not
my delegation’s intention to take the floor on this item.
However, having heard the statement made by the
representative of the European Union on this subject, we
deeply regret that this question is being brought up now, at
a time when we are adopting two draft resolutions on which
the Third Committee reached consensus.
In connection with the accreditation of nongovernmental organizations and their participation in the
special session to be held next year for Beijing+5, it is clear
to the Algerian delegation — and we want this to be clearly
reflected in the records of the Assembly — that the
accreditation of non-governmental organizations to the
General Assembly has already been the subject of
discussion and of consensus not only in the Preparatory
Committee and the Economic and Social Council, but also
in the Third Committee. We feel that the statement made
just now by the European Union is an attempt to reopen
this question. We hope that this is not the case. In any
event, it is clear to the Algerian delegation that the question
of accreditation is a matter that has already been discussed
and negotiated and on which consensus has been reached.
The Algerian delegation does not intend to reopen this
issue.
The participation of these non-governmental
organizations in the special session is a question that is now
being negotiated. We do not believe that the question
should be raised now, at the time of the adoption of the
report of the Third Committee. I would ask, therefore, that
the statement made by the Algerian delegation be reflected
in the records of the Assembly.

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
English version, we see “Fifty-fourth session, Agenda
item 10”. I presume it should read “Agenda item 110”.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
110.

Agenda item 111
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and
displaced persons and humanitarian questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/600)
The President: The Assembly has before it five
draft resolutions recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 19 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the five
draft resolutions one by one. After all the decisions have
been taken, representatives will again have the
opportunity to explain their vote.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees”, which the Third Committee adopted without
a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/143).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution II, entitled “Follow-up to the Regional
Conference to Address the Problems of Refugees,
Displaced Persons, Other Forms of Involuntary
Displacement and Returnees in the Countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States and Relevant
Neighbouring States”, without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?

The President: I call on the representative of
Suriname on a point of order.

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/144).

Mr. Kerpens (Suriname): I would like to call to the
Assembly’s attention that in document A/54/599, entitled
“Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World
Conference on Women”, on the top left of page 1 in the

The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution III, entitled “Assistance to unaccompanied
refugee minors”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?

8

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 54/145).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution IV, entitled “Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 54/146).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution V, entitled “Assistance to refugees, returnees and
displaced persons in Africa”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 54/147).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 111?

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
“... against children, as defined in the Statute of the
Court, which include, inter alia, ...”.
The words “Rome” and “International Criminal”
should therefore be deleted.
Mrs. Afifi (Morocco) (spoke in French): I apologize
for taking the floor yet again, but I would like to draw to
the Assembly’s attention the fact that Morocco is a
sponsor of draft resolution II under item 112 on “The
rights of the child”, which is contained in document
A/54/601.
Mr. García González (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation wants to express its wish to be
a sponsor of draft resolution I, entitled “The girl child”,
and we hope this can be reflected in the record.
Mrs. Brobbey (Ghana): Ghana would like to cosponsor draft resolution II, “The rights of the child”.

It was so decided.
Mr. Manele (Solomon Islands): My delegation
would like to co-sponsor draft resolution II.
Agenda item 112
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/601)
The President: I give the floor to those
representatives who have asked to speak on a point of
order.
Mr. Schalin (Finland): I wish to point out that in
section III of draft resolution II, contained in document
A/54/601 and entitled ”The rights of the child”, operative
paragraph 1 — which in the English version is on page
10 — was subject to substantive and extensive negotiations
and was correctly reflected in the Third Committee in the
“L” document which was adopted. That paragraph should
therefore read:
“Welcomes the report of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the impact
of armed conflict on children”.
On the following page of the same report, in operative
paragraph 7 — which was likewise carefully negotiated and
orally amended in the Third Committee before adoption —
the third line should read:

Mr. Rabuka (Fiji): My delegation would like to join
as a sponsor of draft resolution II.
The President: I call on the representative of Costa
Rica on a point of order.
Mrs. Castro de Barish (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica is also a sponsor of draft resolution
II, entitled “The rights of the child”, but does not appear
among the sponsors or among those that joined later. We
hope that this will be placed on record.
Mr. Essonghé (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation would also like to join as a sponsor of the
draft resolution entitled “The rights of the child”.
Mr. Bhatti (Pakistan): My delegation would like to
join the sponsors of draft resolution I.
Mrs. Sinjela (Zambia): Zambia would like to join as
a sponsor of draft resolution II.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 12 of the report and on the
one draft decision recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 13 of the same report.

9

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “The girl
child”. The Third Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Agenda item 114
Elimination of racism and racial discrimination
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/603)

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/148).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution II, entitled “The rights of the child”, without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/149).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision entitled “Report of the
Secretary-General on the status of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child”. May I consider that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft decision?

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 16 of its report and on the
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 17 of the same report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Measures
to combat contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”. The
Third Committee adopted draft resolution I without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/153).

The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 112?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 113
Programme of activities of the International Decade of
the World’s Indigenous People
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/602)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. The Third
Committee adopted the draft resolution, entitled
“International Decade of the World’s Indigenous People”,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

The President: Draft resolution II is entitled “Third
Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and
the convening of the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/154).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision entitled “Report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to conclude its consideration of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 54/150).
Agenda item 115
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 113?

Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/604)

It was so decided.
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/672)

10

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the three draft resolutions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 17 of its report. The report
of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of draft resolution II is contained in document
A/54/672.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Universal
realization of the realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination”. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/155).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled “Use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Japan, Luxembourg,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Estonia, France, Greece, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution II was adopted by 110 votes to 16,
with 35 abstentions (resolution 54/151).
[Subsequently the delegation of Guatemala informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled “The
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,

11

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Georgia
Draft resolution III was adopted by 156 votes to 2,
with 1 abstention (resolution 54/152).
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 115?

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
It was so decided.
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.1
and Corr.1)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the United States, who wishes to make a statement in
explanation of position.
Mr. Rabby (United States of America): We would
like to explain our position on the draft resolution entitled
“International Covenants on Human Rights” which has
been submitted under agenda item 116 (a).
The Government of the United States takes
exception to the language in operative paragraph 6 that
suggests that there are broad rules proscribing the ability
of States, under international law, to enter reservations to
treaties beyond the provision that a reservation may not
be incompatible with the object and purpose of the
relevant treaty.
For the record, the Government of the United States
wishes to note that the applicable international law, which
is stated in Article 19 of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties, is that
“A State may, when signing, ratifying, accepting,
approving or acceding to a treaty, formulate a
reservation unless:
(a) the reservation is prohibited by the treaty;

It was so decided.

Agenda item 116
Human rights questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/605)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 4 of its report.
The draft decision is entitled “Documents considered
by the General Assembly in connection with the question
of human rights”. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt the draft decision.

12

(b) the treaty provides that only specified
reservations, which do not include the reservation in
question, may be made; or
(c) in cases not falling under sub-paragraphs
(a) and (b), the reservation is incompatible with the
object and purpose of the treaty.”
We should also like to explain our position on draft
resolution III, under agenda item 116 (a), regarding the
Convention on migrant workers. Since this Convention
was adopted and opened for signature, ratification and
accession in December 1990, only 12 countries have
chosen to become States parties. The great majority of
countries have chosen not to become a party to this
instrument, among them the Government of the United
States. We cannot support the use of scarce funds by the

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Secretary-General for a public affairs campaign aimed at
promoting a Convention that has gained so little support.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the three draft resolutions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 16 of its report
(A/54/605/Add.1).
We shall first turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution I without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/156).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution II, entitled “International Covenants on Human
Rights”, without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/157).
The President: We turn now to draft resolution III,
entitled “International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families”. The Third Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 54/158).
The President: I call on the representative of Mexico,
who wishes to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
Ms. Monroy (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I ask for
the floor in connection with the statement just made by the
representative of the United States. My delegation
understood him to say that his delegation did not want to
support the use of funds for a convention, such as the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, that
has received so little support. However, my delegation
wishes to state that the allocation of funds would be
intended to promote the ratification and dissemination of
the Convention, which has recently been receiving
ratifications, albeit slowly. Moreover, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
recently referred to this Convention as a basic international
instrument in the area of human rights that certainly
deserves the support of the Member States of the United
Nations.

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 116?
It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it 20 draft
resolutions recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 75 of its report.
I call on the representative of Thailand, who wishes
to speak in explanation of vote before voting.
Mr. Wirasamban (Thailand): Thailand wishes to
clarify its position on draft resolution XX, entitled “The
right to development”, contained in document
A/54/605/Add.2, under agenda item 116 (b), “Human
rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms”.
Thailand deeply regrets that the issue of the right to
development has become highly politicized during this
session of the General Assembly. The definition of the
right to development has become selectively interpreted.
Such selective interpretation is contrary to the principles
enshrined in the 1986 Declaration on the Right to
Development, which clearly stipulates that the right to
development encompasses all human rights. Thailand
feels that the advancement of the right to development is
very much contingent on common understanding of and
consensus on the true spirit and real objectives of the
Declaration on the Right to Development.
In this regard, we sincerely hope that in future work
on the right to development all parties will make great
efforts to achieve such consensus, bearing in mind the
universality, indivisibility and interdependence of all
human rights. Attaching great importance to consensus on
the issue of the right to development, Thailand will vote
in support this draft resolution, but we reserve our right
to express our views in future work and subsequent
discussions on the right to development, particularly on
the issues reflected in the context of paragraphs to be
voted on by the General Assembly.

13

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
The President: I call on the representative of Japan
on a point of order.
Mrs. Ito (Japan): My delegation wishes to make
corrections to draft resolution XI, entitled “Situation of
human rights in Cambodia”, in order to reflect properly the
language agreed in the Third Committee. In operative
paragraph 7, lines 2 through line 4, the names of the
Commissions should be the National Assembly Commission
of Human Rights and Reception of Complaints and the
Senate Commission of Human Rights and Reception of
Complaints.
In the same draft resolution, in operative paragraph 20,
the words “inter alia” should be replaced with the word
“including”.

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
The President: Draft resolution V, entitled “Human
rights in the administration of justice”, was adopted by
the Third Committee without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 54/163).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Protection of migrants”. A separate vote has been
requested on the tenth preambular paragraph of draft
resolution VI.
As there is no objection to that request, I shall now
put to the vote the tenth preambular paragraph of draft
resolution VI. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the 20 draft resolutions one by one. After all
the decisions have been taken, representatives will again
have the opportunity to explain their votes.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Elimination
of all forms of religious intolerance”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it that
the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/159).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution II, entitled “Human rights and cultural diversity”,
adopted without a vote. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/160).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution III, entitled “United Nations Decade for Human
Rights Education, 1995-2004, and public information
activities in the field of human rights”, without a vote. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 54/161).
The President: The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution IV, entitled “Effective promotion of the
Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National
or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities”, without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 54/162).

14

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Azerbaijan, China, Estonia, Georgia, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Kenya, Malaysia, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Myanmar, Nepal,
Pakistan, Singapore
The tenth preambular paragraph of draft resolution VI
was adopted by 134 votes to 1, with 14 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution VI as a whole. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution VI as a whole without
a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution VI, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 54/166).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Protection of and assistance to internally displaced
persons”. The Third Committee adopted draft resolution VII
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution 54/167).
The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled
“Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals,
Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect
Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms”. The Third Committee adopted draft resolution
VIII without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution 54/170).
The President: We turn now to draft resolution IX,
entitled “Human rights and terrorism”.A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Fiji, Gabon, Georgia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Moldova, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Benin, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Venezuela
Draft resolution IX was adopted by 106 votes to
none, with 58 abstentions (resolution 54/164).
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]

15

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
The President: Draft resolution X is entitled
“Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all
human rights”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chad, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Togo, United States of America

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Draft resolution X was adopted by 99 votes to 2,
with 64 abstentions (resolution 54/165).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Brunei
Darussalam, Gambia, Mozambique, Togo and
Yemen informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of Malta
had intended to abstain.]
The President: Draft resolution XI is entitled
“Situation of human rights in Cambodia”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution XI without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XI was adopted (resolution 54/171).
The President: Draft resolution XII is entitled
“Strengthening United Nations action in the field of
human rights through the promotion of international
cooperation and the importance of non-selectivity,
impartiality and objectivity”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution XII
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution XII was adopted (resolution
54/174).
The President: Draft resolution XIII is entitled
“Respect for the principles of national sovereignty and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States in their
electoral processes”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mozambique, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Yemen

16

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Oman,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Seychelles, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Belarus, Brazil, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Malawi,
Nicaragua, Panama, Senegal, Solomon Islands,
Tajikistan
Draft resolution XIII was adopted by 91 votes to 59,
with 10 abstentions (resolution 54/168).
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Draft resolution XIV is entitled
“Respect for the right to universal freedom of travel and the
vital importance of family reunification”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mali,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Samoa, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan, Zambia
Draft resolution XIV was adopted by 95 votes to 1,
with 66 abstentions (resolution 54/169).
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: Draft resolution XV is entitled
“National institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights”.

17

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution XV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution XV was adopted (resolution 54/176).
The President: Draft resolution XVI is entitled
“Human rights and mass exoduses”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution XVI
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution XVI was adopted (resolution 54/180).
The President: Draft resolution XVII is entitled
“Human rights and unilateral coercive measures”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,

18

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Nicaragua,
Republic of Korea, Ukraine, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution XVII was adopted by 109 votes to
48, with 7 abstentions (resolution 54/172).
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: Draft resolution XVIII is entitled
“Strengthening the role of the United Nations in
enhancing the effectiveness of the principle of periodic
and genuine elections and the promotion of
democratization”.
A separate vote has been requested on operative
paragraph 8 of draft resolution XVIII. I see no objection
to that request. I shall therefore first put to the vote
operative paragraph 8. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, China, Cuba, Egypt, Jamaica, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Morocco, Myanmar, Pakistan, Qatar,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Viet Nam,
Yemen
Operative paragraph 8 was retained by 136 votes to
none, with 21 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegations of Gambia and
Guatemala informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote draft
resolution XVIII as a whole. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Myanmar, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Viet Nam
Draft resolution XVIII as a whole was adopted by
153 votes to none, with 11 abstentions (resolution
54/173).
The President: Draft resolution XIX is entitled
“Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of
human rights”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution XIX
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

19

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Draft resolution XIX was adopted (resolution 54/181).
The President: Draft resolution XX is entitled “The
right to development”. Separate votes have been requested
on the eighth and thirteenth preambular paragraphs and on
operative paragraphs 3 (c), 3 (e), 13, 21 and 22 of draft
resolution XX.
Are there any objections to this request? I see none.
I shall first put to the vote the eighth preambular
paragraph of draft resolution XX, on which a separate vote
has been requested. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,

20

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Croatia
The eighth preambular paragraph of draft resolution
XX was retained by 113 votes to 44, with 1
abstention.
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
thirteenth preambular paragraph, on which a separate vote
has been requested. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

The thirteenth preambular paragraph of draft
resolution XX was retained by 111 votes to 44, with 1
abstention.

Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]

Abstaining:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Cyprus

Abstaining:
Croatia

The President: I shall now put to the vote operative
paragraph 3 (c), on which a separate vote has been
requested. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,

Operative paragraph 3 (c) was retained by 113
votes to 42, with 3 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote operative
paragraph 3 (e), on which a separate vote has been
requested. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-

21

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
Operative paragraph 3 (e) was retained by 121 votes
to 39.
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote operative
paragraph 13, on which a separate vote has been requested.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,

22

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Afghanistan
Operative paragraph 13 was retained by 114 votes
to 43, with 1 abstention.
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote operative
paragraph 21, on which a separate vote has been
requested. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Georgia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Operative paragraph 21 was retained by 112 votes to
43, with 2 abstentions.

Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]

Abstaining:
None

Abstaining:
Russian Federation, Ukraine

The President: I shall now put to the vote operative
paragraph 22, on which a separate vote has been requested.
A recorded vote has been requested.

Operative paragraph 22 was retained by 115 votes
to 42, with no abstentions.

23

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote draft
resolution XX as a whole.A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Denmark, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Netherlands, Sweden, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Greece, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, New Zealand, Norway,

24

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution XX as a whole was adopted by 119
votes to 10, with 38 abstentions (resolution
54/175).
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote
on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The Chilean
delegation wishes to explain its vote on the resolution
entitled “Human rights and cultural diversity”, contained
in document A/54/605/Add.2.
The delegation of Chile joined in the consensus on
the adoption of the draft resolution on “Human rights and
cultural diversity”. Nonetheless, it has reservations as to
the appropriateness of including the subject of cultural
diversity in the area of human rights.
My country scrupulously respects the coexistence of
different cultural systems in the international sphere. It
could not be otherwise for a country such as Chile, where
different cultures of very diverse origin coexist.
Nonetheless, we believe that the subject of cultural
diversity corresponds to a different area of the work of
the United Nations, in particular that of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
and not to the area of human rights.
We are approaching the close of the twentieth
century, of which no one speaks at length because of the
expectations for the next millennium. But progress has
certainly been achieved in this difficult century, at the
cost of great suffering, in the area of the recognition and
acceptance of the universality of human rights. For Chile,
universality of human rights means that the intrinsic
dignity of all inhabitants of the world must be respected,
regardless of culture, religion, social status, ethnic origin,
gender or traditions. Neither lack of development nor
cultural characteristics can be invoked to justify a
limitation of human rights as recognized in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, the Covenant on Economic, Social and

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Cultural Rights and the other conventions that constitute the
universal system for the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Reopening a debate on
human rights and cultural diversity could mean, in the view
of the Chilean delegation, a step backwards with regard to
the universality and validity of those rights.
Mr. Schalin (Finland): I have the honour to explain
our position on draft resolution II, entitled “Human rights
and cultural diversity”, and our vote on draft resolution XX,
entitled “The right to development”. I will first turn to
resolution XX and make an explanation of vote on behalf
of the European Union.
The European Union was unable to vote in support of
the draft resolution. We sincerely regret that it was not
possible to arrive at a consensus on the resolution this year.
Indeed, on many occasions in the past, such consensus has
been achieved. The European Union, because of its great
interest in this matter, participated, as did many others, very
actively in the informal consultations on the text. While we
appreciate the flexibility shown by all involved in the
negotiations and the willingness of the sponsors to
accommodate many concerns, we regret that the sponsors
decided to include a number of new elements which are not
directly part of the subject matter under consideration and
could not find consensus. We are also concerned about the
new reporting obligations established by this resolution;
these obligations prematurely change the mandate of the
follow-up mechanism on the right to development,
established at last year’s session of the Commission on
Human Rights. This change of the mandate has been
effected even before the working group has started its work.
The European Union stands prepared to work for the
realization of the right to development in constructive
partnership with all interested countries. For that purpose,
we have great expectations and hopes for the follow-up
mechanism, which was established with the support of all
Member States. The vote on the resolution was particularly
unfortunate in the run-up to the first meeting of the
open-ended working group of the Commission on Human
Rights, which was planned to take place this week, but had
to be postponed again to a later date.
The implementation of the right to development
deserves active support from the international community.
The European Union reiterates its willingness to continue,
in a true partnership, its cooperation in implementing the
right to development. Such partnership should, in our view,
be reflected in a joint commitment to reach consensus in
multilateral forums. We therefore hope that the open-ended

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
working group on the right to development will be able
to lay the foundations for a return to consensus on the
important subject of the right to development.
I will now turn to draft resolution II, entitled
“Human rights and cultural diversity”. I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central
and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia — and the associated countries,
Cyprus and Malta, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries and members of the European
Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align
themselves with this statement.
Cultural, religious and linguistic diversity is a
fundamental asset for humankind. For Europe, as for so
many other regions around the world, multi-ethnic and
multicultural diversity and interaction have created an
enormously rich heritage. The European Union supports
the importance of cultural diversity at all levels of
society. We have not stood in the way of consensus on
the resolution just adopted, regardless of our reservations
with regard to the way it is drafted.
The European Union remains of the view that the
promotion and protection of human rights, including
cultural rights, is the first responsibility of States, and
they have the responsibility of ensuring the enjoyment of
such rights by individuals within their jurisdiction. The
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
recognizes the right of everyone to take part in cultural
life. States have a duty to conserve, develop and diffuse
science and culture, with a view to achieving the full
realization of this right, which belongs to the individual.
In a resolution on human rights and cultural diversity, the
European Union would have liked to see this elementary
cultural right referred to or reiterated. This idea, however,
was not accepted by the sponsors of the resolution.
Instead the draft resolution refers repeatedly to cultural
diversity at the international level.
The European Union agrees that all peoples have the
right freely to pursue their economic, social and cultural
development. The European Union is also of the view that
this right can be fully realized only within democratic
societies which respect the diversity and cultural rights of
their members. Cultural diversity at the national level,
between individuals and communities, flows directly from
respect by the State for all human rights.

25

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
According to draft resolution II, cultural diversity at
the international level is enjoyed by “nations” or “peoples”
of the world. Such promotion of cultural diversity between
nations could easily promote uniformity within nations —
at worst, even to the point where it would hamper the right
of individuals to enjoy cultural diversity among themselves.
The European Union is made uneasy by the possibility that
nations, by actively identifying with a particular set of
distinct cultural attributes, will in fact discourage tolerance
for cultural expressions flowing from other sets of cultural
attributes. Such a bias could, at worst, lead to limitations on
the enjoyment of human rights by persons belonging to
linguistic, religious or cultural minorities.
For all these reasons, in the view of the European
Union, the subject of cultural diversity at the international
level would have been better addressed in the context of
agenda item 34, entitled “Dialogue among civilizations”. A
draft resolution entitled “Human rights and cultural
diversity”, presented under a human rights item, should
have remained focused at the national level, where human
rights are primarily promoted, protected and respected.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
I explained once again, earlier, that a delegation has an
option to explain its vote only once, either in the
Committee or here, but not to do it in the Committee and
again here in the Assembly. That is what we agreed a long
time ago.
I call on the representative of Qatar on a point of
order.
Mr. Al-Hajri (Qatar): (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to point out that Qatar was one of the sponsors of draft
resolution II, “Human rights and cultural diversity”,
contained in document A/54/605/Add.2.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Russian Federation on a point of order.
Mr. Rogov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
The delegation of the Russian Federation would like to
request the correction of a mistake. In document
A/54/605/Add.2, page 15, paragraph 63, where the results
of the voting are given for draft resolution A/C.3/54/L.79,
entitled “Human rights and unilateral coercive measures”,
it is incorrectly indicated that the Russian Federation voted
against that draft resolution. We voted in favour of that

26

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
draft resolution, and I would like this point to be duly
taken into account in the record.
Ms. Afifi (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish to
state that my delegation would like to join as a sponsor of
the resolution entitled “National institutions for the
promotion and protection of human rights”.
Mr. Rabuka (Fiji): My delegation would like to be
listed as one of the sponsors of draft resolution X.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 116?
It was so decided.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it 10 draft
resolutions recommended by the Third Committee in
paragraph 62 of its report.
I shall now give the floor to those representatives
who wish to speak in explanation of vote before the vote.
Mr. Wirasamban (Thailand): Under agenda item
116 (c), “Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives”, Thailand wishes to
explain its position on draft resolution II, entitled “Human
rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran”, which is
contained in document A/54/605/Add.3.
Over the past year there has been a positive trend in
the development of human rights in Iran. Local elections
were held. Iranian women are increasingly participating
in public life. Human rights, good governance and the
rule of law have taken their place on the Iranian
Government’s agenda. Thailand recognizes and
commends these sincere efforts that are being made by
the Government of Iran, despite difficulties and obstacles.
We believe that the Government of Iran will continue
unwaveringly to redouble its efforts in this proper
direction. For these reasons, Thailand will abstain in the
voting.
We also feel that dialogues being held both within
the Iranian society and between Iran and the United
Nations, including with the Special Rapporteur on the

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
situation of human rights in Iran, will further constructively
contribute to the progress that has been made by the present
Government of Iran in promoting human rights.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke
in French): At this session my delegation has on many
occasions had an opportunity to shed light on the armed
conflict that has victimized my country. For almost two
years there have been significant violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law as a result of this
conflict. My delegation would like again to emphasize the
gravity of the situation, as the Special Rapporteur,
Mr. Garreton, did. He most eloquently described the
situation — in particular as regards the atrocities — and he
clearly indicated who is responsible for these atrocities. As
the international community knows, those responsible are
the Government forces from Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi
that are occupying the northern and eastern sections of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations, the African Charter on
Human and People’s Rights, and the Ceasefire Agreement
that the Governments of these countries that are attacking
my country signed with us on 10 July 1999 in Lusaka.
During debates in the Committee on sub-item (c) of
agenda item 116, my delegation in fact made a statement
about the unfairness of the draft resolution that was
introduced by the European Union and that appears as draft
resolution IV in document A/54/605/Add.3. This draft
resolution pretends to be based on Mr. Garreton’s report,
but in fact it constitutes an unacceptable denial of the most
basic rights of the Congolese civilian population in the
northern and eastern parts of the country, in particular, their
right to life. Similarly, the European Union has overlooked
the efforts made by my Government, as described by the
Special Rapporteur, to promote and protect human rights in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in spite of this
unjust war.
My delegation therefore notes with great regret that
the philosophy underlying this draft resolution completely
lacks objectivity and balance, and to such an extent that my
delegation finds itself wondering whether the European
Union — by lending its support to the barbaric and
murderous acts being committed against innocent Congolese
victims by the aggressors, Rwandans in particular — is not
making itself the spokesperson for the very ideology it
fought so hard against 50 years ago.
In spite of this difficult period in my country’s history,
my Government reiterates its trust in the institutions of the
United Nations. We believe that everything should be done

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
in order not to hamper the progress that has been
achieved by the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the United Nations in the search for solutions
to this tragedy.
My delegation is also pleased that the United
Nations is making further efforts in this regard and that
it is attempting to work appropriately and effectively and
with respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are
particularly pleased by the establishment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC), whose many tasks include
helping defend human rights, including those of children.
As regards defending and protecting children’s
rights, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to the United
Nations Children’s Fund and to the Governments of
Belgium and Canada for the major role that they have
played in the successful holding of the Forum on the
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers, which
was held in Kinshasa from 6 to 10 December last.
In spite of the war taking place in our country, my
Government, wishing to honour its international
obligations regarding the protection and promotion of the
rights of child soldiers, has taken a number of other
protective measures — to demobilize child soldiers, to
reintegrate them into society and to prohibit the
recruitment of minors. We would also like to announce
that last week our Government declared a moratorium on
capital punishment. Lastly, my Government has just
issued an amnesty and released more than one hundred
prisoners on 10 December, Human Rights Day.
Rather than condemning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo by the adoption of resolutions that are not at
all motivated by humanitarian concerns, but rather by
obscure political goals, the European Union could usefully
give its support to my country through constructive
cooperation for the defence and protection of human
rights. My delegation feels entitled the expect from the
European Union a sincere effort to better initiate and
carry out a fruitful relationship and the necessary support
in this field in accordance with the Congolese national
programme.
In this regard, and in accordance with the
instruments to which it is party, my country is prepared
to continue to display its good will with regard to human
rights. I am also pleased to announce that through the

27

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
establishment of the Supreme Court of Justice my
Government has undertaken judiciary reform, and it
reiterates its invitation to the international community to
help us in this process. My Government believes that the
international community would be doing useful work if it
were to help our efforts in this respect, if it really wants to
effectively tackle violations of human rights, to which effort
it has committed itself.
In conclusion, my Government wishes to state that in
no way is it concerned by this draft resolution in the sense
that the text is not concerned with the protection and
promotion of human rights in my country. It is a text that
is used by some for politicized goals that should not have
been the subject of discussion in this Assembly.
My delegation would also like to ask you,
Mr. President, to please withdraw the question of the
situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo from the agenda of future sessions of the General
Assembly. My Government would like to reassure you that
it will continue its full cooperation with all United Nations
bodies entrusted with issues of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
Finally, I wish to take this opportunity to thank the
delegations that have understood the justice of our cause
and that have given us unfailing support by voting against
this resolution in the Third Committee. We ask them to
continue to support us. As for those who were not able to
do so in the past, we ask them to join us and vote against
this resolution and thus do justice to the Congolese people,
who have suffered so much from the ills of war and who
do not need this new tribulation.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is not for the
President to withdraw what the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has asked me to do. It
is for the delegations to take the initiative. The
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
belongs, among others, to two influential groups, the
African Group and the Non-Aligned Movement. Initiatives
can come from there.
The Assembly shall now take a decision on the 10
draft resolutions, one by one. After all the decisions have
been taken, representatives will again have an opportunity
to explain their vote.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Question
of human rights in Afghanistan”. The Third Committee

28

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/185).
The President: We turn now to draft resolution II,
entitled “Human rights situation in the Islamic Republic
of Iran”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Chad, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Egypt, Ghana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan,
Philippines, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, United Republic of Tanzania,
Venezuela and Viet Nam
Abstaining:
Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Benin, Botswana, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Congo, Cyprus, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Georgia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malawi, Mali, Mexico, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Suriname, Swaziland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution II was adopted by 61 votes to 47,
with 51 abstentions (resolution 54/185).
[Subsequently the delegations of Gambia and
Zimbabwe informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote against.]
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled “Human
rights situation in Iraq”.
A recorded vote has been requested jointly on
paragraphs 2(a), 3(g), 3(i) and 3(j) of draft resolution III.
Are there any objections to that request? I see none.
The President: I shall first put to the vote jointly
operative paragraphs 2(a), 3(g), 3(i) and 3(j), on which a
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Benin, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Fiji,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia,
Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam
Operative paragraphs of 2(a), 3(g), 3(i) and 3(j)
were retained by 94 votes to none, with 56
abstentions.
The President: I shall now put draft resolution III
as a whole to the vote.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern

29

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Ireland, United States of America,
Uzbekistan, Zambia, Zimbabwe

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Uruguay,

Against:
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Sudan
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, China, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Jordan,
Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New
Guinea, Philippines, Saint Lucia, Singapore,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam
Draft resolution III was adopted by 100 votes to 3,
with 53 abstentions (resolution 54/178).
[Subsequently the delegations of Gambia and the
Islamic Republic of Iran informed the Secretariat that
they had intended not to participate in the vote.]
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,

30

Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Tajikistan, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela
Against:
Angola, Burkina Faso, Chad, China, Cuba,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Myanmar, Sudan, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia,
Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 91 votes to 10,
with 54 abstentions (resolution 54/179).
The President: We turn now to draft resolution V,
entitled “Situation of human rights in Myanmar”. The
Third Committee adopted draft resolution V without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 54/186).
The President: Draft resolution VI is entitled
“Situation of human rights in Haiti”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution VI without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 54/187).
The President: Draft resolution VII is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Sudan”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
In favour:
Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Zimbabwe
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Chad, China, Comoros,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt,
Fiji, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam
Abstaining:
Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Bangladesh, Benin,
Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Gabon,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Marshall Islands, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria,
Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Saint Lucia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Ukraine, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Zambia
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 89 votes to 30,
with 39 abstentions (resolution 54/182).
The President: Draft resolution VIII is entitled
“Situation of human rights in Kosovo”. A recorded vote has
been requested.

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, Tunisia,
Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Belarus, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Russian
Federation
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad,
China, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Dominica, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Grenada, Guinea, Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mali,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Panama,
Peru, Saint Lucia, Singapore, Suriname, Swaziland,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela,
Viet Nam
Draft resolution VIII was adopted by 108 votes to 4,
with 45 abstentions (resolution 54/183).

31

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
[Subsequently the delegation of the Islamic Republic
of Iran informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour.]
The President: Draft resolution IX is entitled
“Situation of human rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro)”. Separate votes have been
requested on section III and on sections I and II of draft
resolution IX.
I shall first put to the vote section III of draft
resolution IX, on which a separate vote has been requested.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe,
Against:
Belarus, China, Russian Federation

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, India, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Saint Lucia,
Singapore, South Africa, Suriname, Swaziland,
Tajikistan, Togo, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania
Section III of draft resolution IX was adopted by 120
votes to 3, with 31 abstentions.
The President: I shall next put to the vote sections
I and II of draft resolution IX, on which a separate vote
has been requested. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Abstaining:
Against:

32

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
None
Abstaining:
Angola, Belarus, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Chad, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
India, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Papua New Guinea,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Singapore, South
Africa, Suriname, Swaziland, Tajikistan, Togo,
Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania
Sections I and II of draft resolution IX were adopted
by 119 votes to none, with 34 abstentions.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution IX as a whole. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Belarus, Russian Federation
Abstaining:
Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, China, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Mali, Mexico, Myanmar,
Namibia, Saint Lucia, Singapore, Suriname,
Swaziland, Tajikistan, Togo, Uganda,
United Republic of Tanzania
Draft resolution IX as a whole was adopted by 123
votes to 2, with 34 abstentions (resolution 54/184).
[Subsequently the delegation of Gambia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: Draft resolution X is entitled
“Situation of human rights in Rwanda”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution X
without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution X was adopted (resolution 54/188).
Mr. Baali (Algeria), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to explain their votes or
position.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to speak in explanation of vote on resolution 54/183 on
the situation of human rights in Kosovo.
Respect for state sovereignty and territorial integrity
and non-interference in the internal affairs of other
countries represent important principles of the United
Nations Charter. China is of the view that Kosovo is part
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and that the
question of Kosovo, as an internal affair of that country,
should be settled politically through dialogue on the basis
of respect for its sovereignty and territorial integrity and

33

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
guaranteeing the legitimate rights and interests of all ethnic
groups in Kosovo.
Moreover, China is always in favour of increased
understanding and enhanced cooperation through exchanges
and dialogue on the basis of equality and mutual respect.
We oppose the exertion of pressure on other countries
through the submission of resolutions on their human rights
situations; much less, then, could we support a resolution
on human rights in one part of the territory of a sovereign
State.
In view of the fact that the relevant elements of
resolution 54/183 are not consistent with China’s position,
China abstained in the voting.
Mr. Sulaiman (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation abstained in the voting on
resolution 54/178 on the human rights situation in Iraq. We
regret to note that it contains an attempt to partition that
country among the Shi’a, Turkmen and Assyrians, as
evidenced in paragraph 3 (j). Syria forcefully rejects this
and any attempt to assail the territorial integrity of Iraq and
to interfere in the northern part of that country under the
pretext of defending human rights. Declarations on the
creation of a security zone in northern Iraq and similar
measures threaten the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq.
Moreover, the resolution once again proposes the
adoption of and support for an institutionalized system of
control over all human rights in any given country by
deploying a human rights observer mission in Iraq. This
represents interference in the internal affairs of a State
Member of the United Nations and is therefore contrary to
the purposes and principles of the Organization itself.
My delegation wishes nevertheless to reiterate the need
for the Iraqi authorities to cooperate in order to ensure fair
solutions to the plight of Kuwaiti prisoners and others.
Ms. Zúñiga Achá (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to speak in explanation of vote in connection with the
voting in the Third Committee on the draft resolution on
the human rights situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
My delegation abstained at that time. Now, however,
having received specific instructions from the capital, my
delegation voted in favour of resolution 54/160.
Mr. Spirollari (Albania): I should like to explain our
vote on resolution 54/183 on the situation of human rights
in Kosovo.

34

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
The situation of human rights in Kosovo has been on
the agenda of this body for a number of years now. The
General Assembly quite justly drew the attention of the
international community to the brutal and continuous
violation of the human rights of ethnic Albanians in
Kosovo. Despite the growing concern on this issue, the
situation of human rights in Kosovo worsened, assuming
the proportions of a threat to international peace and
security.
In the spring of this year, it reached the point of
open conflict in Kosovo. The Serbian military and
paramilitary, accompanied by the police forces and thugs,
launched the most brutal campaign of ethnic cleansing
and genocide in Europe since the end of the Second
World War. One million ethnic Albanians were forced to
leave their houses and lands under the threat of being
killed. Thousands of people were killed and buried in
mass graves all over Kosovo. Hundreds of thousands had
to live in the open on root plants. The houses and
businesses of ethnic Albanians were burned to ashes. A
long trail of people — women, children and the
elderly — walking for days or rushed in train-wagons
towards neighbouring countries, readily recalled scenes
from a reality that Europe had already left behind: the
worst years of the Holocaust. Albania alone received
around 500,000 people, which raised the local population
by 15 per cent in a matter of days.
In these circumstances, in order to preserve the
sacred principles of the United Nations Charter and of
humanitarian law, the international community intervened
decisively to protect the population that was under threat
of disappearance. The Albanians of Kosovo strongly
supported this action and saw the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) countries as their sole protector and
defender of human principles in the face of systematic
oppression and long-term strategy of the Belgrade
authorities to ethnically cleanse Kosovo of its indigenous
Albanians.
Today Kosovo is enjoying long-desired freedom.
Over 90 per cent of the refugees are back, and 90 per
cent of the schools are open. People are doing their best
to rebuild their lives, and a sense of normalcy is being
restored. The reality that only a few months ago was
unthinkable is now taking shape with the presence of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR).
My delegation would like to express its appreciation
and gratitude to the United States delegation for

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
presenting for a second time a draft resolution on the
situation of human rights in Kosovo. Although Albania was
the main sponsor of such resolutions for a number of years,
this time we were not able to co-sponsor it because of a
principled position. The resolution does not have any
reference to the will of the people of Kosovo, a reference
that was a fundamental element of previous resolutions. It
is our strong view that sustainable peace in the Balkans and
the process of integration of that region into Europe would
have to take into consideration the right to selfdetermination of Kosovars as a way towards a lasting
solution, in accordance with the Rambouillet Accords. Any
other solution precluding the people of Kosovo from
expressing their will would be just another step away from
peace and a way of ignoring reality.
Mr. Bhattacharjee (India): I am speaking in
explanation of vote on the resolution on the situation of
human rights in Kosovo.
India voted against the resolution because it is
inconsistent with the manner in which the question of
human rights violations in the former Republic of
Yugoslavia has been treated. On the one hand, we have but
one resolution on the situation of human rights in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia — three independent, sovereign
nations; while, on the other hand, there is this resolution on
a part of the territory of one of the countries dealt with in
the other resolution. By implication, this treatment appears
to treat Kosovo as an indeterminate territory, not as an
integral part of the country concerned.
Secondly, the fundamental flaw in the resolution is
that it is critical of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for
all that is happening in Kosovo, ignoring the fact that
Kosovo is administered by the United Nations, with the
assistance of regional bodies. As the Special Rapporteur has
noted, the human rights of the Serbs and other ethnic
minorities, such as the Roma, are being violated despite
their presence — and not by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.
Regrettably, this resolution represents the use of
human rights as a political instrument. We deplore this,
both because it politicizes human rights and because it calls
into question the territorial integrity of a member State. We
were unable to support this resolution.
Mr. Naber (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation
would like to mention, with reference to draft resolutions II
and VII, that any unanimity on human rights should

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
establish the fact that human rights belong to everyone,
regardless of cultural, religious, racial or political
orientation. In this regard, we have to refer to the major
achievements of the world over the last half century in
promoting, publicizing and strengthening respect for
human rights on a very broad scale through the adoption
of international instruments and conventions that deal
with the protection of those rights, and the existence of
the political will to apply them.
The issue of human rights in all countries is
legitimately a main concern for the world as a whole. In
this respect, international monitoring of human rights
standards could have a bearing on the sensitive issue of
State sovereignty. Nevertheless, this sovereignty cannot be
used to justify discrimination against persons or depriving
them of their internationally guaranteed rights. The
standards of human rights should provide the foundation
for justice throughout the world, and the monitoring of
their application must be looked at from a global,
objective standpoint. Accountability should be based on
recognized standards and norms.
That is why my delegation believes all States and
individuals have responsibility for the promotion of such
norms through a constructive and sustained dialogue as an
important step towards consensus. My delegation has
taken into consideration the fact that a genuine and
constructive dialogue is taking place with regard to draft
resolutions II and VII under this agenda item.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I call on the representative of Finland on a point of
order.
Mr. Schalin (Finland): I wish to make a small
number of editorial comments on some of the texts we
have just adopted.
In draft resolution III, entitled “Human rights
situation in Iraq”, in the seventh preambular paragraph, at
the end of the second line on that page, Security Council
resolution 1153 (1998) should be replaced by Security
Council resolution 1175 (1998), as in document
A/C.3/54/L.60 adopted in the Third Committee.
In the eighth preambular paragraph of draft
resolution III, we would request that the French
translation of the English phrase “and appealing to all
concerned to fulfil their mutual obligations” be made

35

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999

consistent with the Secretary-General’s report from which
it is quoted — namely, document S/1999/896, paragraph
104.

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(c) of agenda item 116.

In draft resolution VII, “Situation of human rights in
the Sudan”, we would request that operative paragraph 2,
subparagraph (a) (i), be reflected as it was adopted in the
Third Committee. It has been rearranged by editing. I will
read it out as it is in document A/C.3/54/L.81, adopted in
the Third Committee:

(d) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up
to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action

“At the occurrence of cases of extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary execution resulting from
conflict between members of the armed forces
and their allies, and armed insurgent groups,
including the Sudanese People’s Liberation
Army”.
Allow me to conclude by just putting on record that
the European Union had not explained its vote under
agenda item 116 (b), on the right to development, nor on
cultural diversity, in the Third Committee. Therefore, we
decided to explain our vote in plenary meeting.
The Acting President: I call on the representative of
the Russian Federation on a point of order.
Mr. Rogov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
My delegation would also like to bring to the Assembly’s
attention a number of technical inaccuracies in the draft
resolutions just adopted.

Report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.4)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly takes note of the report of the Third
Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 116?
It was so decided.
(e) Report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.5)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly takes note of the report of the Third
Committee?
It was so decided.

Turning to draft resolution VIII, on “Situation of
human rights in Kosovo”, on page 11 of the English text,
in the second line of paragraph 45, the document number
in parentheses should read “A/C.3/54/L.97” instead of
“L.96”.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 116?
It was so decided.

On page 39 of the English text, in the third line of the
third preambular paragraph, the word “sovereign” should be
replaced by the word “sovereignty”.
There are also some changes with respect to draft
resolution IX. On page 13 of the English text, in the second
line of paragraph 52, the words “and orally revised” should
be deleted. Similarly, the words “orally revised” should be
deleted from the second line of paragraph 54. In addition,
at the end of paragraph 52, also on page 13 of the English
text, the word “boundaries” should be replaced by the word
“borders”.

36

Agenda item 12
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Third Committee (A/54/606)

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999

The Acting President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the two draft decisions recommended by the
Third Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We turn first to draft decision I, entitled “Organization
of work of the Third Committee and biennial programme
of work of the Committee for 2000-2001”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
decision I?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The Acting President: We turn next to draft decision
II, entitled “Report of the Economic and Social Council”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
decision II?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of the chapters of the report of the Economic and Social
Council allocated to the Third Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
Third Committee before it.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

37
