A /74/PV.45

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

45th plenary meeting

Thursday, 12 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Beckles
(Trinidad and Tobago), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 128
Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him
Draft resolution (A/74/L.20)
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that action on the draft resolution is
postponed to a later date to allow time for the review
of its programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on the draft
resolution as soon as the report of the Fifth Committee
on its programme budget implications is available.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sweden
to introduce draft resolution A/74/L.20.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I am pleased to introduce
today, on behalf of all the co-sponsors, the draft
resolution contained in document A/74/L.20, concerning
the investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and
the members of the party accompanying him. We are
grateful to all the delegations that have joined us in this
endeavour, and I would like to thank all the co-sponsors,
of which there are now more than 100, for their support.

Since 2015, Chief Justice Mohamed Chande Othman
has overseen major progress in the investigation,
first as Head of the Independent Panel of Experts
and, thereafter, as the Secretary-General’s Eminent
Person. His latest report (see A/73/973), issued in early
September, is substantial and presents valuable new
information. We express our sincere gratitude to the
Eminent Person and his team for their dedicated work.
We also thank all Member States that have
collaborated with and contributed to the investigation,
particularly those that have appointed national
investigators to conduct dedicated reviews of national
archives to determine whether additional relevant
information exists, as well as the Secretary-General
and our colleagues at the Secretariat, who have worked
to ensure that the United Nations has reviewed its own
specific records and archives for declassification of
information relevant to the case.
In his latest report, the Eminent Person concludes
that it remains plausible that an external attack or threat
was a cause of the crash. There are specific matters
that warrant further follow-up. In that light and in firm
support of the Secretary-General’s recommendations
on the way forward, Sweden, together with its partners,
is introducing the draft resolution before the Assembly
today. The draft resolution has six operative paragraphs,
the most important of which are paragraphs 1, 3 and 4.
Paragraph 1 requests the Secretary-General to
reappoint the Eminent Person to continue his work.
This extensive investigation benefits immensely from
continuity, and we firmly believe that no one is better

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-40562 (E)

*1940562*

A/74/PV.45

placed than Chief Justice Othman to continue and
conclude the investigation. Much work has already
been done. We therefore believe that it will be possible
to conclude the investigation during the next extended
mandate. As such, we request the Eminent Person to
draw conclusions from the investigation by the end of
the seventy-fifth session.
However, that requires the full cooperation of
Member States. Paragraph 3 therefore specifically
requests those Member States referred to in the report
to cooperate with and assist the Eminent Person fully,
including by appointing without delay independent and
high-ranking officials to conduct a dedicated internal
review of their security, intelligence and defence
archives to determine whether relevant information
exists. It also encourages the Eminent Person to remain
engaged with all high-ranking officials, including those
who have concluded their work, in order to draw upon
their expertise on the matter.
In his report, the Eminent Person recognizes that
both Member States and individuals have contributed
through sharing expertise and information. Therefore,
paragraph 4 calls upon Member States to encourage
individuals and private entities to ensure that any relevant
records related to the death of Dag Hammarskjöld and
of the members of the party accompanying him be
made available for review by the Eminent Person.
We trust that, as in previous years, the draft
resolution will be adopted without a vote. We count
on the full cooperation of all Member States in its
implementation. It is our shared responsibility to pursue
the full truth in this matter.
Since the draft resolution has minor programme
budget implications, as the President mentioned, its
adoption will be proposed once the Fifth Committee
has considered the matter later this month. In the
meantime, the list of co-sponsors will remain open. We
encourage all Member States to join us. We once again
thank our partners for their support.
The United Nations and all its States Members must
continue to do everything possible to ascertain what
happened to Flight SE-BDY, the Albertina. We owe it
to the families of those who perished 58 years ago, and
we owe it to the United Nations as an Organization.
I would like to conclude on a personal note. This
is my last appearance in the General Assembly in my
capacity as Permanent Representative of Sweden. I
2/27

12/12/2019

am particularly pleased that today’s topic happened
to be about Dag Hammarskjöld. Sweden is immensely
proud of Dag Hammarskjöld and the work he did as
Secretary-General of the United Nations. He was a man
who believed strongly in the equal rights of nations,
large and small. He was a champion of peace, with
an extraordinary sense of duty and vision. He was a
spiritual man with great integrity. He had faith in
people and in this Organization. To honour his legacy, I
hope we can renew our commitment to multilateralism
and further strengthening the United Nations.
The Acting President: As that was Ambassador
Skoog’s last statement to the General Assembly, we
wish him continued success in his endeavours.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 128.
Agenda item 15
Culture of peace
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/74/195 and
A/74/476)
Draft resolutions (A/74/L.23, A/74/L.24 and
A/74/L.25)
The Acting President: I should like to inform
the Assembly that draft resolution A/74/L.24 is also
submitted under agenda item 11, “Sport for development
and peace: building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bangladesh to introduce draft resolution A/74/L.23.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): It gives me great
pleasure to deliver my maiden statement to the General
Assembly as the new Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh, all the more so as it is on the agenda item
“Culture of peace”. It was 20 years ago that, as a young
representative, I had the privilege of being part of
the core team that introduced this agenda item at the
Assembly, leading to the adoption of the groundbreaking
resolution 53/243. There could not be a more auspicious
start to my second innings at the United Nations.
On 13 September 1999, the General Assembly
adopted by consensus resolution 53/243 (see A/53/
PV.107), on the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace. Through that seminal resolution,
Member States agreed on a programme of action to
19-40562

12/12/2019

promote a culture of peace in eight important areas that
are individually significant and mutually reinforcing.
That was during the first term of the Government of
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina. Since then, Bangladesh
has facilitated this resolution at the Assembly every
year. The culture of peace is an integral part of our
national agenda for people-centred development, as
enshrined in Vision 2021 and Vision 2041 of Prime
Minister Hasina’s development road map. We are very
pleased to see the inclusion of the culture of peace in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as a
recognition of the mutually reinforcing role of peace
and development. As the original proponent of the
culture of peace at the United Nations, Bangladesh
is pleased to see that the concept has grown in
prominence and has been found to be relevant in
addressing contemporary global challenges across
the three pillars of the United Nations. The growing
interest in the concept is manifest in the range of draft
resolutions being proposed under this agenda item over
the years. In recent years, we have seen a surge in peace
and preventive diplomacy, as actively promoted by the
Secretary-General. The culture of peace can serve as a
critical enabler in that regard.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Declaration and Programme of
Action. On that occasion, the President of the General
Assembly convened a high-level forum on a culture of
peace on the theme “The culture of peace: empowering
and transforming humanity”. It recognized the
enduring value of the culture of peace for the full
and effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
At that meeting, there was also broad agreement for
more inclusive collaborations and partnerships among
Member States, United Nations entities, international
organizations, civil society and all other relevant
stakeholders for the effective implementation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action. Given that the
cross-cutting concept of a culture of peace has evolved
into a dominant theme in our discourse at the United
Nations, there is clearly a need to further strengthen
efforts at all levels to operationalize it through specific
plans and programmes.
I believe that the coming year will provide us with
an excellent opportunity to do so. Next year we will
celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations. There are two other landmark anniversaries

A/74/PV.45

also coming up in 2020 — the twentieth anniversary
of the women and peace and security agenda and the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action. Those occasions will provide us
with the perfect opportunity to push the frontier further
in promoting a culture of peace in all areas of our
work, especially in enhancing women’s participation in
ensuring peace and security and their critical role in
achieving sustainable development, as envisioned in the
women and peace and security and Beijing outcomes.
I wish to take this opportunity to place on record
our deep appreciation to all Member States and United
Nations agencies that have actively supported the
culture of peace process over the past two decades. On
that note, I wish to call upon the United Nations entities
concerned, such as UNESCO, UNICEF, UN-Women,
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and the
University for Peace, to continue to remain engaged,
within their respective mandates, in integrating the
culture of peace in their core areas of work. We wish
to work with everyone involved in making that happen.
I now have the honour to introduce the draft
resolution entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace”, as
contained in document A/74/L.23. The large number
of its co-sponsors and its adoption by consensus each
year attests to the support that the resolution enjoys and
its growing relevance to Member States. We sincerely
thank all delegations for their active and constructive
participation in the informal consultations on the draft
resolution once again this year. We also appreciate their
valuable inputs, which have enriched the draft. Besides
technical updates, the draft resolution this year includes
the following other updates.
First, the draft resolution welcomes the successful
holding, on 13 September, of the High-level Forum
on the Culture of Peace, on the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace, convened by the President
of the General Assembly. We also need to make some
editorial corrections to the twenty-first preambular
paragraph and to paragraph 17 to reflect the correct
title of the Forum.
Secondly, the draft resolution notes with
appreciation that the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace continues to find
relevance across the three pillars of the United Nations,
which are interconnected and mutually reinforcing, as

19-405623/27

A/74/PV.45

corroborated by the introduction of a new resolutions
under this agenda item in recent years.
Thirdly, the draft resolution appreciates that
the Forum provided an opportunity for Member
States, United Nations entities, civil society and
non-governmental organizations and all relevant
stakeholders to exchange ideas and make suggestions
on how to build on and further promote the culture of
peace in the twenty-first century, and acknowledged
that the theme of the Forum, “The Culture of Peace:
empowering and transforming humanity”, reflected the
enduring value of the culture of peace for, inter alia, the
full and effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
Fourthly, while recognizing the ongoing activities
of UNESCO related to the culture of peace and
non-violence and their focus on concrete actions at
the global, regional and subregional levels, the draft
resolution also notes its support for Member States in
promoting the culture of peace at the national level.
We sincerely thank those delegations that have
already co-sponsored the draft resolution — I believe
there are 111 delegations, the highest to date — which
reflects the broad-based support for this draft resolution.
We look forward to more delegations joining as
co-sponsors from the floor shortly, ahead of its proposed
adoption by consensus.
As we adopt various resolutions today under the
culture of peace agenda, we do so in the sobering
awareness that our world is still plagued by conflict and
various forms of injustice, discrimination, cruelty and
inhumane acts, as well as crimes against humanity. We
have the responsibility, as members of the international
community, to protect the oppressed and end the
culture of impunity by ensuring accountability and
justice. That should be our solemn pledge as we renew
our commitment to a culture of peace today.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia to introduce draft resolution
A/74/L.24.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I have the honour of
introducing draft resolution A/74/L.24, entitled “World
Chess Day”, which proposes to designate 20 July as
World Chess Day, to mark the date of the establishment
of the International Chess Federation (FIDE) in Paris
in 1924.
4/27

12/12/2019

One of the oldest and most popular mental games
in history, chess is an established part of our modernday culture as a unique combination of sport, scientific
thinking and art. The draft resolution reflects the
transformative power of chess in helping to transcend
national boundaries, break down racial, political and
social barriers, change perceptions and prejudices,
combat discrimination and defuse conflict. As a global
game that promotes fairness and mutual respect, chess
can contribute to an atmosphere of tolerance and
understanding among nations by building more bridges
and bringing more people together.
The draft resolution recognizes the important
opportunities offered by chess in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals, including the
strengthening of education and health, promoting
the empowerment of women and girls and fostering
solidarity, cooperation and peace in its capacity as an
affordable and inclusive activity.
In Armenia chess is regarded as an essential part
of our culture. The long-standing tradition of chess has
earned our country, with a population of 3 million people,
the titles of Olympic and world champions. Armenia
has one of the highest numbers of chess grandmasters
per capita in the world today. Having embraced chess
as an academic subject in schools, Armenia recognizes
that one of the most important and enduring lessons that
chess can offer is respect — respect for rules, players
and discipline, and also respect for the continuous quest
for progress based on effort and decency. Skill is the
ultimate value on the chessboard, not the origin or
background of the player.
Armenia is grateful to all the delegations that
participated in the informal consultation process on the
draft resolution for their constructive engagement. We
thank the co-sponsors for supporting the designation of
World Chess Day as a global platform to foster dialogue,
solidarity and a culture of peace. While chess originated
as a game that modelled a battlefield, today we have
come to think of chess as a game that is more closely
linked with peace, and the concept of a chessboard is
often linked with diplomacy and multilateralism.
The designation of World Chess Day by the General
Assembly provides an important opportunity to
recommit to the intrinsic values that the United Nations
and the International Chess Federations share. As
reflected in FIDE’s motto, gens una sumus, we are one
19-40562

12/12/2019

family. As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations, World Chess Day can stand as an
important platform to celebrate those shared values and
to put them at the service of humankind.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines to introduce draft
resolution A/74/L.25.
Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): On behalf of Pakistan
and my own country, the Philippines, I am honoured
to introduce draft resolution A/74/L.25, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”. The draft
resolution has been co-sponsored by friends and
partners in Asia and the Pacific, Africa, the Americas
and Europe. We thank them all for their engagement.
The Philippines and Pakistan endeavoured to
accommodate all the views and concerns put forward,
thereby advancing the objectives of the that resolution
that we have co-sponsored for 15 consecutive years.
Certain things cannot be taken back: an arrow shot from
a bow, a bullet fired from a gun and an ill word spoken.
Not even apology can close the wound. Therefore, even
when we talk, we must be circumspect — all the more
so when we bear arms.
The world today faces seemingly intractable
conflicts and complex challenges that cause immense
human suffering and economic loss and hinder greater
socioeconomic cooperation to repair the damage. We
have witnessed growing xenophobia and religious
intolerance, underpinned by the politics of identity, as
well as the emergence of extremist ideologies. Suspicion
and ignorance among various religions and civilizations
are being exploited — and indeed propagated — by
extremist groups to pursue their agenda of establishing
a terrorized society. There was a time when terror was
the weapon of the weak against the strong in struggles
for freedom and justice. Today terror is pursued for
itself and is not a means but the very end that terrorism
seeks — a society built on fear in which every person is
afraid of the others.
Against that backdrop, this annual draft resolution
becomes more relevant than ever. It has two objectives:
to promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue
to achieve peace and stability, and to strengthen
mechanisms that promise constructive dialogue across
the most divergent divides. We worked to advance the
objectives of the draft resolution by maintaining an

A/74/PV.45

open, inclusive and transparent approach throughout
the negotiation process.
An example of that approach is provided in
paragraph 9, which welcomes the landmark initiative to
open up the Kartarpur Sahib Corridor and appreciates
the agreement between Pakistan and India, which
was reached in record time. The draft resolution also
recognizes the important role of UNESCO and the
invaluable contribution of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations in promoting interreligious and
intercultural dialogue at all levels.
Negotiations can be difficult at times, but only
because we, as Member States, approach one idea from
our own unique perspectives. But the process was
inspired at all times by our shared ideal of promoting
a culture of peace, which helped us reach agreement.
We are grateful for the openness and flexibility
demonstrated by delegations. We hope that our efforts
will be met with approval by the Assembly.
There should be no doubt in our solidarity as the
United Nations to embrace a culture of peace, partnership
and inclusivity. On behalf of the Permanent Missions
of Pakistan and the Philippines, I humbly request that
all Member States adopt by consensus draft resolution
A/74/L.25, on the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace.
Mr. Condor (Saint Kitts and Nevis): On behalf of
the 14 States members of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), I have the honour to deliver this statement
on agenda item 15, “Culture of peace”. At the outset,
CARICOM wishes to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (A/74/476), which provides an overview of
the activities that have been carried out by the main
United Nations entities working to promote a culture
of peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace since the
adoption by the General Assembly of its resolutions
73/126 and 73/129, and which was prepared to guide
our consideration of this agenda item.
CARICOM commends UNESCO for strengthening
efforts to mobilize all relevant stakeholders within
and outside the United Nations system in support of
a culture of peace and for inviting the Organization
to continue to enhance communication and outreach,
including through the culture of peace website.

19-405625/27

A/74/PV.45

CARICOM recognizes the importance of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace, adopted by the General Assembly in resolution
53/243, of 13 September 1999, which serves as the
universal mandate of the international community,
especially the United Nations system, with respect
to the application of the principles and rules of
international law for the benefit of humankind, in
particular future generations.
We live in an era of increasing globalization and
deepening interdependence. As CARICOM itself
is the essence of cultural diversity, we recognize
the importance of promoting interreligious and
intercultural dialogue. CARICOM believes that the
peaceful resolution of conflicts and differences is
crucial to social and economic development, security
and stability.
In addition, disparities among and within countries
remain a global concern. Poverty and social and
economic inequality have persisted, causing growing
resentment and intolerance. CARICOM believes that
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development will need
to address the increasing inequalities among countries
and ensure that globalization benefits all countries, and
not just a selected few.
Consistent with its obligations as set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations, the United Nations
should be a force for equality and fairness in the
context of an inequitable system of globalization. The
United Nations must work to ensure that rules apply
equally, effectively and consistently to all the actors in
our global family.
CARICOM recognizes the important role of women
and young people, as well as the contribution of children
and older persons, in advancing a culture of peace. In
our region, the Caribbean Youth Advocacy and Action
Agenda on Violence Prevention is a call to action to
effectively address the issues that young people across
the Caribbean have identified in relation to crime and
violence, including preventing and reducing crime,
fostering social inclusion and promoting reintegration.
In the words of Haile Selassie,
“[t]hroughout history, it has been the inaction of
those who could have acted, the indifference of
those who should have known better, the silence of
the voice of justice when it mattered most, that has
made it possible for evil to triumph.”
6/27

12/12/2019

CARICOM shares the view of the SecretaryGeneral that the world is at a critical juncture, and it is
vital to continue to scale up efforts towards achieving a
culture of peace and attaining the vision set out in the
Charter of the United Nations and the 2030 Agenda.
The time for action is now.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 States members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) — Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and my own country,
Thailand.
I would like to begin by thanking the President for
convening today’s debate. It comes at a crucial moment
this year, as the international community recently
completed the first four-year cycle of the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. To
that end, ASEAN reaffirms our strong determination to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals in a more
accelerated and effective manner, in the knowledge that
the enduring value of the culture of peace is critical to
that vision.
We would also like to extend our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive reports
(A/74/195 and A/74/476) under this agenda item.
ASEAN reiterates its support for United Nations
efforts to make the promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, with a focus
on prevention, increasingly the business of the entire
United Nations system.
When ASEAN was founded, 52 years ago, against
the backdrop of the numerous challenges facing our
countries, our vision was simple: to have an integrated,
peaceful and stable community that enjoys co-prosperity
and realizes lasting peace and stability in the region.
ASEAN continues to further advance that vision today
by promoting peaceful dialogue and mediation, without
resorting to the threat of use or use of force for any
of our decisions. Our decision-making process has
also been carried out in a truly ASEAN fashion — the
ASEAN way — that is, with the consensus of all 10
member States. The ASEAN way, which is a hallmark
of our organization, has worked for the betterment of
the peace and stability of the region.
ASEAN has also carried out the same process,
together with its dialogue partners, in ensuring peace
and stability within the region and beyond its borders.
19-40562

12/12/2019

The promotion of a culture of peace and prevention that
educates and empowers people, detects and prevents
armed conflicts and sustains peace through a crosssectoral, comprehensive and integrated approach is
what our region strives for.
ASEAN shares with all Member States the aspiration
and deep sense of collective responsibility to achieve
a world at peace through mutual respect, tolerance,
acceptance, reconciliation and respect for the rule of
law. We recognize the need to continue to build on our
shared values and shared aspirations by strengthening
mechanisms and actions through constructive dialogue,
better understanding, inclusiveness and moderation in
order to realize a global culture of peace.
ASEAN continues to engage in meaningful
dialogue with our external partners through ASEANled mechanisms, such as preventive diplomacy and
confidence-building measures under the ASEAN
Regional Forum, and through other constructive
engagement. We believe that advancing the habit
of dialogue is imperative in creating a conducive
atmosphere aimed at having a better understanding of
each other’s views on the situation in the region.
We also support the Security Council women and
peace and security and youth and peace and security
agendas, as well as multi-stakeholder initiatives for the
active participation of women and young people that
foster a culture of peace, such as the ASEAN Youth
Volunteer Programme. In addition, we believe that the
promotion of cooperation on sustainable development
also helps to foster a culture of peace.
ASEAN believes that cultivating such a culture
of peace is deeply rooted in respect for the rule of
international law and its guiding principles. In that
regard, we reaffirm our commitment to continuing
to foster peace and to maintain stability and security.
ASEAN stands ready to work with the international
community and the United Nations towards upholding
peace and stability, as enshrined in both the ASEAN
Charter and the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Ron Martínez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in the
annual debate on the agenda item “Culture of peace”,
since the promotion and strengthening of peace are a
topic of great importance to our country. We are aware
of the urgent need to make further progress in achieving
the principles and values of coexistence, tolerance,

A/74/PV.45

respect for diversity and non-violence, particularly at a
time when the world is under the constant threat of war
and multilateralism is facing a significant crisis due to
a growing trend towards unilateralism.
In that context, we would like to begin our statement
by reaffirming the importance of redoubling our efforts
to strengthen the culture of peace by promoting political
understanding and constructive dialogue among States
on the basis of mutual respect and in strict adherence to
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, as well as the rule of international
law, the principles of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, the right to self-determination of
peoples, non-violence, diplomacy for peace and the
full realization of all human rights, including the right
to development.
At the same time, we welcome and appreciate the
presentation of draft resolutions A/74/L.23, A/74/L.24
and A/74/L.25, to be considered at this meeting,
all of which we have co-sponsored, concerning the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace, World Chess Day and intercultural and
interreligious dialogue. We commend the delegations
of Bangladesh, Pakistan, Armenia and the Philippines
for their respective initiatives to continue strengthening
the values of coexistence and spaces for dialogue,
which are key to building a world where a culture of
peace is a reality.
The building and strengthening of a culture of
peace requires the genuine commitment of all of us, as
responsible members of the international community,
which must transcend occasional speeches and be
translated into concrete actions. Safeguarding future
generations from the scourge of war and achieving
lasting peace will be possible only to the extent that
we are able to demonstrate steadfast solidarity with the
most vulnerable in our societies, on the basis of respect
for cultural integrity and diversity and the ability to
understand and accept each other without judgment
by recognizing that fairness and justice are essential
elements of that equation. That is why, without hesitation
we affirm before the General Assembly that a world of
peace will be possible only once social justice becomes
a reality and equal access to health care, food, housing,
education, culture, social security, science, sport and
other fundamental rights is ensured based on national
and international commitments to cooperation.

19-405627/27

A/74/PV.45

Likewise, fostering a culture of peace and its
inherent values requires the utmost respect for the
dignity of every human being, regardless of nationality,
social class, sex, age, ethnic origin, disability, political
or religious views or any other conditions. We therefore
reject the encouragement of xenophobic campaigns
and the manipulation of the issue of migration and
refugees for internal political purposes, which
seriously undermines the values that have inspired the
Organization and the possibility of achieving lasting
peace. Only through political will and dialogue among
all social actors, without exception and under equal
conditions, can we achieve a climate favourable to
establishing the necessary conditions for all members
of society to feel involved in development and
transformation as an integral part of the social contract
between States and citizens based on a just, prosperous,
democratic and equitable international order.
History has shown that those great aspirations,
which sometimes seem too idealistic, can be met with
efforts and political will. On many occasions, they
have even resulted in major peace agreements between
warring groups, programmes of social impact that
ensured the social and economic rights of entire peoples,
and liberation movements that granted freedom,
independence, sovereignty and self-determination to
nations under the colonial yoke, among other positive
experiences that are a beacon of hope at a time when
the political interests of a small number of countries
and powerful sectors seem to prevail.
That is clearly not a simple or short-term task but an
ongoing one that we, as States and peoples, can advance
socially and institutionally with actions of various
kinds so as to make real gains through public policies
and an inclusive dialogue. To that end, the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development are an excellent guiding light.
For its part, Venezuela has made major
contributions in recent years to the international and
regional agendas for multilateralism, cooperation,
integration and fostering solidarity, as well as a culture
of peace, which have been recognized by various
States, social movements, civil society and academia,
as well as prominent figures. That is demonstrated
through our regional leadership of initiatives for
mutual economic cooperation, regional integration and
political engagement, as well as our recent role as Chair
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries during
8/27

12/12/2019

the three-year period from 2016 to 2019, in which
we promoted, among other things, the declaration of
24 April as the International Day of Multilateralism
and Diplomacy for Peace following the adoption of
resolution 73/126, presented exactly a year ago to this
important body under the same agenda item, “Culture
of peace” (see A/73/PV.51).
In keeping with the principles of its Bolivarian peace
diplomacy, Venezuela has resolutely and consistently
promoted initiatives in support of harmony, cultural
diversity, self-determination and peaceful coexistence
in order to achieve a pluralistic and multi-centred
world, without foreign intervention, as the foundation
and guarantee of peace.
In its preamble, the Constitution of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela states that one of its primary
aims is to establish a democratic, participatory, selfreliant, multi-ethnic and multicultural just, federal
and decentralized State that embodies the values of
freedom, independence, peace, solidarity, the common
good, territorial integrity, coexistence and the rule of
law for this and future generations. It is therefore a key
commitment of our nation to foster a culture of peace as
an inherent value of our inclusive democratic system,
which recognizes peace as a right and a duty in order
to achieve its great aspirations on behalf of humankind.
This debate is therefore a timely occasion to
reiterate our rejection and condemnation of the illegal
promulgation and implementation of unilateral coercive
measures against our country by the Government of
the United States of America. Such measures, which
violate all norms of international law, the Charter of
the United Nations and the human rights of more than a
third of humankind, including 30 million Venezuelans,
constitute criminal and inhuman collective sanctions
that are clearly incompatible with the values of a
culture of peace. We demand their immediate repeal
and lifting.
To conclude, despite the magnitude of the
challenges, Venezuela will remain firm and committed
to the Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace and to promoting policies of
inclusiveness and dialogue among peoples and nations
based on the fundamental principles of coexistence,
respect for diversity, dialogue among faiths, cultures
and civilizations, with multilateralism as the most
appropriate tool for achieving global solutions to
the great challenges of the twenty-first century.
19-40562

12/12/2019

A/74/PV.45

These must be addressed jointly rather than through
exclusive, supremacist and unilateralist approaches
that only favour minorities. The future of humankind
and a sustainable planet depends on agreement among
discerning men and women and responsible States,
overcoming our differences and working resolutely
so that the peace for which we yearn today becomes a
reality for our sons and daughters.

tools are also mentioned in the Charter of the United
Nations as a peaceful means of finding solutions to
conflict, in particular under Chapter VI. Preventive
diplomacy, mediation and the resolution of conflicts
by peaceful means are fundamental pillars of Kuwait’s
foreign policy. Strengthening and highlighting those
tools has been a priority for the State of Kuwait during
its current membership of the Security Council.

Mr. Mohammad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, for his reports
(A/74/195 and A/74/476), which contain information on
topics and actions undertaken by key United Nations
entities in order to promote a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace, to fight terrorism and violent
extremism, and to strengthen efforts towards a more
peaceful and tolerant world.

During our presidency of the Security Council in
June, we held a briefing on conflict prevention and
mediation (see S/PV.8546), since we firmly believe in the
importance of such tools for maintaining international
peace and security. We reiterate the reference in the
Secretary-General’s report about the role of women
and young people in fostering a culture of peace. We
wish to highlight that they should be empowered and
included in all areas, including in political processes.

More than ever before, the world today is
facing increasingly complex challenges and threats,
including challenges that undermine and threaten
the dissemination of a culture of peace. Regrettably,
disputes and conflicts are sometimes fuelled by
intolerance, extremism, violence and religious and
ethnic tensions in our world today. Those actions
are the result of the rejection of others, intolerance,
exclusion and a lack of awareness of the need to coexist.
Some have been using violent extremism as a means
of expression and even disseminate such incriminating
views through social media.
The terrorist act that took place in Christchurch,
New Zealand, this year highlights the need for us
to make greater efforts to combat the misuse of
social media. We also need to work together at the
international level to ban content that incites violent
extremism and terrorism. We must step up our efforts
to transform a culture of hatred, intolerance and war
into one of dialogue, coexistence and peace. Among
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), we would
highlight SDG 16, which calls for establishing inclusive
and peaceful societies for all. In that context, we
reiterate that there can be no sustainable peace without
development or development without sustainable peace,
as the two phenomena are inextricably linked.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General
(A/74/195) highlights important tools for the
achievement of peace, such as preventive diplomacy,
conflict prevention, mediation and dialogue. These

A culture of peace is deeply entrenched in my
country. One of the articles of the Kuwaiti Constitution
explicitly states that peace is the goal of the State. In the
State of Kuwait, we have fostered a culture of tolerance,
coexistence and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue that has marked our society over centuries.
The Constitution of the State of Kuwait enshrines those
values and concepts in its articles, which guarantee
freedom of speech and expression and the right to
perform religious rites freely and safely.
In conclusion, we are willing to participate in all
regional and international efforts to promote a culture
of peace, strengthen the dialogue among civilizations,
spread the values of moderation, tolerance and mutual
respect and renounce extremism, hatred and violence
in all their forms and manifestations. In that regard,
we urge all Member States to cooperate and work
together through our multilateral system to create a
more peaceful and more tolerant world for this and
future generations.
Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
President for organizing this important meeting on a
culture of peace. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his relevant reports (A/74/195 and A/74/476). Allow
me today to highlight the efforts of my country to
strengthen the culture of peace.
Three months ago, in this very Hall, we
commemorated the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace. On that day, my country reaffirmed

19-405629/27

A/74/PV.45

that a culture of peace must begin in every country. For
example, the United Arab Emirates has declared 2019
the Year of Tolerance. Following that announcement,
His Holiness Pope Francis made a historic visit to
Abu Dhabi, which was the first-ever papal visit to the
country. During that visit, we signed the Document on
Human Fraternity for World Peace and Living Together.
Following the signing of the document, we decided to
build the Abrahamic family house, which will include a
church, a mosque and a synagogue in one complex and
will be a global and historic model of tolerance.
The United Arab Emirates believes that it is
important to engage young people in efforts to achieve
stability and address threats to international peace and
security. Therefore, next week Abu Dhabi will host a
high-level regional conference, entitled “Empowering
youth and promoting tolerance”. The conference will
be convened jointly by the United Nations Office of
Counterterrorism and the Hedayah Centre and seek
to strengthen the role of young people in combating
extremism. It will also highlight the role of civil society
and religious organizations in strengthening dialogue,
mutual understanding, tolerance and coexistence.
We also believe that if we wish to achieve stability
and coexistence, we cannot overlook the important role
of women in supporting the pillars of peace, security
and tolerance. We have therefore implemented new
initiatives and policies to that end, in line with the
Beijing Platform for Action and Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. Such initiatives include the holding of a series
of discussions, in collaboration with the Georgetown
Institute for Women, Peace and Security, to review the
role of women in post-conflict reconstruction, as well as
military training programme for women peacekeepers
in cooperation with UN-Women and the Khawla bint Al
Azwar Military Academy of the United Arab Emirates
Ministry of Defence. Women from the Arab world
participated in the first training session, and we are
preparing to launch a second session, starting in 2020,
in which women from Africa and Asia will take part.
My country believes in the importance of preserving
and protecting cultural heritage and religious sites. We
therefore welcomed the United Nations Plan of Action to
Safeguard Religious Sites, launched in September. The
United Arab Emirates was among the countries visited
during the consultations that led to the Plan of Action.
We are also pleased that the United Arab Emirates was
granted permanent membership, with observer status, of
10/27

12/12/2019

the Council of the International Centre for the Study of
the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property.
We are the second country in the world, after Italy, to
be granted that important status. Given the significant
role of the United Arab Emirates and the principles that
we seek to promote, we were also recently elected as a
member of the Executive Board of UNESCO. Through
that membership, we will seek to promote tolerance and
prosperity by means of various cultural, educational
and scientific initiatives.
Mr. Mohd Nasir (Maldives): This year marks the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
53/243, on the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace. It was a sign of our collective
commitment to a culture of peace that the resolution
was adopted by consensus and without reservation.
Since then, the General Assembly has adopted annual
resolutions, asserting and reaffirming the commitment
of Member States to building a culture of peace. Today
we are here once again to renew that commitment.
The Programme of Action encourages action at all
levels — the individual, the family and the community,
as well as the national, regional and global levels.
Education is a key element in cultivating and
nurturing a culture of peace. In that regard, we commend
the work of the United Nations, in particular UNESCO,
for the admirable job that it is doing in working with the
Governments of Member States to develop and enhance
their education systems. Goal 4.7 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development seeks to ensure that all
learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to
promote sustainable development, including, inter alia,
through education, the promotion of a culture of peace
and non-violence. Globally, we have made considerable
progress with regard to education, but the reality is that
in 2017, worldwide, there were still 262 million children
out of school. We must do better in this area.
Inequality is one of the greatest obstacles to
creating a culture of peace. The approach of the
Maldives to creating a culture of peace is to provide
equitable development across the country and to
create a safe and prosperous environment for all. For
decades, Maldivians who live in islands outside of the
greater Male region have not had the same level of
development or access to the same basic resources or
even been accorded the same level of priority in policymaking circles. The current Government is committed
to implementing a decentralization policy aimed at
rectifying that.
19-40562

12/12/2019

A/74/PV.45

The Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace is an agreement among States but
it rightly identifies Governments, civil society, the
media and individuals as key actors for its effective
implementation. Nurturing a culture of peace requires
the media, including social media platforms, to
ensure that free speech not be used as an instrument
to incite hate or violence. However, without adequate
regulation of social media, in particular to restrict its
use to spread populist rhetoric, political extremism,
racism, xenophobia and falsehoods, social media has
become a convenient vehicle, and at times an enabler, in
propagating and exporting such rhetoric across borders
and cultures for those who seek to create division within
our society. If we do nothing to defeat such forces, our
collective investment in building a culture of peace
could be very rapidly undone.

Regrettably, the world is seeing waves of violence
accompanied by displacement, death and destruction
due to growing violent extremism, terrorism and
hatred. Extremism leads to terrorism. If we look at
the root causes, there is no doubt that we will find
poverty, unemployment, ignorance, discrimination,
impunity and marginalization. It is also regrettable
to note the flagrant daily human rights violations, of
which everyone is aware yet does nothing to counter,
as if such violations had become the norm. However,
this is a very grave phenomenon. We must strive to find
a solution to prevent its recurrence. The international
community must increase its efforts and resources. It
must find the will and determination necessary to put
an end to such practices, adopt bold resolutions and put
in place effective mechanisms that promote a culture of
peace and tolerance throughout the world.

The effective and efficient monitoring of social
media for malicious activity is therefore paramount.
However, in smaller countries, such as the Maldives,
the local language is generally used for such malicious
activities. It is important that social media companies
put in place appropriate mechanisms to adequately
monitor local-language content. Consequently, because
of the gap in content monitoring, we believe that this
also narrows the space for a culture of peace to thrive
in societies such as ours. Therefore, we call on social
media companies to take more responsibility, especially
for monitoring divisive content in such contexts.

Commitment to achieving peace strengthens
the values of freedom, justice and equality. Peace is
essential to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals. Peace can exist only if there is justice. A
culture of peace therefore calls for concerted action
on the part of all to fight ideological extremism, such
as the exclusion of others and incitement to violence,
by enhancing the role of mass media, including the
Internet and social media, which have become part
of our daily lives and have a huge impact on young
people, who are often targeted by extremists and those
who spread distorted ideas. In addition, opinion and
religious leaders should encourage people to enhance
social cohesion. Greater understanding would increase
our appreciation of others and strengthen our capacity
to combat violence. Ultimately, it will help to build and
consolidate a culture of peace.

History has taught us that peace is not perpetual or
unchallenged. As we overcome one challenge, another
is on the horizon. The vast majority of peace-loving
people cannot afford to let their guard down. Therefore,
in this twentieth anniversary year of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, let
us, together, with renewed vigour and hope assert and
reaffirm our commitment to building a culture of peace.
Mr. Almabrok (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report entitled “Promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace” (A/74/476). The report
provides an overview of the activities conducted by
the bodies of the United Nations to promote a culture
of peace. We also wish to thank the co-sponsors of
draft resolutions А/74/L.23, А/74/L.24 and А/74/L.25,
submitted under this agenda item.

The essential role played by the United Nations
in the peaceful settlement of disputes can be the most
effective way to strengthen a culture of peace. In
that regard, all Member States must demonstrate the
collective will to resolve conflicts and wars and support
the right to self-determination without interference in
the internal affairs of other States. We believe that all
these factors would strengthen the culture of peace,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Respect for cultural and religious diversity throughout
the world, together with support for dialogue and
mediation over confrontation, are also important tools.
Without them, lasting peace for all will remain beyond
our reach.

19-4056211/27

A/74/PV.45

Despite the challenges of today’s world, the good
offices of the United Nations in achieving peace and
security and dealing with complex international
issues, which are constantly evolving, remain of great
importance. We must therefore support such efforts
through the United Nations specialized agencies,
particularly UNESCO, whose efforts to promote a
culture of peace and tolerance we commend.
In conclusion, we consistently emphasize the need
for peaceful dialogue and diplomatic means to identify
solutions to conflicts among States. The international
community must step up its efforts to implement the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
the Secretary-General’s June initiative to fight hate
speech and to strengthen the implementation of Security
Council resolutions, while ensuring the necessary
human, logistical and technological resources needed
to counter terrorism in all its forms.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Peace can be achieved only if it reflects a set of values,
attitudes, traditions, behaviours and lifestyles, namely,
a culture of peace.
The General Assembly today considers agenda
item 15, entitled “Culture of peace”, in an international
context marked by armed conflicts in various regions,
increasing hate, racist and xenophobic speech,
including by senior State officials, growing poverty
and inequality and an eagerness by some States to close
doors and build walls instead of building bridges and
fostering understanding among nations and cultures.
The world we live in today produces more bullets
a year than the books it prints. As long as nuclear
deterrence is used as a way to curb war, human beings
will not enjoy a culture of peace. Today’s expanding
nuclear arsenals are a direct threat to peace. How far
humankind is from realizing the aspiration set out in
UNESCO’s Constitution:
“[S]ince wars begin in the minds of men, it is
in the minds of men that the defences of peace must
be constructed.”
Cuba notes with concern that the deep rift that
divides human society into rich and poor and the
growing disparity between the developed and the
developing world pose a serious threat to prosperity,
peace, security and global stability. We are convinced
that, in order to preserve and promote peace, the policies
of States should be directed towards the elimination
12/27

12/12/2019

of the threat of war, particularly nuclear war, a
commitment to the peaceful settlement of international
disputes and respect for and the promotion of the right
to development. There can be no peace without full
respect for the sovereignty of States; there can be no
peace without respect for the self-determination of
peoples and the territorial integrity of States. The use
of unilateral coercive measures as a foreign policy tool
must cease.
It is necessary to put an end to violence, to respect
life and to promote dialogue and cooperation. It is
necessary to emphasize education and transmitting
values of peace. Promoting and establishing a culture
of peace require condemning all terrorist acts, means
and practices, including State terrorism, and taking
concrete action to combat this scourge.
Putting an end to the economic, commercial and
financial blockade imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba is an action for peace. This
Assembly has signalled that through an annual
resolution adopted by an overwhelming majority for 28
years. There can be no true culture of peace when the
United States Government launches a new campaign
of slander and discredit against Cuba as part of its
increasingly hostile policy towards our country. That
campaign is driven by the political failure of trying to
make Cubans surrender by tightening the economic
blockade and measures to deny us fuel, against the
backdrop of the demonstrated ability of our people to
resist. We condemn the actions of the United States
Embassy in Cuba, from which mercenaries receive their
instructions and funding to incite violence, disrupt the
public order and defy law enforcement.
The new forms of aggression against Cuba will
fail, just as the blockade policy has failed over the past
60 years. We Cubans reaffirm our commitment to peace
and the promotion of a culture of peace. We reaffirm
the full force and effect of the Proclamation of Latin
America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
and of the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace. We maintain that peace is a necessary
precondition for the promotion and protection of all
human rights for all persons.
Mr. Al Assiri (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
First of all, I would like to thank the President of the
General Assembly for organizing this meeting on a
very important subject. I would also like to thank
19-40562

12/12/2019

A/74/PV.45

the delegation of Bangladesh for introducing draft
resolution A/74/L.23. I will try to be brief.

maintain development gains and contribute to moving
forward with the implementation of its plans.

Agenda item 15, entitled, “Culture of peace”,
is a broad and comprehensive concept enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law. The Organization works to maintain
international peace and security and prevent any form
of disruption to international relations among States.
Over the past two decades, it has become clear that there
has been broader support and participation within the
United Nations system with regard to the consolidation
of peace and peacebuilding through dialogue among
cultures and religions.

The participation of women and young people in
stepping up international efforts to achieve the desired
goals, as well as initiatives to achieve and consolidate
international peace, is very important in today’s society.
They must be included in identifying challenges
and solutions related to young peacebuilders and be
invited to participate in conferences and forums on
peacemaking and peacebuilding. Their voices should
be heard, and their recommendations should be listened
to and translated into concrete actions.

The General Assembly’s designation of 2000 as the
International Year for the Culture of Peace catalysed
the international consensus on the promotion of a set
of values, positions, traditions, behaviours and ways
of life, based on mutual respect, the condemnation
of violence and the promotion of human rights. With
the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the link between peace and development
has become the common denominator.
Our work today, however, which is characterized
by diversity and multilateralism, has become more
complicated owing to the bad and harmful use of various
social media platforms, known as the new media, which
will surely lead to further spread of such diseases as
hatred, violence and xenophobia and to eventually
slipping into the abhorrent terrorism that has hindered
development and made providing education in some
parts of the world almost impossible. Terrorism has
disrupted efforts to achieve peace, by inciting hatred,
violence and the failure to acknowledge the other. Of
course, the opposite effect is achieved when social
media is used in a proper and positive manner.
In order to establish a world of peace today, it is
now incumbent on the international community to adopt
comprehensively integrated policies and operationalize
preventive mechanisms, as well as promote coexistence
and dialogue with others. Those values should be passed
down to future generations through education, and they
should be highlighted by all forms of mass media. Efforts
should be made to enhance mutual understanding and
ethnic, linguistic and religious diversity, as such efforts
will have a significant impact on conflict resolution and
prevention from the very beginning. Such efforts will
also promote comprehensive economic growth and help

My country has made major strides in building
and sustaining peace, as well as resolving international
conflicts through peaceful means, while also preventing
them to the extent possible, avoiding their exacerbation
and mitigating their impacts. The actions taken by
my country are based on its deep understanding and
application of the principles enshrined in the Charter
and those of Saudi Arabia’s foreign policy, as well
as on the belief of our wise leadership over the ages
in the principle of maintaining international peace
and security.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia feels that it has an
important role to play in the world, both at the regional
and international levels, as well as with regard to
its unique standing in exercising the custodianship
conferred upon it over the two Holy Mosques in Mecca
and Medina. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is also
aware of its economic importance as one of the top
oil-producing countries and one of the first countries
to adopt policies aimed at safeguarding the stability
of oil markets and the uninterrupted supply of oil to
global markets.
Saudi Arabia established the King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and
Intercultural Dialogue. Those present at the Centre’s
opening in Vienna, on 26 November 2012, included
representatives of various religions and cultures. The
Centre represents a historic move towards responsible
and constructive humanitarian dialogue, based on
highlighting the shared values of the followers of
religions at the core of divine messages and human
cultures. It is hoped that the Centre will be a beacon
for enlightened dialogue on issues of interest to
every community.
In many cases, a lack of understanding has led to
grinding wars, bloody conflicts and heinous crimes,

19-4056213/27

A/74/PV.45

in addition to extremism, waves of violence and
terrorism. The Centre aims to enhance the role of the
family in society, prevent its disintegration and renew
commitment to moral values and principles. We are
all aware of the state of our world as a result of the
spread of injustice, corruption, the rise of social, health
and environmental ills, economic crises, xenophobia,
human trafficking and an unprecedented level of
criminality. The spread of those phenomena was what
compelled the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to establish
the International Centre. We hope that it will contribute
to closing the wide gaps among components of the
human community and achieve the humanitarian and
noble goals that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is always
endeavouring to achieve everywhere.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): At the High-level Forum on the Culture
of Peace held on 13 September we commemorated
the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, the
implementation and the follow-up of which we are
assuring through draft resolution A/74/L.23, which
Ecuador has the honour to co-sponsor once again. At
the Forum, I focused on the culture of peace as the only
sustainable pathway for States to take, while referring
to universal disarmament and my country’s rejection of
all forms of military occupation and aggression.
I recall today the proclamation in the UNESCO
Constitution that, since wars begin in the minds of
men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace
must be constructed. What better tribute can we pay
to the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the
United Nations than to achieve a more peaceful world?
The coming year will be crucial not only because of
the historical commemorations to be held, but because
it will serve as an opportunity for us to modernize and
improve the peacebuilding architecture at the United
Nations, and therefore around the world.
The 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
will also take place next year. In addition, a significant
majority of States will be signing the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which will serve as a
catalyst for its universalization. Latin America and the
Caribbean, a peaceful and nuclear-weapon-free zone,
will also likely be further strengthened by becoming
a nuclear-test-free zone. In 2020 we will also begin the
countdown to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
14/27

12/12/2019

How can we consolidate peace in the world if we do not
achieve development and, at the same time, how can we
achieve development without a culture of peace?
If anything has changed since the adoption
of the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace, 20 years ago, it is information
and communications technology. That is why I was
honoured, in September during the informal interactive
dialogue at the High-level Forum on the Culture of
Peace, to chair a discussion on digital media as a new
weapon of our modern times. We were all in agreement
about the need to take stock of our efforts in order to
build greater tolerance and foster respect among and
within our countries. In the end, we concluded that
digital media could indeed be used as a weapon, but
that it could also be a great tool for promoting the
culture of peace and non-violence. It is up to us to
address the existing challenges, stop the spread of hate
speech and take advantage of new technologies. That
is why I highlight in particular paragraph 19 of the
draft resolution to be adopted in the General Assembly
this morning, which refers to strategies in the sphere
of information and communications technology for
the implementation of the Programme of Action. The
more digital media that is used to spread hate speech,
the more we need to use digital media to counteract it.
We must overcome corrosive rhetoric and build more
inclusive communities.
The concept of the culture of peace is embedded
in the Constitution of Ecuador. However, in the face
of extreme violence and organized crime, that is not
enough. If we are to achieve peace, we must not only
renew and revitalize our commitments to doing so
every day, but also mobilize the efforts of our peoples
to consolidate and defend it. In the beginning of
October, we saw acts of extreme violence committed
in Ecuador, and I swiftly condemned those acts before
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, in open
debates of the Security Council (see S/PV.8668) and in
the General Assembly. But as of tomorrow, two months
will have passed since the violence peaked and, in
that regard, I would like to share with the Assembly
some of the critical details about that period that have
compelled us to place a sharper focus on promoting the
culture of peace.
The main roads for accessing the Andean region
were closed, with major urban centres soon running
short of food and medicine and becoming unable to move
by land. Ecuador had to transport provisions by air to its
19-40562

12/12/2019

largely populated cities, while drinking water supplies
were cut off in several locations. Violent extremism
seeks to try to isolate and terrorize the population.
The military base at La Balbina was attacked. A great
deal of coordination and tactical preparation went
into those acts of extreme violence. The perpetrators
employed urban guerrilla techniques, using homemade
shields and weapons that they had produced in serial
quantities. Many of the criminals wore gas masks and
protective helmets. They coordinated their occupation
of strategic sites and transit transport hubs in the
capital. They spread messages calling for widespread
rebellion, undermining peace and seeking to destabilize
the Government.
On 15 October the Permanent Council of the
Organization of American States (OAS) condemned
the destructive acts that were perpetrated, mobilized
support to the Ecuadorian Government from the Latin
America and Caribbean region and recognized the efforts
to restore social peace. It also urged the Government
and the people of Ecuador to continue to firmly defend
the democratic order, the rule of law and respect for
human rights, which constitute the best guarantees for
peace and social progress in a free society. We cannot
fight hatred with more hatred; rather, we must do so
through institutions and by perpetually promoting a
culture of peace. Ecuador has made it clear, both here
at the United Nations and at the OAS, that in the face of
violent extremism, the Ecuadorian security forces did
not fire any lethal weapons.
Returning to the topic of information technologies,
that violent period also saw the spread of false
information, which exacerbated the violence and caused
irreparable damage. Member States had an opportunity
last week to reflect on how we should move forward
in strengthening online democracy and the responsible
use of cyberspace and information. Each and every
one of us is responsible for ensuring that. As a country
of peace, Ecuador recognizes and promotes the rights
to development and to peace as human rights, which
mutually reinforce one another. For Ecuador, today
marks 60 days since dialogue triumphed over violence
and institutions and peace triumphed over hatred.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our commitment
to deepening efforts to establish a global culture of
peace. To that end, we have sponsored the three draft
resolutions submitted today to the General Assembly
for consideration (А/74/L.23, А/74/L.24 and А/74/L.25)
and will support their implementation.

A/74/PV.45

Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report entitled “Promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace” (A/74/476), in which he
emphasizes the prevention of violent extremism as
well as the use of mediation and dialogue as important
ways to contribute to peace. I would like to take this
opportunity to pay heartfelt tribute to the SecretaryGeneral for the selflessness and dedication he has
shown at the helm of our Organization in his efforts to
achieve peace.
The culture of peace is the very raison d’être of our
Organization, as it embodies the three pillars that guide
the work of the United Nations, namely, development,
peace and security and human rights. As a conscientious,
responsible and active actor within the community of
nations, the Kingdom of Morocco remains convinced
that strengthening multilateralism and taking coherent
and collective action in our Organization in favour of
dialogue, pluralism and mutual respect are essential to
meeting the many challenges currently facing our world,
especially the rise of ideological conflicts, intolerance,
nationalist sentiments, violence and extremism.
As an intersectional hub where different cultures and
civilizations interact with one another, the Kingdom of
Morocco is proud of its ancestral tradition of promoting
intercultural, interreligious and intercivilizational
dialogue. Respect for cultural and religious diversity is
an integral part of daily life and is embedded in the
collective consciousness of Moroccan society. The
mosques, synagogues and churches in the various cities
of the Kingdom of Morocco have always respectfully
coexisted. At the national, regional and international
levels, the Kingdom of Morocco, under the guidance
of His Majesty King Mohammed VI — may God assist
Him — is work tirelessly to strengthen the values of
peace, harmony, mutual understanding and respect for
cultural and religious diversity. In that regard, I would
like to emphasize that, at the invitation of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, Commander of the Believers,
His Holiness Pope Francis visited Morocco on 30 and
31 March. That historic papal visit, which was the
second after that of Pope John Paul II in 1985, served
as strong and clear testament to Morocco’s leading role
in promoting dialogue, understanding and cooperation
among different religions and cultures.
Education is a bulwark and a fundamental means to
combat the scourge of discrimination based on hate and

19-4056215/27

A/74/PV.45

extremism. That is why education is of fundamental
importance to Morocco. To that end, the Moroccan
education system instils in children, from a very
young age, the virtues of respect, openness, diversity
and human rights. In that context, textbooks and
school curriculums are systematically and periodically
reviewed to include the values that promote coexisting
in harmony with and in tolerance of others. I would
like to take this opportunity to commend UNESCO’s
efforts towards promoting education and the culture of
peace around the world.
Similarly, in order to highlight the just, noble and
respectful values of Islam as well as combat all forms of
radicalism and extremism, the Kingdom is carrying out
various initiatives such as reforming the curriculum on
religion, improving religious education and promoting
cooperation with brotherly and friendly countries,
particularly in Africa. In addition, on the instructions of
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Morocco established
the Mohammed VI Foundation for African Ulemas and
the Mohammed VI Institute for the Training of Imams,
Morchidines and Morchidates — for men and women
preachers. In that context, the Kingdom of Morocco
provides multidimensional training for hundreds of
preachers from a large number of African, Arab and
European countries.
Furthermore, Morocco is proud and honoured to
have been behind and to have greatly contributed to
the adoption and implementation of plans of action,
documents and resolutions constituting the cornerstone
of United Nations efforts and initiatives aimed at
promoting a culture of peace and fighting all forms of
discrimination and exclusion. In that regard, I want to
highlight the following.
First, the Kingdom of Morocco attaches
great importance to the fight against all forms of
discrimination, hatred and rejection of others, including
Islamophobia, antisemitism and Christianophobia.
Thus, Morocco co-organized, with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
international meetings that resulted in the adoption of
the Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of advocacy
of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence.
Secondly, Morocco has engaged positively in the
formulation and implementation of the Plan of Action
for Religious Leaders and Actors to Prevent Incitement
16/27

12/12/2019

to Violence that Could Lead to Atrocity Crimes,
launched by the Secretary-General in July 2017.
Thirdly, my country contributed to the
establishment and implementation of the plans
of action on safeguarding religious sites and on
hate speech, formulated under the leadership of
Mr. Miguel Ángel Moratinos, High Representative
for the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, and
Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide, respectively. I
take this opportunity to re-express to Mr. Moratinos
and Mr. Dieng Morocco’s warm congratulations for
their tireless efforts and concrete achievements in the
implementation of their crucial mandates for the United
Nations and to assure them of my country’s full support.
Fourthly, in 2016 Morocco hosted an international
conference, in which hundreds of religious, political
and civil society leaders from 120 countries took part
and which resulted in the adoption of the Marrakesh
Declaration on the Rights of Religious Minorities in
Predominantly Muslim Majority Communities, which
constitutes a reference in this domain.
Fifthly, Morocco instigated the adoption by
consensus by the Assembly on 25 July of resolution
73/328, which my country introduced, entitled
“Promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue
and tolerance in countering hate speech”. The resolution
was sponsored by 90 Member States, and we thank all
Member States for supporting it.
The Kingdom of Morocco warmly welcomes the
efforts of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations
to promote intercultural dialogue and strengthen
understanding and respect among civilizations,
cultures, religions and beliefs. As a founding member of
the Alliance, Morocco works to promote understanding
and cultural and religious enrichment and spares
no effort to promote a dialogue of peace allowing
genuine synergies to blossom within the international
community. The Kingdom of Morocco is aware of the
fundamental role of the Alliance of Civilizations in that
context and is therefore delighted and honoured to host
the Alliance’s ninth global forum in 2020. My country
is all the more honoured because it will be the first time
that the forum is held in Africa.
Ms. Quiel Murcia (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Two decades after the adoption of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace in
1999, this occasion is certainly a cause to rejoice but
19-40562

12/12/2019

A/74/PV.45

even more so a time to reassess the path we have set
ourselves to achieve a more peaceful, sustainable, fair
and inclusive world.

as one of the pillars of fostering inclusion, peace,
development and, accordingly, the promotion of more
tolerant societies.

Panama welcomes the recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General’s reports “A world against
violence and violent extremism” (A/74/195) and
“Promotion of a culture of peace and interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace” (A/74/476), which emphasize the value
of multilateral cooperation to the international
community’s efforts in effectively addressing the related
problems of polarization, intolerance, violent extremism
and terrorism. As a principle of our foreign policy,
Panama favours dialogue and consensus-building, as
well as cooperation, mediation and multilateralism as
tools to promote peace and understanding.

We also welcome the actions being promoted
by the United Nations in favour of open and fluid
communication with major technology and social
network companies with a view to finding ways
to reduce hate speech and extremist content on
the Internet. We recognize that violence today is
perpetrated not only with weapons but also virtually
and has an alarming reach into vulnerable sectors of
society, without discriminating between developed and
developing countries. My country therefore supports the
broad dissemination of the strategy of the Department
of Global Communications and of the work carried out
by agencies such as UNESCO and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre on campaigns aimed at
promoting peace and combating xenophobia, hatred,
disinformation and stigmatization.

Panama
welcomes
the
Secretary-General’s
appeal regarding the need to take advantage of the
creativity and energy of young people in meeting those
challenges. With that vision, my country is committed
to global efforts to combat radicalization, especially
given the threat it poses to children and young people in
particular. To that end, we firmly believe in education as
the main tool for the prevention and public awarenessraising of intolerant behaviour and the use and reach of
hate speech and extremism.
As a country with a large young population, we are
committed to investing in the social development of
our young people as a priority so that they may fully
develop their abilities. Entering the academic and/or
working world equipped with critical thinking limits
the manipulative impact of xenophobic, extremist and
violent currents facing our young people today. We also
recognize the crucial role of sport in building peaceful
societies, and are therefore grateful for the leadership
of Bangladesh in promoting draft resolution A/74/L.24,
proclaiming World Chess Day.
This year has been marked by a series of
events connected to violent extremism and extreme
nationalism, highlighting the need to overcome the
obstacles we face in order to prevent young people
from being exposed to information that fosters false
ideologies and violent behaviour, which have no
place in an increasingly plural and diverse world. As
a multi-ethnic and pluricultural country that firmly
believes in respect for human rights, diversity and the
coexistence of religious beliefs, we welcome the United
Nations efforts to promote interreligious dialogue

In Panama’s view, social investment prevents
conflict and promotes peace. As a country that has
been demilitarized since 1990, we have focused the
investment of resources on sectors that provide greater
opportunities for the promotion of economic and social
growth, thereby contributing in a comprehensive
manner to regional and global peace.
I conclude by pointing out that, by co-sponsoring
the three draft resolutions before us today, I reiterate my
country’s firm commitment to global actions designed to
effectively implement the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace. We recognize that
peace is the foundation of development and that quality
education for our children and adolescents will drive the
elimination of extreme terrorism during this decade of
action, which will require concerted efforts combining
national actions and a multilateral system determined
to achieve concrete results and to ensure that violence
is not normalized, much less institutionalized.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
on the agenda item “Culture of peace” (A/74/476). The
report was requested by the General Assembly in its
resolution 73/129, on the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace, sponsored by the Philippines and Pakistan.
This year’s draft resolution (A/74/L.25) emphasizes
that the virtues of peace, harmony, cooperation and

19-4056217/27

A/74/PV.45

brotherhood are the common denominators of all faiths,
cultures and civilizations. We remain committed to
the promotion of a culture of peace nationally as well
as globally.
Pakistan is a pluralistic, multicultural and
multi-ethnic society. Our founding father declared
that the religion, caste or creed of a citizen has
nothing to do with the business of the State. A prime
example of Pakistan’s policy is the initiative taken by
Prime Minister Imran Khan to open the Kartarpur
Sahib Corridor between India and Pakistan. This has
enabled the Sikh community from India and across
the world to visit one of its holiest sites without any
visa requirements.
Unfortunately, we seem to be trapped in the echo
chambers of hate speech, supremacist ideologies,
neofascist beliefs, bigotry, intolerance and xenophobia.
Antisemitism has resurfaced. Even more pervasive is
the phenomenon of Islamophobia.
After 9/11, the war on terror turned virtually into
a war on Islam. The pernicious equation of Islam with
terrorism has justified discrimination against Muslim
individuals, communities and entire nations. It has
justified a series of foreign invasions in the Muslim
world. It has also justified the denial of justice and selfdetermination to the Palestinian and Kashmiri peoples.
Today Islamophobia has assumed a deadly
dimension in India. The mothership of the governing
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is the Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), a fascist organization
created almost 100 years ago. Its founder, Gowalkar,
endorsed Hitler’s aim of “purifying” the Aryan race by
eliminating the Jews. He advocated a similar cleansing
of Muslims and other minorities from India’s Aryan
Hindu population. RSS gangs of violent thugs organize
and behave like Hitler’s Brownshirts. It was an RSS
member who assassinated Mahatma Gandhi. In 1992,
an RSS-led mob destroyed the historic Babri mosque in
Ayodhya. Only last month, the Indian Supreme Court
handed over the mosque site to those very people who
had destroyed it to build a Hindu temple.
Also in 1992, thousands of Muslims were killed in
Mumbai, then known as Bombay, by Hindu extremist
mobs. There is considerable evidence that in 2002,
Mr. Modi, a lifelong member of the RSS, as Chief
Minister of Gujarat, orchestrated the massacre of 2,000
Muslim men, women and children. The chilling slogan
18/27

12/12/2019

heard at the RSS rallies is “The only place for a Muslim
is the graveyard or Pakistan”.
The BJP-RSS is already implementing its plan
for ethnic cleansing across several parts of India.
In Assam, 2 million Muslims and Christians have
been arbitrarily stripped of their Indian nationality.
Thousands are being held in concentration camps. This
new nationality registration is to be applied across
India. Only yesterday, the Indian Parliament passed
a patently anti-Muslim law called the Citizenship
Amendment Bill, which envisions granting citizenship
to all in India except the Muslims.
Muslims are being indiscriminately killed across
India, with complete impunity, by Hindu cow vigilantes
and extremists. Indian journalists, the electronic and
print media, and even opposition politicians have been
intimidated and coerced into either silence or, even
worse, collaboration.
The BJP-RSS has now decided to impose what
they themselves call a “final solution” for Jammu and
Kashmir, unashamed of their choice of this ominous
phrase. After abolishing the legislative structures in
occupied Kashmir and imposing direct rule from New
Delhi, the BJP-RSS Government on 5 August changed
two articles in the Indian Constitution to eliminate
Jammu and Kashmir’s special and autonomous status,
divided the State into two territories and removed
the prohibition on outside settlers, with the aim of
transforming it from a Muslim-majority State into a
Hindu-majority territory. Under the relevant provisions
of the pertinent Security Council resolutions, these
measures are null and void.
Anticipating a popular Kashmiri revolt, India added
180,000 troops to the already 700,000 stationed in
occupied Kashmir before 5 August. A round-the-clock
curfew and a complete communications blackout was
imposed. Thousands of Kashmiri political leaders
and activists, including two former Chief Ministers,
were arrested.
After 130 days, Kashmir remains in lockdown.
Since 5 August, according to India’s own data, an
additional 4,000 political leaders, professionals
and activists have been arrested. Many have been
transported to jails all over India. According to reports
trickling out of occupied Kashmir, 20,000 men and
boys have been captured and transported to prisons in
various parts of India. Thousands of abducted young
boys have been subjected to torture and other inhuman
19-40562

12/12/2019

and degrading treatment. Often the screams of tortured
boys are broadcast over loudspeakers as an instrument
of intimidation. Peaceful demonstrations have been
brutally quelled with pellet guns, killing and maiming
scores of Kashmiris.
We fear that Indian repression will intensify
further. The Kashmiris will inevitably express their
rage and rejection. The Indian forces will without doubt
respond with characteristic brutality. With good reason,
Genocide Watch, a civil-society organization, has
warned of the danger of a genocide in occupied Kashmir.
India’s actions are propelling South Asia towards
a catastrophe. To divert attention from its repression,
India could launch another false-flag operation to
justify further aggression against Pakistan. The Indian
Army Chief has repeatedly threatened war. He has
spoken of the feasibility of fighting “a limited war”
under the nuclear overhang. On 16 August, the Indian
Defence Minister held out a thinly disguised nuclear
threat against Pakistan. India has issued new maps that
show both Indian-occupied and Pakistan-administered
Jammu and Kashmir as part of India. India’s ceasefire
violations have also intensified. We have observed
threatening Indian army movements along the Line
of Control in Kashmir in recent days. Pakistan does
not want war with India, but, if India mounts another
attack against Pakistan, we will respond vigorously
and effectively.
It is high time for the international community to
wake up to the clear and present danger and intervene
to defuse this India-instigated crisis. The United
Nations is a party to the Jammu and Kashmir dispute.
It has an obligation to secure the implementation
of the resolutions of the Security Council on Jammu
and Kashmir. It has a responsibility to protect the
fundamental human rights of the Kashmiri people,
including their right to self-determination. We hope
that the world will act before it is too late for peace and
the thousands — and perhaps millions — of Kashmiris,
Pakistanis and Indians who may perish in the conflict.
Ms. Annuar (Brunei Darussalam): Brunei
Darussalam aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Brunei Darussalam is pleased to once again
co-sponsor the traditional draft resolutions (A/74/L.23,
A/74/L.24 and A/74/L.25) under this agenda item.
We thank the delegations of Bangladesh, Pakistan

A/74/PV.45

and the Philippines for their excellent work, and we
congratulate Armenia on its initiative. We would also
like to express our appreciation for the invaluable
insight and recommendations that are included in the
Secretary-General’s reports (A/74/195 and A/74/476)
on this agenda item.
It has been 20 years since we adopted the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. Against
the backdrop of the rapidly evolving nature and growing
threat of terrorism and violent extremism, as well as the
alarming increase in hate speech, Brunei Darussalam
believes that our shared objective of fostering a culture
of peace and non-violence and fighting intolerance
remain as important as ever. Allow me to share briefly
how we are advancing national efforts, as well as
cooperation at the regional and international levels.
Brunei Darussalam has been immensely blessed
as a peaceful, harmonious and prosperous State.
Instilling a culture of peace and understanding is vital
to our rich history and traditions and flows from our
strong community values, with an emphasis on the
centrality of the family institution. Bearing in mind
the importance of investing in youth as active agents
in building a peaceful world, Bruneians are taught,
from the earliest stages of life, the values of respect and
to always respect their elders, family, neighbours and
people from all walks of life, regardless of race, gender,
religion or culture. Providing high-quality education
and skills development to our youth is a top priority on
the national agenda, particularly in realizing our 2035
national vision. In addition, mandatory civic education
is taught in schools to guide students on how to treat
one another with compassion and understanding and
contribute positively to a diverse, respectful and lawabiding society.
Cultivating interreligious and intercultural
dialogue and understanding is also a key component of
our multi-faith and diverse community. Moreover, we
encourage inclusiveness in our everyday community
engagement, such as celebrating holidays together,
which helps to forge enduring bonds of family and
friendship, thereby ensuring interfaith harmony and
social cohesion across the country.
As a small State, Brunei Darussalam is cognizant
of the need to be vigilant in the face of potential risks
to our peace, stability and cohesiveness. We therefore
undertake a whole-of-society approach in preventing
and countering the threat of radicalization and violent

19-4056219/27

A/74/PV.45

extremism. That includes the responsible dissemination
of information through the use of media, the Internet
and Friday sermons. Faith leaders, teachers and village
heads play a prominent role in providing a positive
influence, particularly in countering negative teachings
and ideologies that could disrupt the peace of the family
institution, the society and the State.
Brunei Darussalam is a proud member of
ASEAN — a diverse grouping of 10 nations that is
home to over 600 million people, with a multitude of
ethnicities, religions, languages and cultures. Unity
in diversity is the very essence of ASEAN, as we
aspire to create an inclusive, resilient, rules-based,
people-centred and people-oriented community. Our
shared commitments are enshrined in the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025 and 2017 ASEAN Declaration
on a Culture of Prevention for a Peaceful, Inclusive,
Resilient, Healthy and Harmonious Society. Brunei
Darussalam remains committed to supporting efforts
at the international level in promoting tolerance and
understanding among different faiths and civilizations.
Brunei Darussalam actively participates in global
interfaith dialogues and conferences, notably at the
Group of Friends of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations. I wish to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the contributions of the Alliance of
Civilizations, including the United Nations Plan of
Action to Safeguard Religious Sites, in guaranteeing
safety to worship in peace and that the values of
compassion and tolerance are fostered globally. I
would be remiss not to mention and express our
appreciation for the valuable contributions of UNESCO
as the lead agency for the International Decade for the
Rapprochement of Cultures.
In conclusion, in the light of the upcoming seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations and amid the
troubling threats to multilateralism, it is now more
important than ever that we renew our collective efforts
to foster a culture of peace and tolerance, continuously
seek to understand one another and appreciate the
richness in our diversity. In that undertaking, we must
also remain committed to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, develop friendly
relations among nations based on respect for the
principles of equal rights and the self-determination of
peoples and strengthen universal peace.
Mr. Aliyev (Republic of Azerbaijan): At the outset,
I would like to thank the delegation of Bangladesh
20/27

12/12/2019

and the delegations of Pakistan and the Philippines,
respectively, for their skilful efforts, dedication and
leadership in facilitating the negotiations on the
relevant draft resolutions (A/74/L.23 and A/74/L.25)
and for their strong commitment to the promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
The very fact that the General Assembly has
adopted a growing number of resolutions under the
agenda item “Culture of peace” with the overwhelming
support of Member States attests to the primacy and
urgency given by the international community to the
topic. At the same time, the annual draft resolutions
entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace” and “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace” continue to serve as universal
standard-setting and guidance in this area of activities
and cooperation. The culture of peace is interlinked
with the objectives of sustainable development. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development recognizes
that all cultures and civilizations can contribute to, and
are critical enablers of, sustainable development.
The promotion of a culture of peace is equally
important in the context of addressing conflicts,
especially those aggravated by policies aimed at
sowing dissension and inculcating enmity and hatred
on religious and ethnic grounds. Intercultural and
interreligious dialogue at the national and international
levels has therefore been, and must remain, one of the
important avenues within the broader objectives of
peacebuilding, sustaining peace and reconciliation.
Furthermore, we would like to emphasize the
leading role of UNESCO and the critically important
work of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in
advancing the cause of a culture of peace. Azerbaijan
welcomes the launching by the Secretary-General,
earlier this year, of the United Nations Plan of Action
to Safeguard Religious Sites, prepared by the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations, which provides an
action-oriented framework with recommendations to
support relevant stakeholders in preventing attacks
against places of worship.
Among the initiatives put forward and successfully
implemented by Azerbaijan, the Baku process has
proved itself to be one of the leading international
platforms for fostering dialogue and cultural diversity.
The Secretary-General emphasized the important role
of the Baku process in advocating for dialogue among
19-40562

12/12/2019

cultures in his report on the current agenda item to
the General Assembly at its seventy-second session
(A/72/488). That role was also emphasized most
recently in the outcome documents of the eighteenth
Summit of Heads of State and Government of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held on 25 and
26 October in Baku. An integral part of the Baku
process is the World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue,
which, since 2011 has been organized biennially by
Azerbaijan, in partnership with UNESCO, the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations, the World Tourism
Organization, the Council of Europe and the Islamic
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
We welcome the growing international recognition
of the World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue, which,
as stated in the report of the Secretary-General I
mentioned, has established itself as a key global
platform for promoting intercultural dialogue. That high
assessment of the role of the World Forum was further
promulgated by the General Assembly in resolutions
72/136 and 73/129. It is also emphasized in the United
Nations Plan of Action to Safeguard Religious Sites.
The fifth World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue,
which took place in Baku in May, focused on dialogue
as an instrument for action against discrimination,
inequality and violent conflict. The current report of
the Secretary-General on the promotion of a culture
of peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace states that the
fifth World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue
“centred around three core themes: the management
of diversity; youth and intercultural leadership; and
displacement and human security. In particular,
the Forum sought to hone its impact as a platform
for catalysing concrete action, using innovative
formats and devising ambitious outcomes to be
achieved through new strategic collaborations.”
(A/74/476, para. 9)
There is also information about the fifth World
Forum on Intercultural Dialogue in the report of the
Secretary-General on human rights and cultural
diversity (A/74/212), submitted to the General
Assembly at its current session pursuant to resolution
72/170. Among the various events that took place at
this year’s Forum was the high-level panel of heads of
international organizations, during which participants
exchanged views on building synergies and partnerships
among relevant stakeholders, including those active in
the political, economic, financial, humanitarian and

A/74/PV.45

social spheres. Furthermore, the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism organized a special event on the
margins of the Forum to showcase good practices for
engaging and partnering with youth to build resilience
in the face of violent extremism, specifically by
addressing discrimination and inequalities through
innovative approaches.
In November, Azerbaijan hosted the second Baku
Summit of World Religious Leaders, which was
attended by participants representing 70 countries. The
Summit adopted the Baku declaration as its outcome,
which emphasized the role of religious leaders in
promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
The United Nations continued support for successful
initiatives on the culture of peace and multiculturalism
is essential in the context of building relationships,
overcoming stereotypes and misconceptions, and
implementing development frameworks and policies.
My country looks forward to enhanced cooperation
with all stakeholders in achieving those noble goals.
Mrs. Tripathi (India): Since wars begin in the
minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences
of peace must be constructed. Those words were
enshrined into the Constitution of UNESCO more than
seven decades ago, at a time the world was emerging
from the gloomy shadows of the two world wars. Since
then, under the auspices of the United Nations, the
promotion of a culture of peace has grown into a global
discourse. Within that framework, peace encompasses
far more than an absence of conflict. The promotion
of tolerance, disarmament, sustainable economic
and social development, a democratic ethos, gender
equality and respect for human rights and dignity also
play key roles.
It has been recognized that, in order to transition
from a culture of war to a culture of peace, it is necessary
to transform individual behaviour and institutional
practices. What begins with the development of
inner peace and scientific temper permeates into
the collective conscience and becomes enshrined in
institutions. Education and raising awareness play key
roles in that process. That is particularly relevant in the
context of children’s and young people’s development.
A large segment of that group suffers from poverty
and inequality and is vulnerable to radicalization and
violent mobilizations. We need to galvanize efforts
to use quality education and sustainable development
as tools for addressing those vulnerabilities. The
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable

19-4056221/27

A/74/PV.45

Development is pivotal in that regard. We welcome
the successful holding of the High-level Forum on the
Culture of Peace on 13 September to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. It gave
us an opportunity to reaffirm our collective resolve to
forge wide-ranging partnerships to promote the culture
of peace.
We appreciate the efforts taken by Bangladesh
to submit the draft resolution on the follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace (A/74/L.23), which India has co-sponsored.
Realizing interreligious and intercultural dialogue by
engaging faith leaders, civil society and academia is
important for building intellectual and moral solidarity.
We welcome the various efforts of the United Nations
and its States Members towards achieving that end.
The spirit of cooperation is the crux of the culture
of peace, an agenda that should not be misused or
trivialized for the purposes of political propaganda.
We need to be particularly cautious in situations
where we know that the fox is guarding the henhouse.
The attempts by one delegation today to misuse this
agenda should hardly come as a surprise to those who
have witnessed its many attempts to masquerade as a
champion of the culture of peace while besmirching
the spirit of cooperation by spinning false narratives
for political gains. In reality, the footprint of every
major act of international terrorism passes through that
country. Terrorists are trained in their safe havens to
take innocent lives. Children and youth are given guns
instead of books. Women are oppressed. Minorities
are persecuted. The virulent terror that emanates from
that territory threatens to destabilize global peace.
Yet that delegation makes baseless allegations, with a
pathological obsession, about the internal matters of
others. Our position on such issues are well-known.
We firmly reject all those allegations. The international
community has not paid any attention to such deceitful
propaganda, which is motivated by aims to covet
territory. We are confident that the international
community will maintain its stance in that regard.
Today we have come to recognize that peace is
inextricably linked to equality between women and men.
The full and equal participation of women at all levels
of decision-making is indispensable in the quest for
peace. We need to enhance the meaningful participation
of women peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Their
experiences and priorities must contribute to long-term
22/27

12/12/2019

stability. We need to convert our aspirations into actions
in a synergistic manner. The commemorations of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and of the fortieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of
Discrimination against Women provide opportunities
to reaffirm our resolve towards collective action.
India, the largest democracy in the world, is also
the second-most populous nation in the world. Our
civilizational legacy treats nature as a source of nurture,
and there is high value placed on living in harmony
with nature. The Vedas are a repository of the holistic
development of human beings in harmony with their
surroundings. The practice of yoga helps in achieving
inner peace.
India is home to a very significant number of
practitioners of practically every major religion of the
world. They include Hinduism, Islam, Christianity,
Buddhism, Sikhism, Jainism, Zoroastrianism and the
Bahai faith. Gautam Buddha gave his first sermon
in Sarnath in India. His message of peace continues
to inspire the thought and action of millions across
the globe. This year we celebrate 550th anniversary
of the birth of Guru Nanak, the founder of Sikhism.
His teachings continue to appeal to devotees of
different faiths.
The history of India, in essence, is a narrative of
conversations between different civilizations. The
enduring principle of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam —
meaning, “the entire world is one family” — has
guided our interactions and exchanges of thought with
the world. We in India understand the importance of
building alliances among religions, cultures and ethnic
groups. We have always supported all efforts to build
bridges of understanding among nations, peoples,
religions and cultures across the world. As the culture
of peace agenda gains salience in a world riven by
inequality, violence and mistrust, we remain deeply
committed to its full implementation.
Ms. Janson (Canada): Canada is pleased to support
the United Nations and Member States in their efforts
to advance the culture of peace. The actualization of
a global culture of peace demands nations that strive
to promote dialogue while also working to protect
and preserve the culture of all their citizens. Inclusive
societies require respect for cultural diversity and for
diversity of religion and belief. Canada supports the
promotion of cultural pluralism and the recognition of
19-40562

12/12/2019

cultural diversity as a source of mutual enrichment.
Meaningful dialogue across cultural and religious
identities is not an abstract idea for Canadians; it
is a practical, lived reality that takes place at the
grassroots level, among neighbours, families, students
and colleagues.
The draft resolutions we are considering today
highlight different facets of the culture of peace agenda.
We would like to thank Bangladesh, the Philippines,
Pakistan and Armenia for their leadership in bringing
forward the respective draft resolutions.
In draft resolution A/74/L.24, on “World Chess Day”,
Canada supported Armenia’s inclusion of language
recognizing the importance of equal opportunities for
women and girls in sport and recreational activities.
Ensuring women’s access helps support women’s full
and equitable participation in societies.
Canada also thanks our colleagues from Bangladesh
for their efforts on draft resolution A/74/L.23, entitled
“Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace”, and for their long-standing
commitment to advancing a culture of peace. This past
September, Canada’s Ambassador for Women, Peace
and Security, Jacqueline O’Neill, joined the Highlevel Forum on the Culture of Peace, on the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration and
Programme of Action, where she highlighted the urgent
need for more women to participate and be engaged
in conversations about peace and security. We are
pleased that this draft resolution, like its forerunners,
recognizes the role of women and youth in building a
culture of peace, as well as in preventing and solving
conflicts and post-conflict situations.
We would like to express our thanks and
appreciation to Pakistan and the Philippines for their
leadership on draft resolution A/74/L.25, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”. That draft
resolution affirms that respectful dialogue builds
understanding, fosters inclusion and lays the foundation
for a culture of peace.
In particular, we would like to emphasize
the importance of the draft resolution’s call for
reconciliation as key to a culture of peace. Canada’s
ongoing national reconciliation process aims to renew
Canada’s relationship with indigenous peoples, and is
inspired by historic treaties of friendship and peace.
Canada’s past is not free from conflict, and Canada

A/74/PV.45

cannot move forward if indigenous peoples continue
to be held back. We believe strongly that indigenous
peoples have the right to participate and be heard in
decisions that affect them at the global, regional and
local levels. A more peaceful and prosperous world
cannot be achieved without the meaningful participation
of indigenous peoples.
Building a culture of peace based on inclusion and
respect for diversity is a whole-of-society project. To
that end, we applaud the draft resolution for recognizing
the important role of civil society and initiatives that
strengthen people-to-people bonds at all levels and in
all sectors of society.
Today we are increasingly hearing voices of hate
and exclusion that are actively undermining a culture
of peace and exacerbating divisions in society. Our
debate today is an important reminder that we must
redouble our efforts in the face of racism, antisemitism,
xenophobia, Islamophobia and all other types of
cultural and religious prejudice. We must work together
in dialogue and action with all members of our society
and our richly diverse global community.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Nicaragua is a faithful supporter of a global
culture of peace, harmony and love among nations,
where a multilateralism of international rules prevails,
through international and regional organizations, over
and above the greed and avarice of the most powerful,
thereby promoting solidarity, cooperation and equitable
relations for the sustainable development of all our
peoples. While we have the United Nations, its Charter
and international law to achieve peace, we continue
to bear witness to repeated violations of international
law through military aggression, usurpation and
coups d’état against legitimate, democratically elected
Governments, as well as economic warfare, including
so-called sanctions, embargoes and economic and
financial boycotts — all of this imposed by the hegemony
of the imperial Power and the law of the strongest.
This international order must change. It must be
replaced by one that upholds respect for the norms of
human coexistence and the culture of peace. We must
hold steadfast to the peaceful resolution of disputes that
may arise between and within States and nations. In this
Organization we must fight for the peace and dignity
of all our peoples. Nicaragua will continue to act as a
stalwart defender of peace and security in the world.

19-4056223/27

A/74/PV.45

We are pleased to share with the General Assembly
that Nicaragua is living in peace and security. We
are currently implementing our national plan entitled
Strategy for a Culture of Dignity, Respect, Nonviolence,
Reconciliation and Peace, for the Nicaraguan people.
As our Vice-President Rosario Murillo has said, “Peace
is a treasure we must cherish and guard”. This inclusive
Strategy incorporates, as a fundamental component,
the role of women and young people, having been
developed through years of implementation of law,
policy and development programmes and projects in
the country. It even includes an early-warning system,
allowing us to detect signs of violence and risk to life
in all its forms.
We thank the delegations of Armenia, Bangladesh,
the Philippines and Pakistan for having presented the
respective draft resolutions. We are pleased to have
co-sponsored draft resolution A/74/L.23, entitled
“Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace”.
We reiterate that the United Nations must fulfil
its historic role of fostering respect, understanding,
sovereign security, a future of peace, peaceful solutions
free from interference or coercion, working always on
equal terms, privileging multilateralism and the selfdetermination of all women and men.
Promoting a culture of peace means reaffirming
the validity of the upholding sovereignty, territorial
integrity, independence and the right to selfdetermination of our peoples, and, above our, our right
and our duty to eradicate poverty and forge a better and
happier world for our sons and daughters. Boys and
girls are born to be happy and to live in peace.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 15.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/74/L.23, A/74/L.24 and A/74/L.25.
Before the Assembly takes action on the draft
resolutions, one by one, I would like to remind members
that they will have an opportunity to explain their vote
on any or all of the three draft resolutions either before
or after action.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before taking action, I would like to remind speakers
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
24/27

12/12/2019

I now call on the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to
present the position of the delegation of Armenia on
draft resolution A/74/L.25, entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”.
Armenia strongly supports interreligious and
intercultural dialogue in promoting peace, tolerance
and human rights, including through education.
Education, in particular human rights education, is
key to preventing discrimination and hatred on ethnic,
racial or religious grounds. In that regard, we regret
that proposals of the delegation of Armenia with regard
to prevention through education and culture were not
reflected in the draft resolution.
Armenia reiterates its objection to the thirtyfirst preambular paragraph of the draft resolution,
which refers to an event named the World Forum on
Intercultural Dialogue. A particular Member State is
continuously promoting a policy of organizing various
international forums to distract the attention of the
international community from the dire human rights
situation in the country and to promote its distorted
conflict narratives by disseminating hate speech at the
State level. It would be erroneous think that intercultural
and interreligious dialogue is possible under conditions
of gross violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in particular the freedoms of expression and
peaceful assembly and association, and the silencing of
dissenting voices.
In that regard, we regret that the event referred
to in the draft resolution, which was supposed to
promote multiculturalism and intercultural dialogue, is
continuously misused by the host country and turned
into an instrument of propaganda. We believe that,
in organizing international events on multilateralism,
intercultural dialogue and the promotion of peace,
due regard should also be given to the record of the
host country in terms of adherence to its obligations
under international human rights law as well as
the protection of cultural heritage of historical and
religious significance.
Armenia therefore disassociates itself from the
thirty-first preambular paragraph of the draft resolution,
containing reference to the event I mentioned.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position before taking action.
19-40562

12/12/2019

A/74/PV.45

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/74/L.23, entitled “Follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace”. I inform the Assembly that the draft resolution
has closed for e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of draft
resolution A/74/L.23, and in addition to those
delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have also become sponsors: Albania, Algeria,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Belarus, Belize, Benin, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Canada, the Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Finland, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, the Solomon
Islands, Somalia, Spain, the Sudan, Suriname, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution is A/74/L.23?
Draft resolution A/74/L.23 was adopted (resolution
74/21).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution is A/74/L.24, entitled
“World Chess Day”.

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/74/L.24, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Argentina, Canada, Chile, Cyprus,
Djibouti, Egypt, Georgia, Guatemala, Guinea, Ireland,
Israel, Malaysia, Monaco, Morocco, Nicaragua, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Singapore,
Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.24?
Draft resolution
(resolution 74/22).

A/74/L.24

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution is A/74/L.25, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/74/L.25, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, China,
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Ecuador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Honduras, Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Morocco, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Samoa,
Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Singapore, Slovenia,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Turkey,
the United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.25?

19-4056225/27

A/74/PV.45

12/12/2019

adopted

thank the United Nations and Member States for their
strong support for this important initiative.

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
those wishing to speak in explanation of position, I
would like to remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.

Against that backdrop, there is nothing surprising
in the inadequate, irrelevant and unethical comments
made earlier by the representative of Armenia. We
hope that Armenia will learn lessons from the apparent
failure of its shameful and deplorable methods of
blackmail evidenced during the consultations on the
draft resolution. In his attempt to explain its position
on the World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue, the
representative of Armenia in fact eloquently confirmed
that the words “culture” and “peace” are alien to his
country. The representative of Armenia went so far as
to lecture others about principles and values that, in
reality, his Government has consistently disregarded
and opposed. Finally, by obstructing efforts towards the
promotion of intercultural and interreligious dialogue,
challenging various global initiatives and international
events only because of their relation to Azerbaijan,
Armenia demonstrates that the prospect of it engaging
in a constructive search for peace remains elusive.

Draft resolution
(resolution 74/23).

A/74/L.25

was

Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to make a
statement in explanation of position on resolution 74/23.
As in previous years, the delegation of Azerbaijan
actively participated in the negotiation process on the
draft resolution. We note with satisfaction that some
of our proposals put forward in the course of the
informal consultations were accommodated in the text.
However, we regret that could not join the sponsors in
co-sponsoring the resolution. Our position on the event
referred to in the twenty-sixth preambular paragraph
was explained in detail in a statement delivered by the
delegation of Azerbaijan at the plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on 15 April 2019, the text of which
is reproduced in the official records of the meeting (see
A/73/PV.75).
At the same time, Azerbaijan supports and shares
the main objectives of the resolution and subscribes to
its content, purpose and philosophy. We are grateful to
the delegations of Pakistan and the Philippines for their
efforts and impeccable professionalism.
We note that the resolution welcomes the
declarations adopted by the Global Forums of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, including the
seventh Global Forum, which was held in Baku in April
2016. We also note the invitation to Member States to
consider implementing the relevant recommendations
addressed to them in the United Nations Plan of Action
to Safeguard Religious Sites, prepared by the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations and launched by the
Secretary-General earlier this year.
Furthermore, the resolution just adopted is the third,
following resolutions 72/136 and 73/129, to refer to the
World Forum on Intercultural Dialogue held biennially
by Azerbaijan in cooperation with UNESCO, the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations, the World Tourism
Organization, the Council of Europe and the Islamic
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
as a key global platform for promoting intercultural
dialogue. We welcome the growing recognition of the
World Forum at the international level. I would like to
26/27

Mr. Ho (United States of America): The United
States strongly believes in encouraging a culture of
peace through the promotion of justice, democracy,
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as
by rejecting violence and addressing the root causes
of conflicts. In joining consensus on resolution 74/21,
I would refer the General Assembly to our remarks
delivered in the Second Committee on 21 November
2019 on our position with respect to the 2030 Agenda
on Sustainable Development.
In explanation of the United States position with
regard to resolution 74/22, entitled “World Chess
Day”, let me state that, in joining consensus on the
resolution, the United States would refer delegations
to our aforementioned 21 November 2019 remarks
with respect to our position on the 2030 Agenda on
Sustainable Development and to prior statements on
our position on the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action.
In explanation of our position on resolution
74/23, the United States firmly supports efforts to
promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue and
cooperation, and we were pleased to join consensus
on this resolution. However, we would like to take this
opportunity to clarify important points. The United
States strongly supports the freedom of expression and
religion or belief. We oppose any attempt to unduly
19-40562

12/12/2019

limit the exercise of these fundamental freedoms and
therefore disassociate ourselves from paragraph 13 as
we had done in 2018 with respect to paragraph 12 of
resolution 73/129 (see A/73/PV.51).
We are doing that because the text inaccurately
suggests that the protection of freedom of expression
and freedom of religion or belief are at odds with one
another. These two freedoms are mutually reinforcing,
and both must be respected in order to achieve
mutual respect and meaningful interreligious and
intercultural dialogue. Rather than seeking restrictions
to expression to deal with intolerance, the United
States advocates robust protections for free speech as
well as the enforcement of appropriate legal regimes
that deal with discriminatory acts and hate crimes.
We addressed further concerns in our aforementioned
general statement delivered on 21 November in the
Second Committee.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
I now give the floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Monsignor Hansen (Holy See): The Holy See
welcomes the adoption of resolution 74/23, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, and thanks
the facilitators, Mr. Angelito Nayan of the Philippines
and Mr. Muhammad Zulqarnain of Pakistan, for their
constructive and professional leadership throughout
the negotiations.
The delegation of the Holy See takes this opportunity
to reiterate its long-standing commitment to the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue
as important components of the cause of peace. Such
dialogue also plays a crucial role in building peaceful,
just and inclusive societies, highlighting yet again
the major role that religious leaders and faith-based
organizations play in the development of each human
being and the advancement of the common good.
Considering the positive impact of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue at the global, regional, national
and local levels and its support for peace, stability and
mutual respect, the Holy See believes it is important
that this agenda item continue to be reviewed annually
by the General Assembly.
Among the new elements in this year’s resolution,
the Holy See welcomes the inclusion of a reference to the

A/74/PV.45

document “Human fraternity for world peace and living
together”, jointly signed by His Holiness Pope Francis
and Ahmad al-Tayyib, the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar,
on 4 February 2019, in Abu Dhabi. This document
explicitly recognizes the fundamental contribution
of fruitful exchange and dialogue to the widespread
promotion of a culture of tolerance, acceptance of
others and of living together peacefully. In so doing,
the “Human fraternity” document represents an
important example of interreligious dialogue striving
to advance, as the resolution notes, peace and social
stability, respect for diversity and mutual respect
and to create an environment conducive to peace and
mutual understanding.
The Holy See is also most pleased to see included
in the resolution the mention of the initiative to open
up the Kartarpur Sahib Corridor in the spirit of
interfaith harmony and peaceful neighbourhood and
the agreement between the Governments of India and
Pakistan to allow visa-free access to pilgrims of all
faiths. My delegation commends the delegations of
India and Pakistan for their constructive engagement in
the efforts to reach consensus on this paragraph.
In conclusion, the Holy See reiterates its firm
support for interreligious and intercultural dialogue in
the pursuit of peace and human fraternity and assures
its commitment to the building of bridges among
peoples, nations and faiths.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded the
stage of its consideration of agenda item 15.
Programme of work
The Acting President: Before adjourning
the meeting, I would like to make the following
announcement concerning the programme of work of
the plenary. The consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 3, entitled “Report of the Credentials Committee”,
and sub-item (b) of agenda item 114, entitled “Election
of members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission”, both originally scheduled
for Monday, 16 December, has been rescheduled to the
afternoon of Wednesday, 18 December, following the
consideration of the reports of the Sixth Committee.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

19-4056227/27
