TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING: 1 APRIL 1969

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 472)

., ,, ,, ,, ,., ... ,.. ,.. .. -... .. ..

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption oftheagenda

. . . , . I . , , . . . , , . . , I’, , . . 1 , . , . . , . , , . , , . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/91 13) .. , . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/91 14) . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.1472

NOTE
SymboJs of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
j&k-es. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SECONDMEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,
President: Mr. P. KHATRI

(Nepal).

1 April 1969, at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

The agenda was adopted,

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/91 13)

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1472)

The situation in the Middle East

1. Adoption of the agenda.

Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of thesecurity
Council (S/91 14)

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/91 13).

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Jordan, Israel and Saudi Arabia to take seats at the Council
table in order to participate, without the right to vote, in
the discussion.

3. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 27 March 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/91 14).
Expression of thanks to the retiring President

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. El-Farra
(Jordan), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took places at the Council table.

1. The PRESIDENT: I apologize to the Council for the
delay in starting this meeting. Many intensive consultations
had to be carried out before it could begin.

5. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the questions before it.
Members have before them in document S/9120 the joint
draft resolution submitted by three delegations: Pakistan,
Senegal and Zambia.

2. Before the adoption of the agenda, I have a pleasant
duty to fulfil. I am sure I voice the feelings of all members
of the Council when I pay tribute to my predecessor,
Ambassador Csatorday of Hungary, for the great wisdom,
courtesy and impartiality with which he conducted the
meetings and consultations of the Council during his
Presidency. The Council’s consideration of the item on the
agenda would probably have been completed under his
leadership but for the sad event of the death of General
Eisenhowever, the thirty-fourth President of our host
country. I am personally very grateful to the representative
of Hungary for his whole-hearted co-operation in consider-’
ing the convenience of all members of the Council in
connexion with this meeting.

6. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, in January of this
year we had the privilege of welcoming Nepal as a member
of the Security Council. Now, in April, we have the great
pleasure of congratulating you most heartily on your
assumption of the Presidency of this august body. In doing
so, my pleasure is the greater because Nepal and Pakistan
are bound together by the friendliest of relations and
historical and cultural ties. Your country, Sir, has the proud
distinction of having successfully maintained its national
independence and territorial integrity against onslaughts in
the colonial era, and has followed a policy of maintaining
good relations with all the great Powers. We have no doubt
that under your wise guidance the Council will discharge its
responsibilities with notable success.

3. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): I should like to thank
YOU, Mr. President, for the very kind words you have just
spoken about me. I wish to assure you of my full and
unreserved support and co-operation during your term of
office. I am certain that your Presidency will be characterized by the wisdom, tenacity and distinction that have
always been associated with your activities at the United
Nations. Your eminent qualities, Mr. President, are firm
guarantees for the successful work of the Security Council.

7. I should also like to pay a tribute once again to
Ambassador Karoly Csatorday of Hungary who presided
over this Council’s deliberations last month. Ambassador
Csatorday has been a zealous guardian of the prerogatives
of the Security Council and always took particular care
I

13. At the time the Security Council adopted resolution
248 (1968), it was confronted with one major attack. At
the time it adopted resolution 256 (1968), it was confronted with at least two such attacks. Today,the Council
is to take into account a series of these attacks, which it is
sought to justify by a new aggressive doctrine of so-called
active self-defence.

personally to keep the members of the Security Council
informed of the consultations. His wisdom and ability
enabled the Council to carry out its duties in a month that
turned out to be quite eventful.
8. On behalf of the delegation of Senegal, Zambia and
Pakistan, I have the honour to introduce the draft
resolution circulated on Saturday in document S/9120. It is
not necessary for me to give an elaborate explanation of
that draft resolution. This is so because the text introduces
no elements beyond those which are contained in resolutions 248 (1968) and 256 (1968) adopted by the Security
Council last year. We cannot claim to have made a new
departure. We do not seek to set up a new precedent.
Indeed, this is the second time within the space of a few
weeks that my delegation commends for adoption by the
Security Council a text which does not fully accord with its
own considered view of the requirements of the situation,
but which represents a point of compromise.

14. After those preliminary remarks, I shall now deal
briefly with the various paragraphs of the draft resolution.
15. The third preambular paragraph merely reaffirms some
earlier resolutions of the Security Council. In selecting the
resolutions which are to be reaffirmed, as well as the choice
of language to refer to their provisions, the sponsors have
made important concessions to the viewpoint of one of the
permanent members of the Security Council by including a
reference to Security Council resolution 236 (1967). AS far
as we are concerned, we feel that it was necessar,yto recall
only resolutions 248 (1968), 256 (1968) and 262 (1968),
because those were the most pertinent to the present
situation.

9. Had we wished to propose a draft resolution on the
basis of the firm convictions which I expressed on behalf of
my delegation earlier in this debate [146&h meeting] and
which are independently and forcefully held by many other
Member States, it would have been an altogether different
text. We would then have proposed that the Security
Council follow the logic of its previous resolutions and take
due account of Israel’s failure to desist from its pre-planned
military attacks on the territory of Jordan or of any other
Arab State. That would have meant the Council considering
here and now the more effective steps or measures of which
a solemn warning wasissued to Israel twice.

16. The fourth preambular paragraph also ti&es into
account the anxiety of certain permanent members to
maintain what they consider to be a balance. However, it
was compellingly clear that we could not distribute equal
emphasis between premeditated attacks launched by a
Government and sporadic violent acts by a resistance
movement directed against foreign military occupation.
17. The final preambular paragraph also represents a
concession made to the viewpoint of some permanent
members.

/ 10. But, as we all know, the Security Council proceeds by
way of accommodation and compromise. The present draft
resolution is the result of prolonged consultations not only
among the Asian-African members of the Security Council,
but also with other permanent and non-permanent
members. During those consultations the sponsors made
every effort to accommodate the points of view of the
permanent members concerned. The text represents the
maximum extent to which such accommodations could be
made.

18. The two operative paragraphs speak for th,emselves.
The first is entirely humanitarian. As regards the second, we
have, I confess, with some reluctance, contented ourselves
with the language of earlier resolutions.
19. In the interest of preserving the right climate on the
eve of the four-Power talks, and despite the grave setback
that has been caused by the actions and utterances of one
party, I shall refrain from describing the acts which are the
subject of condemnation in the present draft resolution. All
we ask is that the Council should not totally abdicate its
responsibility in the present situation and disregard the
commitment it has made in the earlier resolutions. If the
Council is not oblivious of its solemn commitments under
the Charter, it cannot remain silent in the face of the
situation brought to its attention. The least-the very
least-that it can do is to adopt the draft resolution which is
being proposed by the delegations of Senegal, Zalmbia and
my own. I earnestly commend the draft r&solution for
adoption by the Security Council.

11. We feel that the original text of the African-Asian
draft resolution took more adequate note of the aggravation of the situation which has been caused by the
repetition of the air attacks launched before by Israel.
However, in the interest of agreement and mindful of the
necessity of trying to prevent a division among the
permanent members of the Security Council on the eve of
the projected four-Power talks, the three sponsors went to
great lengths in diluting the terms of the draft resolution
that they would otherwise have done,
12. We regret that it has not been possible for us to
present a text which would command unanimity and at the
same time not compromise the basic principles or the
balance of equity embodied in resolutions 248 (1968) and
256 (1968) of the Security Council. While anxious to
prevent any division among the members of the Council, we
could not possibly discard the fact that the situation which
is at present being considered by the Council has deteriorated beyond that which led to the adoption of the earlier
resolution.

20. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Pakistan for the extremely generous words addressed to me.
I know that the message of good wishes has in large
measure been prompted by the happy relations of friendship existing between Pakistan and Nepal,
21. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): Mr. President, allow me to
express my great satisfaction in seeing you preside over our
2

proceedings during the current month of April. We count
on your leadership and proved ability to guide us in the
crucial debates that lie ahead.

28. For those who have made sufficient efforts to try to
help in finding a solution to the Middle East crisis, two
considerations have always made themselves manifest: first,
there is the fate of the Palestinian refugees and, second,
there is the security of the State of Israel and all the States
in the area.

22. The Zambian delegation joins you, Mr. President, and
other representatives in expressing our great satisfaction to
your predecessor, Ambassador Csatorday of Hungary, who
showed indisputable competence during his memorable
term of office. We also salute him for his courtesy, fairness
and unparalleled linguistic ability.

29. In the course of this debate some members have made
reference to the plight of the Palestinians. In particular, the
very enlightened contribution of the representative of Saudi
Arabia has heIped to emphasize that aspect of the tragedy.
While we may conchide this debate without the participation of the Palestinians themselves, I consider it absolutely
vital that they should participate positively in efforts such
as this to try to find a just and equitable solution.

23. The debate we have just resumed is neither new nor
unprecedented. We are concerned again with renewed acts
of violence and recrimination, attacks and counter-attacks,
hopes and frustration. I am tempted to say that we are now
running short of possible measures and even running short
of vocabulary to describe the cycle of violence in this
hypersensitive area.

30. The representative of Israel, on the other hand, has
also pleaded again and again for the right of Israel to exist
as a State, Indeed, at one stage the picture painted in this
Council was so gloomy that it gave one the impression that
the Israelis were seeing themselves as a persecuted people
contra mundum. We shall have failed in our efforts if we do
not regain the confidence of all the people in the area. We
must not only strive, but also be seen to strive to be
resolved that neither side is contra mundum. This Council
must indicate in no uncertain terms that it is not interested
in rhetorical callisthenics, but rather in the solution of the
problem in the interests of all the people in the area.

24. It is not my intention at this stage in our debate on
the Middle East crisis to saddle this august Council with
facts and figures to dramatize the lachrymatory results of
the air attacks on the civilian villages and rest homes in
Jordan. We feel strongly that the tragedy before us needs
coo1 heads, and whipped-up emotions are certainly not
likely to be in the interests of peace in the area. Thus, while
we mourn with the bereaved, while we bury our dead, let us
face the future with determination, resolution and hope to
ensure that neither side-and I repeat, neither side-should
be visited by the ever-gathering tribulations of the past
twenty years.

31. Thus, to come back to the draft resolution before us,
we should like to emphasize that we do not believe that
might is necessarily right. As we said before, there can be
no world order if any State believes that its military
advantages should give it the licence to invade and attack
with impunity the territory of another. We are not so naive
as to believe, however, that there will be no friction
between any group of States. Nevertheless, we believe
equally that military force creates more problems than it
attempts to resolve. This, I am afraid, is at the very core of
the matter in hand.

25. I should like to spell out our duty in this Council
today, First, we should ensure that the distressed indigenous inhabitants of Palestine have their rights restored to
them. They have suffered long enough and we must now
positively respond to their cry for justice and equity. We
should not forget that their sufferings are the legacy of this
Council; for this very Council, by a decision of the
permanent members, cannot absolve itself of the fact,
whether we like it or not, that it was instrumental in the
creation of the State of Israel. Our second duty, therefore,
is to ensure that that territorial and political entity called
Israel not only survives, but is allowed to exist in peace.

32. We are all too familiar with the excuse in international
affairs that when a country is beset with domestic
problems, there is always a tendency to find solace in
external ventures. However that might draw away the
attention of the electorate from the diseased body politic,
it is certainly not the answer to the problems that confront
us. Our colleagues in Israel cannot, therefore, run away
from the cardinal issue, which is the restitution of the rights
of the Palestinians; nor can they expect us to support them
in their expansionist policies.

26. That brings us to the third imperative, which is the
recognition and practical establishment of the true and not
putative boundaries of all States in the area. In blunt terms,
we must return to the boundaries which we all knew before
5 June 1967; for, inasmuch as we accept the fact that Israel
does exist, a fact recognized by the United Nations and this
Council, we also believe that no country has or should have
the licence to acquire territory by the might of the
sword-to use an anachronistic term at a time when
bombing has taken the place of the sword.

33, When all this is said, we should like to reiterate the
important point made by several delegations, namely, that
whatever we do we should not do anything that is likely to
jeopardize the commendable efforts of the Big Four in their
search for peace in the Middle East crisis. We certainly
deprecate some of the statements attributed to the leaders
of some of the parties to the conflict which are destined to
torpedo the efforts of the Big Four, especially those leaders
the very recognition and indeed creation of whose States
owe so much to the Big Four.

27. We all know that it is not easy to achieve the three
goals that I have outlined; and yet I believe that unless
these three goals are attained there can be no peace in the
area. It is therefore imperative for all of us that we should
get to the root cause of the problem if such a disastrous
prospect is to be avoided.

34. It is because of our desire for peace in the Middle East,
our belief that territorial aggrandizement is not conducive
3

to peace ii-, the area, and our concern for the welfare of the
Palestinian refugees that we cannot but find Israel at fault
fir carrying out that unprovoked and premeditated savage
attack on Jordan, which we strongly condemn. We should
not be blinded by the awesome theory that there is a
guerrilla fighter behind every bush in Jordan. For if we
accept that premise, we cannot but come face to face with
the next logical
conclusion, namely, that every bush in
Jordan must be scorched, thus bringing to naught all the
efforts that we have made so far.
3.5. It is our hope, therefore, that the adoption of &is
draft resilution, which Mr. Shahi, the representative of
Pakistan, has very ably presented on our behalf, will bring
about the necessaryrestraint which is absolutely vital in the
interests of all.

innocent Israeli civilians in markets, in schools, in cinemas,
in commercial aircraft. We condemn such attack:s equally
and just as strongly and call upon those in a position to do
so to take all action possible to bring them to an end. The
fact that one set of attacks is carried out by regular and the
other by irregular forces is no consolation to the innocent
victims, their relatives and their compatriots. Death is just
as final and as shocking whether it comes from a bomb in a
supermarket or from a bomb from the air. Nor is it justified
by the fact that those who planted it are resisting
occupation, any more than the air attacks are justified
because their authors are seeking recognition of their
national existence and a stable peace.
43. Because the draft resolution before us concentrates in
its operative paragraphs exclusively on one kind of violence
and ignores the other kind of violence which provokes it,
we find the draft resolution unbalanced, unrealistic and
unlikely to move the parties to the conflict toward a
peaceful solution.

36. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Zambia for the kind words which he addressedto me.
37. Mr. YOST (Unitefl Statts of America): Mr. President, I
am happy to join my’ colleagues in welcoming you to the
Presidency ‘of the Council. It will be a great satisfaction to
us to work under your wise leadership and we look forward
to your Presidency.

44. The preamble observes that “numerous prerneditated
violations of the cease-fire have occurred”, but the operative paragraphs deal only with one particular type of
violation and overlook all others. Had the sponsors of the
draft resolution been willing to add a simple operative
paragraph condemning or deploring all violations of the
cease-fire, we should have been able to support it. ,4s it now
stands we cannot. We reiterate, however, that our abstention should not be interpreted in any sense as clondoning
the kind of violence which the draft resolution condemns,
any more than we condone any other kinds of violence in
the area or any violations whatsoever of this Council’s
cease-fire resolutions.

38. I have asked for the floor to speak briefly in
explanation of the vote which we shall be casting upon the
draft resolution before us.
39. The United States delegation would certainly have
wished to vote for a draft resolution condemning the Israeli
air attack of 26 March. As we have repeatedly said, we
condemn all violations of the cease-fire. We particularly and
most strongly condemn air attacks, where, whatever the
object of the attack may be, innocent lives are almost
certain to be sacrificed.

45. Finally, let me once again most earnestly urge all the
parties to this conflict to co-operate sincerely and effectively with Ambassador Jarring and with all others who are
working for peace in the Middle East, and at long last to act
in the spirit of conciliation and compromise which is
required from all sides if the peacemakers are to succeed.

40. We do not think attacks of this kind, which are bound
to be indiscriminate in their effects, if not in their intent,
can in any way be justified by describing them as “active
defence”. We consider them to be in the highest degree
counter-productive even from this point of view, Not only
do they almost inevitably result, as I have said, in the
slaughter of innocent people but, in so doing, they
aggravate even further bitter and uncompromising feelings
toward Israel in the countries suffering those losses. The
Israeli Government has just called once again for “the
advancement of negotiations between the Arab States and
Israel for the establishment of a true peace in the Middle
East”. We do not believe that it is itself “advancing” such
negotiations by a policy of “active defence”, that is, of
necessarily indiscriminate air attacks on the people with
whom it wishes to negotiate.

46. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
United States for the kind words he addressed to me.
47. Sir Leslie GLASS (United Kingdom): My delegation
would wish to associate itself with the tributes already paid
to the retiring President, Ambassador Csatorday, and in
particular for the brisk efficiency with which he carried
through the business of the Council.
48. My delegation would also, Sir, wish to offer a
particularly warm welcome to you as President of the
Council. My countrymen have admired your countrymen
for a very long time and we have had a very close
comradeship which I hope will be continued now between
our two sovereign States in the search for peace and a
better world.

41. We therefore most firmly condemn these attacks and
Call tipon Israel, in the interest of all the efforts toward
peace which are being made within the framework of this
Council, to ceasesuch attacks forthwith.

49. Mr. President, my delegation condemns the brutal
attack on Salt. My delegation particularly dis’likes the
manner and method of the attack. Indiscriminate bombing
from the air is particularly repugnant to my delegation. My
delegation would therefore wish to mark this dtearly by
voting for a strong condemnatory resolution.

42. On the other hand, as I have said in earlier statements,
we consider it would be both unjust and unrealistic to treat
these air attacks in isolation. There can be no question that
they are ,provoked by equally undiscriminating attacks on
4

50. But, as I said in my speech on 28 March (1$6&h
meeting], we believe that all actions, outside and inside the

Council held an emergency meeting [146&h to 1462nd
and unanimously condemned Israel “for its
premeditated military action in violation of its obligations
under the Charter and the cease-fire resoIutions” [resolutiO?Z 262 (1968)J. The Security Council issued a solemn
warning that, should Israeli attacks be repeated, it would
proceed to consider applying more effective measures “to
give effect to its decisions”.
meetings]

Council, should now be judged by whether or not they
forward peace. Consequently my delegation in considering
the present resolution bears two things in mind.
51. First, the deep need to maintain the unanimity of the
Council which has hardly been broken on cease-fire
resolutions since 1967, and which is more important at this
juncture than ever before.

60. You may recall that, prior to requesting this emergency session, we had reported to the Council continued air
attacks against civilian targets and Jordanian citizens in the
East Bank. In our opening statement [1466th meeting] we
gave a detailed description of the numerous premeditated
violations of the cease-fire,The attack of 26 March on Ein
Hazar left no room for doubt that those air attacks have
become a routine operation and will continue indefinitely
unless checked by this Council. We have already shown that
these are not acts of reprisal, but a vicious and cunning
device designed to crush the people’s will to resist Israeli
aggression.

52. Secondly, the need for the Council to make some
minimum
acknowledgement of the over-all situation
throughout the area in the context of which it is the duty
of the Council to consider individual incidents.
53. My delegation would be greatly saddened by any
untimely split in the Council which would damage the
authority of the Council in this dangerous area, and can
hardly help the search for peace, Whose responsibility is
this split? IS it really necessary’? My delegation would be
prepared to vote for the draft resolution, as it stands, that is
to say overwhelmingly concerned with the incident before
us and condemning it in the most forthright language, if
there could have been added a very short and simple
paragraph deploring all violations of the cease-fire.

61. In bringing our complaint before the Security Council
we were expecting that this body would this time in fact
adopt “more effective measures” to prevent repetition. In
our complaint [S/9113] 1 and in our opening statement we
referred to equally serious attacks against civilian centres
and people. Some of those air strikes were carried out in
the vicinity of Amman, the capital of Jordan.

54. We in the Council spend hours in semantic battles
haggling ingeniously over every comma and every possible
nuance. But I can say that in the opinion of my delegation
such a paragraph would do no more than state the obvious
duty of the Council. The outside world as a whole will
surely scratch its head as to why the Council cannot at this
delicate and important stage, in the most general terms and
without any specific reference to either side, recognize the
general state of violence that undefliably exists and deplore
all violations of the cease-fire resolution which the Council
itself has passed-and this is the course of a draft resolution
overwhelmingly concerned with the incident at Salt and
condemning it in the strongest terms. I cannot really see
that this simple obvious addition in any way compromises
principles or disturbs the balance of equity.

62. In the, light of this background it seemed clear that the
only way open to the Security Council to prevent further
attacks against Jordan lay in the application of Chapter VII
of the Charter. However, the view wasexpressed that there
was a need to preserve the unanimity of the Security
Council, since a serious public split now, just as the Big
Four are entering upon an important new stage of the joint
search for peace, would bring a set-back. Much as we should
like to ensure the most favourable climate for the proposed
Big Four discussions, we do not fully subscribe to this view.
However, in a spirit of compromise, we have not insisted on
our legitimate request for the application of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, in which we saw the
only deterrent to the continued Israeli aggression.

55. I therefore make a most sincere appeal to the sponsors
to bear in mind the wider and longer-term responsibility of
this Council, the vital search for peace, and not disturb the
unanimity of the Council, I greatly regret that failing such
an addition my delegation will not be able to support the
draft resolution.

63. We welcome the initiative that led to the agreement of
the Big Four to hold discussions on the Middle East. The
success of the big Powers, however, will depend on their
determination to uphold the basic principles of justice in
their search for a Middle East settlement. Since armed
aggression constitutes an obstacle to the success of those
talks, its complete elimination should be the first objective.

56. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the generous words he addressed to
me. I wish to assurehim that those sentiments of friendship
are reciprocated.

64. We have grave doubts that the draft resolution now
before you would lead to this result. I am suie that all
members of the Security Council already know that the
Israeli Government has decided in advance to reject the
plan for a meeting of the Big Four, Reporting from Israel ia
The New York Times of yesterday, 31 March, James Feron
said: .
“Israel today formally rejected in advance any Big Four
recommendation on the Middle East that conflicts with
her vital interests, rights and security.”

57. I call on the representative of Jordan.
58. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): It is indeed a pleasure for
my delegation to see you, Mr. President, presiding over our
deliberations. Knowing your statesmanship and wisdom, I
feel certain that the deliberations of the Council during this
month will be fruitfu1 and most helpful.
59. In December 1968, in the wake of the Israeli attack
against the International Airport of Beirut, the Security

1 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourth Year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1969, pages142-143.”

5

Israeli authorities in prison. He said that th.e medical
examination has refuted the allegations I had voi.ced in this
Council. If Mr. Tekoah’s statement is true, why did they
not permit the Red Cross doctor to examine the body of
Mr, Tamimi? We requested that. The Israelis have firmly
refused an examination by an Arab doctor in the West Bank
of Jordan or by any Red Cross physician. Indeed, this
explains why Israel has so far refused to grant admission to
the Secretary-General’s representative to go to the area and
report to the Security Council on the charges made by my
delegation, Such an investigation would be in conformity
with the decision of the Security Council that was adopted
unanimously.

He continued:
“in a statement issued after a Cabinet meeting, the
Government [of Israel] said that it specifically opposed
‘any settlement and any procedure that is not agreed
upon by the Governments concerned’.”
65. What the Israeli statement in effect iS Saying is:
“Either a settlement on Israeli terms, or continued warfare”. They are opposed to peace, and opposed to any
outside effort for peace, either by the Security Council or
by the Big Four. They are even opposed to procedure here.
66. Before I conclude I should like to answer two points
raised by Mr, Tekoah in order to keep the record straight.

;
5
;
I

\
‘_
1

71. This and other humanitarian decisions, according to
Mr. Tekoah, do not make a constructive contribution to a \
solution of the Middle East crisis? Even when they are f
unanimously adopted by this body they are still considered !
one-sided resolutions by the Israeli authorities. It is clear
therefore that only what meets with Israel’s approval and 1
only what is in line with Israeli interests, as the Israelis see [
it, is accepted by Israel.
1

67. In my statement before the Security Council last
meeting], I referred to the old British
martial laws applied by Israel in the occupied territories. 1
emphasized the fact that both the former and the present
Israeli Ministers of Justice declared them unjust. The
former Minister called them “laws which no respected
citizen should abide by”. The present Minister of Justice
described them as “laws that do not exist in any civilized
country; even Nazi Germany did not have such laws”.
Those laws were condemned by many Israelis and were also
deplored by many Jewish lawyers in Palestine prior to the
creation of Israel.
Saturday [147&h

72. In his statement here Mr. Tekoah described the ?reaction of the people in the occupied parts of Jordan to
Israeli oppression as “terrorism”. It may be of interest to i
recall that at the very same time when Mr. Tekoah was {
emphasizing to the Council that Arab terrori& operate
from outside the occupied territories, officials in Israel were
stating-and this is reported in The New York Times of I
Sunday-that the resistance takes place both from within 1
and from without the occupied territories.

68. Mr. Tekoah did not explain why this harsh legislation
should be applied for bulldozing villages and destroying 250
houses on the mere suspicion of the presence there of
resistance individuals. He did not explain the arbitrary
arrests, the torture, the terrorism, the imprisonment without trial, the persecution of the Church and clergymen,
such as the Anglican Reverend Elia Khouri, the blowing-up
of houses, the wholesale attacks on people suspected of
being responsible for acts of resistance, the annexation of
territories, the curfews and other acts of persecution on the
basis of those inhuman laws.

73. This brings me to the statement we heard a little while
ago from our United States colleague. In a previous meeting
[1467th meeting] he referred to the supermarket bomb 1
and the cafeteria bomb. Today we heard him referring to j
bombs in schools, cinemas and supermarkets within the :
area occupied by Israel and also within the area occupied
by Israel prior to 5 June. I have not seen any piece of
evidence, any iota of evidence, showing that the bombs that 1
exploded, whether in a cinema or a cafeteria or a ,
supermarket, were planted by the Jordanian authorities or
by individuals coming from Jordan.

69. In an attempt to evade an answer to all these questions
Mr. Tekoah said to the Council [147&h meeting, para. 7.21
that I had forgotten to mention a decisive fact in this
picture, namely, that those laws are also Jordanian laws
applicable in the West ‘Bank and were therefore applied by
Israel in accordance with generally accepted principles of
international law. This statement made by Mr. Tekoah
constitutes another malicious distortion by the Israeli
representative. It is a deliberate Israel lie. The truth,of the
matter is that we do not have one legislation in Jordan for
the East Bank and another one for the West Bank. We have
one legislation for the whole country and it does not have
the remotest connexion with or similarity to the old British
Mandatory emergency laws which prevailed prior to the
partition of Palestine. The Mandatory Laws were revoked a
day after the end of the British Mandate, that is, on 16 May
1948, and I refer Mr. Tekoah to Law No. 20, published in
the Officiaal Gazette of r948. The official records show this
as a fact and Mr. Tekoah has to look for other pretexts to
justify the crimes now being committed in the West Bank
of Jordan.

74. I see official statements by Israel saying that 250
houses were destroyed because they belonged to those
people suspected-suspected-of having planted the bombs.
Israel itself, on mere suspicion, destroys 250 houses and
admits it in an official statement. The New York Times of
Sunday, 30 March 1969, states: “An Israeli military official
estimated last week that the occupation authorities had
destroyed more than 250 homes of suspected”-on mere
suspicion-“terrorists since the 1967 war,”
75. How can the Council, faithful to its Charter, to the
authority vested in it, come and impute to Jordan what
even the Israelis could not impute to Jordan? Even if the United States tells us that it is so, I do not think that the
Council in its wisdom would accept the United States
statement. There is no evidence before the Council. The #
Council goes by evidence, not by hearsay statements. As I ’
said, the evidence shows that there is resistance from
within. We cannot cite bombs in supermarkets 011 any other &f

70. Mr. Tekoah spoke about the prisoner Tamimi, who,
according to the information received, was murdered by the
6

e medical
ted in this
r did they
le body ef
ave firmly
WestBank
deed, this
mission to
le areaand
ade by my
,onformity
asadopted

cording to
ution to a
I they are
considered
It is clear
proval and
Israelissee

:ribed the ,’
Jordan to
interest to
ekoah was’
ts operate i
Israel were
: Times of )
om within j

little while
us meeting
rket bomb ’
eferringto j
within the
a occupied
y piece of
)ombsthat
;eria or a
horities or

that 250
1 to those
:he bombs.
lousesand

k Timesof

ary official
lrities had
‘-on mere

ter, to the
‘rdan what
!ven if the _
lk that the
ted States
‘until, The 1
rents. AS1
ante from
: any other $

bombs unless we have evidence that they were planted by
K, for whose acts Jordan can be responsible.

Government glamourizes, as its representative did today,
murder for the sake of murder, and initiates, organizes and
supports terror warfare against Israel, it must be considered
responsible for a continual and dangerous violation of
international law and for a crime against humanity of the
utmost gravity. Israel will hold the Jordanian Government
responsible for that crime. And second, nothing that has
been said or submitted here by the representative of Jordan
could alter or affect in the least the nature of the Ein Hazar
base, disabled in the Israeli action on 26 March, as an
encampment of the terror organizations; nor has anything
been said or submitted here that alters or affects the
nefarious purpose for which the Ein Hazar base served.

76. I said and I say again today that this resistance will
continue, that we have no control over it, and that we have
no apology to make to the United States or to the Israelis
for these legitimate acts. Defending one’s homeland is
certainly a defensive right enshrined in the Charter and
endorsed by the very jurisprudence of the United Nations,
and if all the people of Jordan decide to rise-and we have
one people in the West Bank and in the East Bank, one
people having one Constitution, enjoying the same right-to
repel the Israel aggression, that is their legitimate right: it is
their legitimate God-given human right.

86. I should like to quote from an eye-witness account of
one who visited the area several weeks ago and reported on
his conversations with the marauders and their commanders. I am reading from the DaiZy Mail of 14 June
1969. An Arab commando leader told reporter Bernard
Jordan: “They are going up-country tomorrow, They have
simple orders: ‘Kill Jews’. No, we don’t care whether the
dead are civilians or soldiers, just as long as they are Jews.”
Then, ‘in the same eye-witness report we find that commando leader recorded as remarkirig, when listening to a
radio report on a terror raid against Israel: “Only two Jews
killed tonight. Disappointing. Never mind-another two
Jewish families wilI be mourning.”

77. In March 1938, Streicher, one of the Nazi leaders,
said, “We are approaching wonderful times-a greater
Germany without Jews”. Today, the Zionist leaders are
inspired by the same destructive thinking. They arrogantly
speak of and work for a greater Israel without Arabs. Are
the Arabs in this case entitled to resist this Nazi-like
design? This is the question that should be considered by
the Security Council. We welcome a debate of that very
question in this very Security Council.
78. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Jordan for the kind words he has addressed to me.
79. I call now on the representative of Israel.

87. This is what the Jordanian delegation and its supporters would like the Security Council to condone.

80. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr, President, my delegation
takes this opportunity
to congratulate you on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council for
the coming month. We hold you and your great country in
the highest esteem and look forward to your wise guidance
of the Security Council’s work.

88, The one-sided draft resolution before the Council; its
perversion of the nature of Israel’s defence action on 26
March 1969; its blatant misrepresentation of the action’s
targets; its disregard for continuing Arab aggression; its
distortion of even the contents of previous Security Council
resolutions-all these can only batter even more the already
badly battered virtues of truth and equity.

81. I should also like to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, the representative of Hungary, for the way in
which he conducted our deliberations in the Council last
month.

89. As I read the text of the draft resolution I cannot help
remembering the ancient Hebrew story of the man whose
execution was ordered because of a false charge brought
against him. As he wasbeing led out to be executed, he saw
his wife weeping. He turned to her and asked, “Why do YOU
weep? “, and she replied, “Why should I not weep, seeing
that they are putting you to death although you have done
no wrong”. The man replied, “Do you then prefer that they
should execute me because I have done wrong? ”

82. The representative of Jordan insists on continuing a
discussion of the nature of British Mandatory laws. If he
has any complaints about the nature of those laws, I think
he should address them to the United Kingdom.
83. As for the laws applied by Israel on the West Bank in
security measures against agents of terror warfare, they are
Jordanian laws which include emergency regulations inherited by Israel and by Jordan from the time when legislation
wasof British origin,

90. Thus it is with the draft resolution submitted to the
Security Council, except for one thing: Israel does not have
the slightest intention of allowing itself to be executed.

84. The representative of Jordan tries to rebut the
well-known fact that terror warfare is organized by Arab
Governments and conducted from Arab territory by
marauders armed, trained and supplied by the Arab
Governments. I would suggest that he refer to the communiques issued by the Amman headquarters of El-Fatah
and other terror organizations which have no inhibitions at
all about taking credit for the murder of Israeli civilians in
schools, supermarkets and cinemas.

91, The PRESIDENT: I thank the representatives of Israel
for the kind words he has spoken with respect to me.
92. Mr, MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): Mr. President, I should like to

associate the Soviet Union with the congratulations and
kind words addressed to you on your assumption of the
eminent and honoured post of President of the Security
Council, We wish to express our great satisfaction at this,
first of alI because we seethe President’s chair occupied by
the representative of a friendly country; secondly because

85. Two fundamental premises have become clear in the
course of our present debate. First, as long as the Jordanian
7

political settlement in the Near East and tlowards the
implementation of Security Council resolution 242 of 22
November 1967.

we’have already welcomed and wish to weIcome again your
first appearance in the Security Council; and thirdly we
regard you and those of your colleagues who have swelled
the ranks of the Security Council since the twenty-third
session of the General Assembly as a transfusion of new
blood into the Council, to promote our joint work for the
maintenance and strengthening of peace and international
security.

98. The representative of Jordan cited in his statement
today a United States newspaper which as a rule publishes
extremely pro-Israel information in its pages. .ApparentIy,
therefore, what it reports about official statements by Israel
does correspond to the facts. The extract from this
newspaper’s reports cited by the representative: of Jordan
refers to a report that the ruling circles of Israel. are already
declaring that they will pay no attention to the views of
those who are sincerely striving for a peaceful political
settlement in the Near East. This is highly symptomatic and
should put us on our guard.

93. We wish you every success in your forthcoming noble
work as President of the Security Council, and we hope
that the month of your Presidency will be peaceful, after
we haveT concluded our consideration of this unpleasant
question with which we are now obliged to deal and which
has arisen as the result of .a fresh act of aggression
perpetrated by Israel against Jordan.

99. The main conclusion to be drawn from the Security
Council’s discussion of this item on its agenda is that none
of the members of the Security Council has attempted to
justify the policy pursued by Israel, which is a policy of
aggression against its neighbouring States. This is the most
important conclusion. Let us hope that the most reasonable
elements among the ruling circles of Israel will themselves
draw the appropriate conclusion from this discussion and
its results.

94. My introductory remarks would be incomplete if I
were to omit any mention of your predecessor. I too should
like to associate myself with the good wishes addressed to
your predecessor i Comrade Csatorday, the Permanent
Representative of Hungary. I should like to express our
great satisfaction at his excellent and capable guidance of
the deliberations while he held the post of President of the
Security Council, his diligence, his great erudition and his
thorough knowledge of international problems. I should
also like to associate myself with the statement of the
representative of Pakistan, the distinguished Ambassador
Shahi, to the effect that you, Comrade Csatorday, as
President of the Security Council, strictly adhered to the
Charter and concerned yourself with the rights, obligations
and competence conferred by it upon the Security Council.
I should also like to point out once again that the period of
your Presidency of the Council coincided with an important national event in your country, the celebration of a
great historical jubilee, the fiftieth anniversary of the
Hungarian People’s Republic.

100. At the the same time, in taking stock of this
discussion our conclusions would be incomplete if we failed
to take note of what I would call the melancholy fact that’
certain members of the Security Council have obviously
tried to lump together or, as the English say, “to put in the
same boat” questions which are intrinsically completely
different. They have tried to introduce into the Security
Council’s debate and to reflect in its resolution a question
which is entirely different from the one on the Council’s
agenda. In actual fact, both in practice and in theory, the
problem before the Security Council is that of the struggle
of the Arab peoples for national liberation, thLe expansion
and intensification of the national liberation movement of
the Arab peoples, the peoples of the Arab world, who have
been fighting and are continuing to fight against foreign
domination and foreign occupation, and are waging a war
of liberation against foreign invaders who ha.ve occupied
their .territory
and have, if only temporarily, e:nslaved their
,.
population.

95. Another unique circumstance should not be passed
over in silence. I do not think that in all its history the
Security Council has ever had a President who conducted
the Council’s meetings in all the official languages of the
United Nations. This is a singular event, which was even
mentioned recently in one of the United States newspapers,
which, as we all know, are not particularly inclined to make
favourable references to the representatives of socialist
States. We therefore feel compelled to mention this unusual
event and to wish you good health and great successin your
noble work.

101. We have heard statements here urging that, in
discussing this question, the same yardstick should be used
for the aggressor and for the victim of aggression. We wish
to express our firm conviction that the Security Council
will not follow that course.

96. Mr. President, the Council is in fact taking stock of its
debate on the question raised by the Government of Jordan
and by its official representative Ambassador El-Farra, its
debate on the question of a fresh act of aggression by Israel
against an Arab country, Jordan.

102. We are bound to point out that the sponsors of the
draft resolution submitted to the Security Council for
consideration are the representatives of three new sovereign
States on the two continents, Asia and Africa, which have
suffered most from colonial domination, from the yoke of
colonialism and imperialism.

97. What are the main conclusions we can draw? All the
members of the Security Council have unanimously censured these acts of Israel. Every one has referred to the
inadmissibility of a repetition of acts of this kind. The
majority, in any case, have also drawn attention to the very
important new fact that such acts by the ruling circles of
Israel cannot be regarded otherwise than as their determination to undermine all efforts directed towards a peaceful

103. The post-war development of natiorral liberation I
movements and national revolutions has been crowned with F
brilliant success: about 70 new States have appeared on the :
map of the world and nearly all, if not quite all, of them are ’
now represented at the United Nations and a considerable hi
8

number of them in the Security Council, This is one of the
most outstanding results of the Second World War and of
the heroic struggle which the Soviet peoples, together with
the peoples of the other allied and united nations, waged
against Hitler’s Wehrmacht, against the design of the
German Fascists to enslave the whole world and establish
the domination of the German Reich over it for a thousand
years.

present-day conditions, we need a stronger resolution
against those who are undermining international peace,
complicating the international situation and aggravating
tension by their aggressiveactions, But insofar as the Arab
countries and the sponsors consider this resolution to be
the necessary minimum which must be adopted at this
meeting of the Security Council the Soviet delegation
intends to support it.

104. Imperialism and colonialism have tried to counteract
and hinder this noble struggle of national liberation
movements and national liberation revolution, But &y
have proved powerless, for the national liberation revolu.
tion is an irreversible process and no forces can stand in its
way. Even if they try to hinder the process, their efforts are
bound to be in vain.

110. It has been asserted here that the adoption of the
resolution might introduce a “split”. A split between
whom? I am firmly convinced that the adoption of this
resolution will be yet another serious and stringent warning
to those who are trying to put spokes in the wheel and to
undermine praiseworthy efforts directed towards the peaceful settlement of the Near Eastern question. With whom
can there be a split ? With those who are conducting a
policy of aggression.But, as they say, God grant and may it
please Allah that there should always be a split between the
Security Council and any aggressor. This is a salutary,
constructive split, a split in the interests of peace and
security, in the interests of strengthening the United
Nations and in strict conformity with the United Nations
Charter, for the Security Council wasestablished under the
Charter to serve as the principal guardian of international
peace and security. And if as the result of the adoption of
this resolution a split occurs between on the one hand, the
advocates of peace, the opponents of aggression and the
Security Council, and those who prefer a policy of
undermining genuine efforts towards a peaceful political
settlement of the Near Eastern problem, such a split is not
dangerous: on the contrary, such a split will be constructive. If those politicians and military leaders of Israel who
continue to pursue a policy of aggression, reprisals and
military pressure have even a modicum of good sense, they
will understand that a policy of aggression does not pay,
that the Security Council, the United Nations and world
public opinion are against that policy, and that the peoples
of the world are in favour of having the problem of the
Near East settled by peaceful, political means not by force.
If this conclusion is drawn by all those concerned, the
adoption of this draft resolution by the Security Council
will be a constructive step and there will be no need for any
fear of a split.

105’. Israel, by the will of fate and by the will of those
who are supporting and protecting it, has in fact become a
tool against the Arab world in the hands of those who are
trying to hinder this natural process of national liberation
revolutions in the Near East. But this attempt also has no
prospect of success.
106. The fact that, on the eve of the beginning of genuine
efforts to reach a peaceful political settlement, the Security
Council is obliged to examine such a grave new act of
aggressionis both symptomatic and extremely deplorable. I
have no doubt that the Governments of the Arab countries,
their distinguished representatives here and all those who
sincerely wish for a peaceful settlement in the Near East
would have greatly preferred this question not to be before
the Security Council today. (The representative of Jordan is
looking my way and seems to agree with me.)
107. The atmosphere would have been more favourable
for beginning serious efforts towards a peaceful settlement
in the Near East; but unfortunately this does not depend on
the Arab countries or on the Arab representatives. In
committing its act of aggression, Israel was apparently
pursuing quite different aims. Its policy does not seem to
include any serious intention to co-operate wholeheartedly
with all those who really wish for a peaceful settlement in
the Near East and are striving to achieve it. This is the only
explanation of a new act of aggression at this particular
time,
108. Israel has resorted to air raids. This is the blind
vengeanceof desperation. And no one in the whole world,
no more than anyone in the Security Council at this
meeting, can justify this vicious, blind vengeance of Israel
against the Arab world, against the people of Jordan and
against those victims whose sufferings we can now see from
the photographs circulated by the Jordan delegation among
the members of the Security Council [S/9121].
109. Some doubts have been expressed here lest the
adoption of the draft resolution, sponsored, as I have
already said, by the representative of the three countries of
the African and Asian continents, might have an unfavourable effect on negotiations for a settlement in the Near
East. We cannot share those doubts or agree with them. The
adoption of this draft resolution can only arouse regret that
it is so weak and that in the actual circumstances, in dfal

111. The voting on this resolution will show who stands
where and who is in favour of what. That is the logic of the
discussion of this highly important political problem in the
Security Council. The results of the vote will show who is
really and sincerely in favour of the peaceful settlement of
the problem of the Near East, and who is in favour of
seeking waysand means of dissimulating and condoning the
policy of aggression, the policy of undermining honest
efforts towards the peaceful settlement of the problem of
the Near East. I also believe that the result of today’s vote
will be valuable for world public opinion. The whole
picture will become clearer on the eve of certain events.
112. In conclusion, I should like to draw attention to
another consideration, There has been a dispute here
between the representatives of Jordan and of Israel concerning what is happening in the occupied territories. The
representative of Jordan referred to specific facts reported
in TheNew York Timesconcerning the deliberate destruc-

the Occupied
States . . .“.

tion of houses belonging to the Arab population by the
lsrael armed forces for so-called “preventive reasons”. This
amounts to preventive vengeance against the Arab population, a vengeance in advance.

Territories,

composed of three Member

116. Therein lies our possibility of settling the present
dispute. Let the representative of Israel officially declare
here that the Government of Israel agrees, in accordlance
with this resolution and in the implementation of it, to
receive the Special Committee composed of the representatives of three States, who will be appointed by the
President of the General Assembly to investigate the
situation in the occupied territories.

113. The distinguished representative of Saudi Arabia has
often repeated that a considerable proportion of Israel’s
population consists of emigrants from Eastern European
countries. But I can assure you, Mr. Baroody, that the
methods that are being used by the Israel troops are
Hitlerite methods. In my native land, the Ukraine, the
Hitlerites destroyed thousands of villages and settlements
for preventive reasons, to clear the ground and to make it
easier to see whether the partisans were advancing against
the aggressorsand invaders.

117. This resolution has not yet been implcmentedl. We
have no detailed information about the reasons why i.t has
not been implemented, but it is said that the Government
of Israel does not wish to admit such a committee tlo the
territory occupied by Israel armed forces.

114. Apparently this is the policy that the Israel troops
also are following if they have taken the course of
preventive destruction of houses belonging to the Arab
population in the occupied territories. The representative of
Israel denies this. But there is a way of finding out the
truth. In this connexion I should like to recall General
Assembly resolution 2443 (Xx111). This resolution draws
attention to the telegram dispatched by the Commission on
Human Rights on 8 March 1968, calling upon “. . . the
Government of Israel to desist forthwith from acts of
destroying homes of the Arab civilian population in areas
occupied by Israel . . .“.

118. In view of the dispute which arose between the
representatives of Jordan and of Israel at this meeting, it
would seem essential to clarify this question also. If the
representative of Israel were to declare officially here that
his Government does not object to receiving the Special
Committee
for the investigation of the situation in the
occupied Arab territories, we could assume that such a
committee could be set up quickly and could t&e the
appropriate steps.
119. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
Soviet Union for the friendly and sympathetic words
addressed to the President.

115. In this resolution the General Assembly, an intetnational forum in which 126 delegations of States Members
of that Organization take part, calls upon the Government
of Israel to desist forthwith from acts of destroying homes
of the Arab civilian population inhabiting areas occupied by
Israel “. . . and to respect and implement the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 1949 . . .“. The Assembly further decided:
“ .$L to establish a Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of

120. A number of other representatives wish to elcpress
their views before the vote. Due to the lateness of the hour,
and on the basis of informal consultations, 1 propose that
we should adjourn this meeting and meet again at 3.30 this
afternoon.
The meet@ rose at I.55 p.m.

10
Litho in United Nations, New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

82045-November

1972-2,050
