A/64/PV.40

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

40

th plenary meeting
Monday, 9 November 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 17
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/364)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.8)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany to introduce
draft resolution A/64/L.8.
Mr. Ney (Germany): The international community
is willing and committed to continue to support the
Afghan people in their efforts to shape their own
destiny, establish sustainable peace and security, and
rebuild their country despite ongoing terrorist threats.
This is the key message of General Assembly draft
resolution A/64/L.8 on the situation in Afghanistan,
which I have the honour to introduce to the Assembly
today.
The debate and adoption of the draft resolution
give us, the members of the General Assembly, the
timely opportunity to renew our clear message of
international solidarity to the Afghan people.
As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon stressed last
week, we will not be deterred by the recent despicable
attacks by the Taliban targeting the international
community in Kabul. We pay homage to the innocent
people who lost their lives and extend our deepest
condolences to the families and friends of the victims.
Our thoughts are also with all those Afghans and other

nationals who have lost their lives as a result of the
Taliban insurgency.
Afghanistan experienced the first presidential
elections run entirely under the responsibility of the
Afghan

authorities.

The

international

It is at this point that I should like to extend the
sincerest thanks and profound gratitude of my
Government to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Kai Eide, and his team within the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, for
supporting the Afghan institutions during the elections.
I should also like to extend my thanks to the security
forces in Afghanistan for their efforts to provide
security during the electoral process to the extent
possible. The good performance of the Afghan media
and the Afghan election observers also deserves praise.
As Afghanistan continues to face significant
challenges, we emphasize that President Karzai should
move swiftly to form a Government that is able to meet
the challenges. We should continue to encourage all
political actors in Afghanistan to respect the rule of law
and to continue to take responsibility for the stability
and unity of Afghanistan. In this regard, Germany
welcomes President Karzai’s most recent commitment
to instituting reforms and to actively fighting
corruption. We hope that effective measures, such as

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-59876 (E)

*0959876*

community

witnessed with admiration the courage of the Afghan
people who cast their votes despite serious security
threats. We welcome the conclusion of the presidential
electoral process and congratulate President Karzai on
his second term in office.

A/64/PV.40

the strengthening of the anti-corruption commission,
will be taken to ensure good governance and to create
an enabling legal and political environment for
stability, as well as economic and social development
and growth through private investment in Afghanistan.
The draft resolution before us is a well-balanced
call on Member States for continued cooperation with
the Afghan Government and on the new Afghan
Government “to build a renewed relationship of trust
with its citizens by achieving concrete and visible
results” (A/64/L.8, fourth preambular paragraph). The
draft reflects the views expressed in informal
consultations. I wish to seize this opportunity to thank
the numerous delegations that participated actively in
the informal consultations for all their valuable
contributions.
I should like briefly to point out four elements of
the draft resolution that have been discussed most
intensively during the informal consultations. First, all
delegations underlined the importance of the protection
of the civilian population. On the one hand, the draft
resolution clearly stresses the fact that the Taliban,
Al-Qaida and other extremist and criminal groups are
responsible for the wide majority of civilian casualties
in Afghanistan and continue their despicable tactics of
using civilians as human shields. On the other hand, it
also calls on the security forces to continue their
intensified efforts aimed at ensuring the protection of
civilians. This will require the continued review of
tactics and procedures and the conduct of after-action
reviews and investigations.
Secondly, delegations felt a need to recall the
importance of upholding international obligations for
the advancement of women’s rights, as enshrined in the
Afghan Constitution.
Thirdly, delegations exchanged their views on the
prospects of an internal political dialogue aimed at
establishing sustainable peace in Afghanistan. They
agreed that the draft resolution should encourage the
implementation of reintegration, reconciliation and
transitional justice processes led by the Afghan
Government aiming at reintegrating those who are
ready to renounce violence, denounce terrorism, accept
the Afghan Constitution, and commit themselves to
working constructively for peace, stability and
development in the framework of the Afghan
Constitution.

2

Fourthly and finally, delegations welcomed
ongoing efforts by the Governments of Afghanistan
and its partners in the region to foster trust and
cooperation with each other. Delegations encouraged
further initiatives to increase regional cooperation in
order to promote security, stability, peace and
economic development in Afghanistan and in the
region.
The second presidential election in Afghanistan
marked an important step in the democratic history of
the country. This is the time for the Afghan people and
the international community alike to take stock, look
ahead and assess the challenges we are facing. France,
Germany and the United Kingdom have jointly
proposed that the Secretary-General take the initiative
to co-chair an international conference on Afghanistan
in cooperation with the new Afghan Government. We
appreciate the support expressed by the SecretaryGeneral for this initiative, and welcome the first steps
taken by Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Kai Eide in this regard.
If we want to succeed, it is of crucial importance
that we jointly revisit our goals. These goals must
include security, good governance, the rule of law and
human rights, as well as the economic and social
development of Afghanistan. We should agree on new,
specific and measurable benchmarks and timelines in
order to establish a joint framework for the transition
phase ahead towards increased Afghan ownership. In
view of such a framework, Germany is committed to
continuing its support to the Afghan people and to
cooperating fully and constructively with the new
Afghan Government. Germany is planning to further
enhance its contribution to the international
reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan.
Germany aligns itself fully with the statement
that will be delivered by the Swedish presidency of the
European Union later in the debate.
Finally, I would like to conclude by extending my
heartfelt thanks to my colleague Ambassador Zahir
Tanin and his Deputy Permanent Representative, Erfani
Ayoob, for their trust, cooperation and friendship,
which we have been privileged to enjoy.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Thirty years ago, in
December 1979, Soviet forces entered Afghanistan.
Since then, Afghanistan has been the victim of
perpetual war, violence and conflict. Constant upheaval
has torn the country from a peaceful, progressive path

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

and thrust it into the global spotlight. The General
Assembly has repeatedly gathered to reiterate its
solidarity with the Afghan people.
However, while we debated here, the floodgates
of hell opened in Afghanistan. What was once a stable,
modernizing country and a role model for other States
in the region became a name without a State, a vast
wasteland of shattered lives. One hundred years of
social, political and economic progress were destroyed.
What is worse, 2 million people were killed and
10 million more fled for their own safety. That is the
true tragedy of my country and my people. Now, eight
years after the fall of the Taliban, eight years after we
all believed that the long national nightmare of the
Afghan people had at last come to an end, violence still
threatens the lives of Afghans in many parts of the
country.
The draft resolution (A/64/L.8) before us today
reflects an awareness of our common responsibility to
address the situation in Afghanistan and reaffirms the
strong determination of the membership towards this
end. For this support, the Government and people of
Afghanistan are deeply grateful.
In this regard, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting, and all the
members for their presence here today and for so
widely and strongly supporting the draft resolution
now before us. Allow me to also express my sincerest
thanks to the German Mission, in particular
Ambassador Martin Ney, Counsellor Daniel Krull and
his able team, for their substantial efforts and able
facilitation of the draft resolution.
The past eight years have been difficult, but the
situation in Afghanistan has fundamentally improved.
Eight years ago, we were debating how to build what
did not exist: a Government, an army and police force,
and a functioning economic and social life. Today, we
are debating how to improve what we have built and
how to have a good, effective Government, a welltrained army and police and a productive economy.
Today, Afghanistan’s flag flies proudly across the
country. This is a substantial accomplishment.
Unfortunately, our progress has not been
sufficient. We have allowed three crucial opportunities
to slip through our fingers.
First, we missed the chance to wipe out the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other terrorists. After their initial

09-59876

defeat, we permitted them to rearm and regroup in
sanctuaries outside Afghanistan. As a result, they
returned to threaten us in 2006, and the security
situation has deteriorated markedly.
Secondly, we missed the chance to properly
resource and reinforce our efforts. Afghanistan has
been starved for resources, starved for attention and
starved for troops. Our responses have been reactive,
ex post facto and fragmented.
Thirdly, we missed the chance to rapidly
empower and enable Afghans to shoulder the
responsibility for their own destiny. The Government
and civil society lack capacity, experience and
resources.
Thankfully, within the past two years, the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community have together begun to craft a common
approach. We are beginning to offer the necessary
resources to combat a resurgent Taliban. We have
strengthened the important United Nations mandate for
coordination. We have begun to build capacity to
address weak governance and fragile institutions. We
have built a strengthened partnership with the elected
Government in Islamabad, and we are working together
towards real cooperation in the fight against our
common enemy. Finally, with the holding of the second
presidential elections in our history, Afghans are again
able to have a say in their future.
The elections marked the beginning of a new
chapter in Afghanistan. Unfortunately, the elections
were held in difficult circumstances. In many regions,
voters risked their lives to participate. Despite this,
however, millions voted, and millions more
participated in the debates surrounding the campaigns.
Elections are not perfect anywhere. They are even
less perfect in an emerging democracy threatened by
conflict. The Afghan people worked tirelessly, not on
the sidelines but as leaders of our institutions.
Complaints and irregularities were uncovered and
addressed in a meticulously fair and systematic way.
The elections were as free as possible, as fair as
possible and as transparent as possible. Most
importantly, the people of Afghanistan showed respect
for the rule of law. All of Afghanistan patiently and
peacefully awaited a legal, constitutional outcome and
are now prepared to accept that outcome. This has been
a peaceful transition.

3

A/64/PV.40

The re-election of President Karzai has ended a
period of uncertainty and an extended pause in our
reconstruction and stabilization efforts. The Presidentelect, in his first address, emphasized that we need to
seize this unique moment. Over the next five years, the
new Government of Afghanistan will create and
maintain two compacts, one with the Afghan people
and one with the international community. Together,
these pacts will help forge strong, constructive
partnerships and will lead Afghanistan to sustainable
progress.
The principal compact is with the people of
Afghanistan and will be based on a continuing
commitment to ensuring the physical and economic
security of Afghans, providing good governance and
ensuring the rule of law, and encouraging economic
development. To achieve these three aims, Presidentelect Karzai has identified four areas of focus: national
participation, reconciliation, Afghanization and tackling
corruption.
The need for Afghans to take control of their
destinies is central to this compact. In an ongoing
effort to build capacity and wash out the stain of
corruption, Afghans should assume increasing
responsibility for governance, the rule of law and the
protection of human rights. In training the army and
police, Afghans can take on a greater role in ensuring
security, enforcing the law and leading counternarcotics efforts.
The Government represents all Afghans. The
Government serves all Afghans. We are committed to
greater national participation in the political and
reconstruction processes. In addition, we will continue
to welcome any Afghan who is willing to join the
peace process and respect the Afghan Constitution. In
undertaking these commitments, the new Government
of Afghanistan will work actively and constructively
with the region and the broader international
community alike.
In building a prosperous and democratic
Afghanistan, security is at the core of all our efforts.
Security is not only an end in itself; it is also an
important prerequisite for progress in other areas.
Insecurity is a barrier to good governance and
sustainable development, and is the single biggest
threat to human rights. Insecurity prevents Afghans
from putting aside their guns to concentrate on
rebuilding their lives, and it breeds corruption, fear,

4

hopelessness and despair. We will never earn the trust
of Afghans while they are constantly subjected to
terror. We must first help them feel secure.
However, our aim is not to kill every Taliban
fighter. We have to use political and military strategies
together in order to expand the reach of the
Government, train the Afghan army and police, isolate
the Taliban from the people, earn the trust of the people
and encourage the engagement of Afghan civilians in
the peace and reconciliation process.
The sole strength of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
their terrorist allies lies in their brutality. Afghanistan
needs a military and civilian strategy that centres on
the security of the Afghan people and offers them real
protection from the threats of the Taliban and the
unintended consequences of counter-terrorist operations.
NATO’s new strategy is a promising and responsible
step in this direction.
However, the Government’s tremendous objectives
will not be achieved in one day. We will achieve
nothing by setting premature deadlines. We will
achieve nothing without the consistent political,
military and financial support of the international
community. Most important, we will achieve nothing
without mutual understanding built on trust and
cooperation.
Recent public debate about Afghanistan has
strained this understanding. Afghanistan both respects
and understands the legitimate concerns of the
international community. We ask the world to respect
and understand the views and concerns of Afghans. All
stakeholders deserve sincere, credible partners. We
need a partnership built on real solidarity.
For this reason, the Government of Afghanistan
will focus on building and renewing a second
compact — a compact with the international community.
This compact should rest on the strong foundation of
our shared commitment to pursuing security,
development and good governance in Afghanistan and
the region. Together, we should seek rational and wellresourced common strategies with realistic timelines.
In this regard, we welcome the call for an international
conference to refresh and renew our partnership and
build a solid foundation for our future work together.
The recent attack on the dedicated United Nations
workers in Kabul shows that our partnership is under
attack from the outside. We must strengthen it from the
inside.

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

The key to the future of Afghanistan is in the
hands of the Afghan people. They are the masters of
their destiny. The Taliban do not represent Afghans.
Their power is the power of destruction. Their strength
lies only in brutality. Let us make a strong relationship
between the Afghan people and the international
community the bedrock of our strategies. Let us use
today’s draft resolution on Afghanistan to demand
more from ourselves and our partners alike. Alone, we
will fail, but together we can and will succeed.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Iceland,
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Armenia align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomes the conclusion of
the presidential electoral process and congratulates
President Hamid Karzai on winning a second term in
office. This autumn, we have seen important
developments in Afghanistan. The first elections to be
organized by the Afghan authorities in several decades
took place. The European Union has supported these
elections and the Afghan institutions responsible for
conducting them throughout the process and will
continue to do so.
Lessons should be learned from this round of
elections. The European Union stands ready to assist
Afghanistan in reviewing and improving the electoral
system, especially in view of the elections to be held
next year, while we also note that addressing some of
the issues related to the electoral system will require
attention in the longer term as well.
On 27 October, the European Union took an
important decision in adopting a plan for strengthened
EU action in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The plan
reflects the strategic importance that the European
Union attaches to the region. The EU will increase its
efforts strategically, politically and financially, as well
as through the contribution of technical assistance, in
order to help move developments in a positive
direction.
The European Union expects that a credible and
competent Government that addresses the major
challenges facing the country will be formed without
delay and that it will promote national unity in order to
regain legitimacy in the eyes of the Afghan people. The
European Union is ready to engage early and

09-59876

substantially with such a Government, on the basis of
the European Union’s plan of action.
The debate on the annual resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan is an opportunity for the
international community to reaffirm its support for the
Afghan people and its path towards peace, security and
democracy. We thank Germany for its initiative again
this year and for having managed this draft resolution
so well. The end result reflects both the progress that
has been achieved and the challenges remaining in
Afghanistan, as well as the international community’s
unanimous support for the Afghan Government’s
efforts to consolidate a stable and democratic country.
The European Union expresses its continued
strong support for the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and all United Nations personnel for
their important work in assisting Afghanistan despite
the tragic loss of life during the suicide attack on
United Nations personnel in Kabul on 28 October.
The European Union salutes half a century of
United Nations commitment to Afghanistan and hopes
that it will be possible, following its security review,
for the United Nations presence there to return to full
strength. The European Union understands the difficult
security situation under which the United Nations
operates in Afghanistan, supports the need to ensure
the safety of United Nations staff accordingly, and
looks forward to further discussions on proposals from
the Secretary-General in that regard.
Following the completion of the elections and
with a new Government in place, the EU looks forward
to the Government of Afghanistan’s rapidly addressing
the challenges facing the nation by developing a
reform agenda with concrete commitments to the
Afghan people. Such an agenda should include
improving governance and fighting corruption, as well
as addressing security and improving the rule of law.
The European Union also looks forward to the
international conference, which will offer an
opportunity for the new Afghan Government to lay out
its priorities, plans and commitments. The United
Nations should have a prominent role in that
conference. For the international community, it will be
an occasion to review and reaffirm its engagement in
Afghanistan. Jointly, we should agree on new goals,
benchmarks and timelines in order to formulate a joint
framework for our work towards the common goal of
an Afghanistan living in peace and security.

5

A/64/PV.40

The European Union member States are deeply
involved in Afghanistan, and the EU is a key
contributor to its reconstruction. The EU and its
member States are spending nearly €1 billion a year on
civilian efforts in Afghanistan. The troop contribution
of EU member States to the United Nations-mandated
International Security Assistance Force amounts to
approximately 30,000, which is the heaviest EU
military engagement in a long time.
The focus of the international presence in
Afghanistan is on safeguarding a stable security
environment to make development possible. Maintaining
security is currently a responsibility shared between the
Afghan national security forces and the international
community. Ultimately, our highest priority should be
to enable the Afghan national security forces to carry
out that responsibility on their own. The European
Union concurs, needless to say, with the view that
everything possible should be done to avoid civilian
casualties.
Building Afghan capacity and strengthening
national ownership in the civilian sectors remain at the
core of the European Union’s engagement in
Afghanistan. The EU will increase its support, for
example, in the areas of good governance, the rule of
law, including justice, and the fight against corruption.
We urge the next Government of Afghanistan to give
priority to the achievement of progress in those areas,
not least at the subnational level. Further, we
underscore the need for concrete improvements in the
protection of human rights, including the rights of
women, and stand ready to support a new Government
in that regard.
The framework for political, social and economic
development in Afghanistan is the Afghanistan
Compact, the Afghan National Development Strategy
and the principles agreed at the Paris and Hague
Conferences on Afghanistan. The European Union will
further enhance and improve its contributions to
Afghanistan’s reconstruction and development through
a common approach, as well as bilaterally through
individual member States.
Without doubt, stability, security and development
in Afghanistan are closely linked to the overall
situation in that region. The EU strongly supports the
development of a coordinated approach at the regional
level and enhanced cooperation between Afghanistan
and its neighbours, especially Pakistan. The EU

6

particularly acknowledges Pakistan’s key role for
stability in the region. We welcome the progress that
has been achieved in the bilateral dialogue between
Afghanistan and Pakistan.
The European Union will concentrate its efforts
on strengthening State capacity and institutions to
promote good governance, human rights and efficient
public administration, especially at the subnational
level. The EU will focus on strengthening the rule of
law by assisting in the building of a civilian police
force through the European Union Police Mission in
Afghanistan. We will also support economic growth,
especially through rural development and improved
regional cooperation. The EU strongly supports the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in its important role as coordinator of
international efforts. We recognize the responsibility of
member States to assist UNAMA in performing that
task. Additional UNAMA provincial offices are a
welcome contribution.
The EU reiterates that the primary responsibility
for the development of the country lies with the Afghan
Government and the people themselves. I would like to
assure the Assembly that the European Union will
continue to play an active role in assisting Afghanistan
on its road to security, stability and prosperity in close
cooperation and coordination with UNAMA and other
international actors.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) — the Republic of Armenia, the
Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the
Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Tajikistan.
In recent years, the authorities of Afghanistan
have managed to achieve definite progress in Statebuilding and the strengthening of democratic
institutions. The presidential and local elections held in
Afghanistan serve as a vivid example of that. We
expect a new effective Government to be formed soon.
Referring to the recent attack on the United
Nations mission in Kabul, we decisively condemn the
actions of terrorists and call on the Government of
Afghanistan to guarantee an appropriate level of
security both to the United Nations mission in
Afghanistan and to all foreign missions accredited in
that country.

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

The new Afghan authorities will encounter
unprecedented challenges. The Taliban’s position is
stronger than ever since they were toppled. Al-Qaida
remains very active. Much remains to be done in the
field of socio-economic rehabilitation. The security
situation is still of key importance to the further
reconstruction and development of Afghanistan.
In that respect, neither the Afghan authorities nor
the international community can abandon their efforts
to isolate extremist leaders, especially those on the
sanctions list of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). An
opportunity to return to normal political life should be
offered only to those who renounce violence, armed
combat and their ties with Al-Qaida and the Taliban
movement and recognize the Constitution and the
legitimate Government of Afghanistan. All talks should
be held only by the legitimate authorities of Afghanistan.
Our countries pay the utmost attention to fighting
drug trafficking, which is a source of financing
terrorist activity. Unfortunately, we must acknowledge
that international endeavours to fight the illicit
production and distribution of narcotics from the
territory of Afghanistan have yet to prove effective.
The international military presence in Afghanistan
possesses all the tools necessary for a more efficient
struggle against that evil. We support more
comprehensive international cooperation to ensure the
full implementation of Security Council resolution
1735 (2006), including with regard to those who use
resources gained from the production of illicit drugs
and precursors to finance terrorist groups. Security
Council resolution 1817 (2008), intended to impose
international control over the circulation of precursors,
remains relevant.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
strengthen cooperation with the CSTO on countering
the illicit production and trafficking of drugs. We are
convinced that only through the Afghan Government’s
full involvement in the fight against that evil can
substantial improvements be made in reducing the
global level of opiate production. We believe it
necessary to significantly strengthen anti-narcotic
efforts both in the territory of Afghanistan and around it
by creating belts of anti-narcotic and financial security
with the participation of neighbouring countries.
The CSTO possesses vast experience in
countering the illicit circulation of drugs on the Afghan

09-59876

track. One of the most successful and effective formats
of the CSTO countries’ practical cooperation to curb
the interregional and international supply of drugs is
Operation Channel, which has had the status of a
permanent regional CSTO anti-narcotics operation
since September 2008.
Every year the number of countries participating
in Operation Channel expands. In accordance with the
decision of CSTO heads of State, the first stage of
Channel 2009, a complex operational and prevention
operation, was completed between 22 and 28 September.
Participants included drug enforcement agencies of the
CSTO member States; authorized representatives of
law-enforcement bodies from Azerbaijan, Afghanistan,
Bulgaria, Venezuela, Germany, Iran, China, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, the United States, Turkey, Ukraine
and Estonia; and financial investigation operatives
from States members of the Eurasian Group on
Combating Money Laundering and Financing of
Terrorism. Representatives of law-enforcement bodies
from Bulgaria, Germany, Venezuela and Turkey
participated in the endeavour for the first time.
The participants were tasked with several
objectives, chief of which were blocking illicit
trafficking channels into Eurasian countries for opiates
from Afghanistan, synthetic drugs from Europe and
cocaine from Latin America, and preventing illicit
supplies of precursors to the Central Asian republics
and Afghanistan, as well as confiscating illegal arms,
ammunition and explosive materials, and preventing
the laundering of drug money. The operation involved
139,000 officers of drug enforcement agencies,
security forces, law enforcement agencies, police
forces and border services. More than 9,000 joint rapid
response groups and 7,000 fixed stations were created
in border regions at rail, air and road transportation
facilities. More than 2,000 rail junctions and stations,
725 airports and almost 4,500 roads were closed off.
Operations were conducted in regions directly
adjacent to Afghanistan. This permitted the interception
of large, wholesale shipments of drugs. Based on a
previously tested scheme of interaction and information
exchange between the operational department of the
international coordination headquarters and the Russian
Financial Monitoring Service, an examination of
financial operations suspected of being connected to
illicit drug trafficking activity was organized. In the
course of the operation more than 30 tons of
psychotropic, narcotic and other hard drugs were seized.

7

A/64/PV.40

More than 6,000 charges for crimes pertaining to illicit
drug trafficking were made, more than 26,000 criminal
cases initiated and 5,400 people were tried for crimes
involving illicit drug deals; 531 of those individuals
were members of criminal organizations. Approximately
849 firearms and more than 34,000 items of ammunition
were confiscated.
The strengthening of the anti-drug zones should
be supplemented by creating financial security cordons
around Afghanistan. This means not only intercepting
drug shipments but also imposing stronger controls on
the transnational movement of income from drug
trafficking, money-laundering and other criminal
activities, including financing terrorism.
This year the CSTO member States took an active
part in a number of significant international forums on
the question of Afghanistan, including the Special
Conference on Afghanistan held in Moscow under the
auspices of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
The CSTO strongly believes that effectively resolving
the situation in Afghanistan and addressing the serious
issues on the Afghan Government’s agenda are
unattainable without an integrated approach on the part
of the international community, under the auspices of
the United Nations. Such efforts, though, will not yield
the benefits hoped for without delegating more
independence to Kabul in solving Afghanistan’s
internal problems, above all by creating the conditions
that will enable the Afghan Government to be selfsufficient in providing national security.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): Eight years have passed
since the Taliban were defeated and the reconstruction
of Afghanistan began. There have been positive
developments, particularly in the socio-economic field.
But many Afghans are becoming impatient and say that
too little is happening, too late. The deteriorating
security situation is a cause of suffering for the
population and grave concern in the international
community. It is therefore necessary to ask how we and
the Afghan Government should prioritize, and where
we can improve our performance. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) plays a
key role in finding constructive answers to these
questions.
Against this backdrop, Norway looks forward to
the unanimous adoption by the General Assembly of
draft resolution A/64/L.8, on the situation in
Afghanistan. The broad support for this draft resolution

8

among all States Members of the United Nations sends
an important message: the international community has
a common wish for improved security, political
stability and development for the people of Afghanistan.
Following the fatal attack on United Nations staff
in Kabul on 28 October, it is imperative that we
express our strongest support for the Organization in
Afghanistan. We welcome the recent efforts of the
Secretary-General to ensure protection of his own
United Nations staff. Norway is committed to assisting
the United Nations so that it can continue its
indispensable work in a safe manner. The attack was a
brutal reminder that our common goal — security and
stability in Afghanistan — is still a long way off. It also
shows how crucial it is that the efforts of the United
Nations, NATO and a united international community
in Afghanistan be predictable and have a long-term
perspective. It is deeply tragic that the United Nations,
whose mandate includes working for peace, stability
and improved coordination, has been hit so hard.
We are very pleased that the key role played by
UNAMA in Afghanistan is reflected in the significant
increase in the Mission’s budget for 2010. Only with a
sufficient level of predictable funding will UNAMA be
able to implement its mandate effectively. We should
not expect more from the United Nations than we are
willing to invest in it.
The Afghan presidential election and its
aftermath this year illustrated clearly how challenging
conducting elections in conflict-affected areas can be.
Following a lengthy and difficult election process,
President Karzai will be inaugurated as Afghanistan’s
next President on 19 November, and soon thereafter a
new Afghan Government will be formed. With the
election concluded, the new Afghan Government has to
demonstrate a genuine interest in fulfilling basic and
crucial commitments to the Afghan people and the
international community. If not, the new Administration
risks losing support. The legitimacy of the next Karzai
Government will be decided by the actions they take in
the near future and judged by the Afghan people.
It is not only the people of Afghanistan but also
the international community that is formulating
expectations and demands. President Karzai and the
new Afghan Government will have to commit
themselves on a larger scale and take all necessary
measures to combat corruption and the culture of
impunity; improve governance, particularly at local

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

levels and including strengthening the rule of law;
protect human rights and women’s rights; improve the
security situation; and increase their capacity to deliver
basic services to the Afghan people. As members of the
international community, we must stand ready to assist
the next Afghan Government in meeting these
demanding commitments to the people of Afghanistan.
Mr. Sial (Pakistan): Pakistan’s delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, as it provides a timely opportunity for
Member States to review progress towards the
realization of our shared objectives of peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan. We have a vital stake
in achieving this objective.
Pakistan has inseparable bonds of geography,
history, faith and culture with Afghanistan, bonds that
link the destinies of our two nations. No other country
has suffered more than Pakistan from the consequences
of the conflict and the human tragedy in Afghanistan. It
has impacted our social and economic fabric, disturbed
the peace and tranquillity of our border regions and
given rise to the common threat of extremism and
terrorism. The people of Pakistan have shared the
sorrows of their Afghan brethrens. Therefore, we see
our own prosperity reflected in the prosperity of
Afghanistan.
Our vision of common strategic and economic
interests positions Pakistan and Afghanistan to play
their rightful role as partners forming the hub for the
shortest and the most economical corridors for trade in
raw materials, goods and energy among Central Asia,
South and West Asia and beyond. We feel that our
economic and trade potential will remain untapped
unless Afghanistan is peaceful and stable and that
vision reinforces our efforts and commitment to peace
and stability in Afghanistan.
Pakistan is of the view that peace and economic
development in Afghanistan can only be brought about
by a stable Government enjoying majority support of
the Afghan people. In this context, Pakistan greatly
values the recent presidential and provincial council
elections held in Afghanistan. These elections show the
commitment of the Afghan people to democracy and
the rule of law. We have welcomed the outcomes of
these elections. The Government and people of
Pakistan remain committed to further cementing our
close, fraternal and cooperative ties with the new
Afghan Administration under President Hamid Karzai.

09-59876

The cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan
spans the entire spectrum of political, economic and
cultural relations. There is continuous dialogue and
regular exchange of visits at the highest levels. Early
this year, our two countries signed the landmark Joint
Declaration on Directions of Bilateral Cooperation,
which has turned a new page in our bilateral relations.
This Declaration is a road map for our bilateral
relations leading to a bright and promising future. It is
also a manifestation of the aspirations of our two
peoples for a peaceful, prosperous and better tomorrow.
In May this year, Pakistan hosted the third
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan. The event was attended by 24 countries
and 18 regional and international organizations,
institutions and bodies. The Conference crystallized a
regional consensus on key transregional cooperation
projects in the fields of mining, health, energy,
infrastructure development, transit, trade, labour and
human resource development. We are closely following
up on these projects and hope that our efforts will
prove to be a milestone in assisting Afghanistan in its
developmental efforts. Despite our own financial
constraints, we are participating significantly in
Afghanistan’s economic development and reconstruction.
Our assistance package for Afghanistan is the biggest
cooperation programme Pakistan has with any other
country.
We are also looking forward to closely working
with the new Afghan Government on key bilateral
projects that have been identified earlier, including the
rail link from Chaman to Kandahar, the Central AsiaSouth Asia Regional Energy Cooperation project or
CASA 1000, the Hairatan-Mazar-e-Sharif rail link and
establishment of a customs academy in Kabul.
We are also engaged in security and intelligence
cooperation, including through the Tripartite
Commission, which includes the United States and the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). This
cooperation is essential in order to cement our gains in
the campaign against terrorism and extremism. We
have made enormous sacrifices, more than any other
country, in this campaign.
In order to interdict illegal cross-border
movement, which is a joint responsibility, Pakistan has
established 1,000 border posts. More than 100,000
troops are deployed on our side of the border with
Afghanistan, at considerable cost. We rightfully expect

9

A/64/PV.40

Afghanistan and NATO/ISAF to reciprocate with
robust deployment and patrolling on their side, with a
view to checking all illegal activities including
terrorism, drug trafficking and commercial smuggling.

aspects in parallel. Although reliance on international
support is vital, especially for development needs, such
efforts must have strong ownership from the Afghan
Government.

Afghan infants born in refugee camps in Pakistan
during the time of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
have now grown and become fathers. For the past three
decades, Pakistan has housed over 3 million Afghan
refugees and, despite isolated short spells of voluntary
return, Pakistan still hosts nearly 2 million. Nobody
should underestimate the resulting enormous social,
economic and security costs already paid by the people
of Pakistan and the outstanding challenges we still face.

We agree with the conclusion drawn by the
Secretary-General that the key to long-term stability in
Afghanistan is capacity-building of the country’s
security institutions: the Afghan National Army, the
Afghan National Police and the relevant ministries.
Equally important is building the civilian institutions at
both the central and subnational levels. Good
governance and the rule of law are required to counter
the problems of neglect, exclusion and interference,
which are common causes of grievances.

The Tripartite Agreement of August 2007
between Pakistan, Afghanistan and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees contains a framework
on reintegration, and Pakistan remains committed to
the voluntary, gradual, safe and dignified return of all
Afghan refugees. However, we stress the need to
strengthen reintegration programmes for refugees
within Afghanistan’s development strategy. Greater
sustained and diligent efforts to create the necessary
pull-factors in Afghanistan are needed so that refugees
feel that they can return to their country with dignity
and honour. We expect the United Nations and the
international community to assist in this endeavour
with all necessary resources.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan (A/64/364) underscores that insecurity,
driven by politically motivated insurgency and
exploited by criminals and drug traffickers, is the
greatest factor impeding progress in Afghanistan. The
report notes the spread of this menace to the north-east
and north-west of the country. The insurgency needs to
be eliminated as a priority matter and without seeking
to externalize the problem. This is a complex and
interconnected challenge that requires a corresponding
integrated, coherent and coordinated response. Its
objective analysis and proper understanding is required
to formulate an effective response.
The core of violence and conflict in Afghanistan
emanates from terrorist groups, foreign militants such
as Al-Qaida, and militant Taliban who are not prepared
to reconcile and give up the path of violence. Their
nexus with drug traders is increasingly discernable.
These elements must be confronted head on. However,
coercion needs to be supplemented by a comprehensive
approach that addresses the political and economic

10

We are happy to note the improvement in several
economic and social indicators in Afghanistan. The
report of the Secretary-General notes the increasing
effectiveness of the Afghan Government in implementing
its developmental agenda and seeking donor alignment
in its agricultural initiatives. Most of these gains will
be short-lived if they are not backed by a surge in
investment in development programmes.
The world needs to recognize that most of the
growth and innovation of the past few decades in the
global corporate sector has eluded Afghanistan. As
such, Afghanistan remains isolated from the global
economy. It is therefore time to re-establish these
linkages. To that end, the key would be the engagement
of multinational corporations and large enterprises in
project development in Afghanistan, particularly in
mining,
agriculture
and
infrastructure.
The
international community, particularly the developed
countries, should leverage their potential behind such
efforts. The economic and political dividends of such
initiatives could be enormous not only for the people of
Afghanistan, but for rest of the world as well.
Pakistan greatly values the role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. The United
Nations has an important role to play in coordinating
the comprehensive international effort in Afghanistan.
Pakistan would welcome the enhancement of this role
in the political and security fields. We strongly
condemn terrorist attacks on United Nations and
Afghan security personnel and reiterate our support for
the Secretary-General in his endeavours to enhance
security for United Nations personnel.
We take this opportunity to thank the delegation
of Germany for leading the process of consultations on

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

the draft resolution (A/64/L.8). We believe that the text
addresses all the relevant issues in a comprehensive
and balanced manner. We are happy to co-sponsor the
draft resolution and urge all Member States to adopt it
by consensus.
Mr. Askarov (Uzbekistan): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Republic of Uzbekistan in its
capacity as the Chair of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO).
Unfortunately, the situation in Afghanistan
continues to be defined by the aggravation and
escalation of confrontation and the intensification of
terrorist actions by militants. Confrontation in
Afghanistan remains today one of the main sources of
concern for the international community and a serious
security threat to Central Asia.
Uzbekistan, as a close neighbour of Afghanistan,
clearly recognizes that the achievement of peace and
stability in that country is a key security factor and
would open great possibilities for solving the critical
problems of sustainable social and economic
development of the whole Central Asian region.
There is deep concern about drug production and
trafficking because, despite the decrease in narco-crops
and some reduction in the volume of drug production,
it is still too early to draw conclusions about possible
success in this field. We need to take into consideration
the fact that drug trafficking has become one of the
major sources of financing for militants and the
destabilization of the situation not only in Afghanistan,
but also in neighbouring States.
The dynamics of the development of the situation
in Afghanistan highlights the increasing evidence that
the Afghan problem cannot be solved only by armed
forces, using only military means, or by further
militarization.
We acknowledge the measures undertaken by the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
Afghanistan. In this context, it is important that
resolution 1890 (2009), recently adopted by the
Security Council, directs ISAF to comply with
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and for all appropriate measures to be taken to ensure
the protection of civilians.
It is extremely important to fully respect the deep
historical and ethno-demographic roots of the
multi-ethnic people of Afghanistan and their traditional

09-59876

and religious values. Special attention should be given
to solving such acute problems such as the
rehabilitation of the economy and social infrastructure
in Afghanistan, destroyed by more than 30 years of war.
Uzbekistan is undertaking significant efforts to
assist Afghanistan. Our country has built 11 bridges
along the Mazari-Sharif-Kabul highway, which is
crucial to ensuring unhampered communication
between the North and South of the country. At the
start of 2002, we restored Afghanistan’s electrical
supply and, in 2008, Uzbekistan completed the
construction of the high-powered Khairaton-PuliKhumri-Kabul electrical line, thanks to which the
Afghan capital receives 100 per cent of the electricity
it requires.
The problem of the development of transport
infrastructure and its inclusion in international
transport and communication projects requires very
urgent attention. As members know, the only railway in
Afghanistan goes through the Uzbek city of Termiz and
ends in the city of Khairaton. The Asian Development
Bank has prepared a project that stipulates the
extension of the railway to the city of Mazari Sharif,
and Uzbek companies are currently active on this
project. This project seeks to integrate Afghanistan’s
transport infrastructure not only into the Central Asian
and trans-Caucasian transport-communication systems,
but also into the Navoi-Turkmenbashi-Baku-Kars route,
allowing it to reach the markets of Europe and the
Turkish seaport of Mersin, which would provide access
to North Africa and the Middle East. The project’s
implementation would assist rapid development of
mutual trade and increased investment activity in the
region.
Uzbekistan believes that a peaceful settlement of
the situation in Afghanistan is unachievable without
bringing Afghans into the process. We are confident
that, without promoting national reconciliation and
consent and strengthening the State hierarchy, it would
be impossible to significantly improve and radically
change the situation in the country.
In this connection, forming effective international
mechanisms of multilateral cooperation capable of
consolidating stabilization efforts and involving
neighbouring countries, all interested States and
international organizations will be crucial in many
ways to finding a solution to the acute problems of
Afghanistan.

11

A/64/PV.40

The settlement of the Afghan problem could be
facilitated by the creation, under United Nations
auspices, of a “6+3” contact group, with the participation
of plenipotentiary representatives of Afghanistan’s
neighbouring States plus Russia, the United States and
NATO. The President of the Republic of Uzbekistan,
Islam Karimov, has repeatedly emphasized that the
implementation of such an initiative involving
neighbouring countries would allow for the achievement
of an accord both in and around Afghanistan.
Important steps in this direction have already
been undertaken by the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. It is particularly necessary to highlight
the outcome of the special conference held under the
auspices of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in
Moscow on 27 March, as well as the cooperation
between the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
Afghanistan, which is being carried out under the
protocol signed by the organization and the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan on the establishment of the
SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group in 2005 in Beijing.
In this context, Uzbekistan supports the General
Assembly’s draft resolution on Afghanistan (A/64/L.8),
prepared by a large group of sponsors. We expect that
the adoption of this document by consensus will
contribute to the consolidation of international efforts
in Afghanistan.
Mr. Towpik (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement on the situation in Afghanistan made
during our debate by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to make a
few additional comments on this vital issue in my
national capacity.
The annual debate on the situation in Afghanistan
is the best opportunity to underline the role that the
United Nations plays in the process of the stabilization
and reconstruction of that country. Poland welcomes
the draft resolution introduced by the representative of
Germany (A/64/L.8). The coordinating role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
the activities undertaken by Special Representative Kai
Eide enjoy our full support and respect.
In that context, I would like to pay tribute to the
members of the United Nations Mission in Afghanistan
who were killed and injured during the recent terrorist
attack against United Nations personnel in Kabul in
October. I convey my sincere condolences to the
families of the victims, the Secretary-General, United

12

Nations staff and the people and the Government of
Afghanistan. My Government reiterates its determination
to combat all forms of terrorism and strongly
condemns all acts of terror, especially those directed
against those who work for the country’s stability and
security. I would like to underline my Government’s
full support for the Secretary-General’s recent initiative
to enhance the security of United Nations staff.
The year that has passed since our last debate on
Afghanistan in this Hall has been one of significant
efforts and important positive and negative developments
in that country. Poland shares the assessment of the
Secretary-General and endorses the recommendations
contained in his most recent report on the situation in
Afghanistan (A/64/364). We welcome the benchmarks
and indicators of progress annexed to it, which can be a
useful tool for measuring the progress achieved. We
hope that this new instrument will contribute to better
coordination and increase the effectiveness of our joint
efforts.
We are closely following the process of
presidential and provincial council elections, which are
without a doubt important milestones in the processes
of stabilization and State-building. Despite all the
problems, the holding of elections in very difficult,
complex and dangerous circumstances, the participation
of young people, and public engagement in the election
campaign provide us with grounds for cautious
optimism. We deplore the numerous electoral
irregularities and fraud, but at the same time we
commend the Electoral Complaints Commission and
the Independent Election Commission for their work in
identifying, investigating and ruling on those frauds
and irregularities. The time factor is critical. Poland
looks forward to the rapid formation of a new Afghan
Government based on a broad political platform, as
well as the establishment of a new contract between the
Government and the people of Afghanistan.
Poland regrets the current increase in the number
of violent incidents, compared to previous years. We
note that the security situation in the southern and
eastern parts of the country is still more complex and
more difficult than in other regions. However, the
decrease in security is visible throughout the country.
In that regard, we deeply regret any civilian casualty.
At the same time, it must be stressed, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report states, that the Taliban and other antiGovernment elements are responsible for almost three
quarters of civilian deaths. We fully agree with the

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

declaration made by General McChrystal that the
protection of the Afghan population is the central and
essential element of the international presence in
Afghanistan.
Poland has been engaged in Afghanistan since
March 2002. My country’s involvement follows from
our sense of responsibility for the situation in that
country, which still poses a threat to international peace
and security. We are fully aware that assuming the
responsibility for the stabilization and reconstruction
processes is not a short-term commitment. The 2008
decision to significantly strengthen the Polish
involvement increased the number of our troops
allocated to the International Security Assistance Force
operation in Afghanistan to 1,600. The recent decision
of the Government of Poland in April 2009 resulted in
the current number of 2,000 military personnel, with an
additional troop reserve of 200 deployable in an
emergency. Moreover, since the autumn of 2008,
Poland has taken over the responsibility for the
security situation in Ghazni province.
Poland is gradually increasing its engagement in
what we view as the crucial task of training the Afghan
national security forces. My country has provided three
operational military liaison teams to train the Afghan
National Army and two international police mentoring
teams to the Afghan National Police. Additionally,
Poland has been present in the European Union Police
Mission in Afghanistan since its launch in 2007.
Apart from its military engagement, Poland has
been reshaping its involvement in accordance with the
concept of a comprehensive approach aimed at
effective civil-military cooperation. That has resulted
in complementing our military presence with civil
elements. Since the summer of 2008, a Polish team of
30 civilian personnel has been working in the United
States-led provincial reconstruction team in Ghazni.
Additionally, Poland has provided development
aid to Afghanistan since 2002. In 2009, Polish
contributed around $12.5 million to the reconstruction
goal in that country, which is five times higher than the
amount assigned in 2008. The inclusion of Poland in
the work of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board since July 2009 is perceived by my Government
not only as recognition of our efforts in the field of
development cooperation with Afghanistan, but also
and primarily as reinforcing our commitment to further

09-59876

supporting the process of the stabilization and
reconstruction of Afghanistan.
The problems that we are faced with in
Afghanistan are of major concern to all United Nations
Member States. That common interest gives us grounds
for optimism that the coordinated efforts of the whole
international community will lead us to further progress
in the reconstruction and stabilization of Afghanistan.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
expressing our satisfaction with the draft resolution
(A/64/L.8) that the General Assembly intends to adopt
this morning. We would like to thank Germany for
facilitating a consensus on it. We are happy to be
co-sponsoring it. It is a balanced document that reflects
the achievements and challenges in Afghanistan.
I would like to share Turkey’s position on the
situation in Afghanistan. That country is passing
through a critical period. Turkey is hopeful for its
future. The situation may be difficult, but we have to
continue working to assist our Afghan brothers and
sisters. The deliberate terrorist attacks on the United
Nations mission during the recent electoral process
should not deter us. It should only strengthen our
determination to assist the Afghan people in establishing
lasting peace and stability. Turkey condemns the
28 October terrorist attack against the United Nations
in the strongest terms. We extend our condolences to
the United Nations family and the families of the
victims. We wish the wounded a quick recovery. We
salute the courage of the United Nations and Afghan
staff. We also share the grief of the Afghan people.
The continued strong presence of the United
Nations is of utmost importance to success in
Afghanistan. At this juncture, we must continue to
support the Secretary-General by every means; first
and foremost, we must address staff security.
Turkey trusts that the Afghan people will sooner
or later achieve a peaceful and prosperous future. In
that vein, the elections were an important milestone in
the efforts to fight terrorism and secure stability in
Afghanistan. The elections were crucial. Everybody
knew that they would not be easy. The most important
thing is that for the second time elections were held in
that big country. Each election experience undoubtedly
constitutes a further step towards strengthening
democracy. Thanks to the courage and determination of
the Afghan people, who faced difficult conditions,
elections were held. Turkey congratulates President

13

A/64/PV.40

Karzai on his re-election and hopes that the coming
period will be better for the Afghan people.
Now that the elections are over, the new
Administration should embrace the entire nation.
Turkey hopes that the Administration will reach out to
all ethnic groups in the country through inclusive
policies and that all who competed against President
Karzai in the election will offer their support to the
new Administration. Following the election process, it
is of great importance that Afghanistan refocus on
national unity and reconstruction efforts as soon as
possible.
Let me also briefly touch upon Turkish-Afghan
relations. Our relations with Afghanistan are unique;
they are based on deep historical and cultural bonds.
Turkey is continuing its most comprehensive
humanitarian operation. We are participating in the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
took over the ISAF Kabul Command as of 1 November
for a period of one year. On that occasion we nearly
doubled our troop contribution. We also have a
civilian-led provincial reconstruction team in Wardak.
Turkey continues to implement an intensive
assistance programme for the peace and prosperity of
the Afghan people and intends to further expand its
humanitarian operations. Building the capacity of
Afghanistan and strengthening national ownership in
the civilian sector is a priority. Turkey will also
continue its utmost efforts to provide support to the
United Nations in Afghanistan. We will be the lead
country in the Security Council on Afghanistan in
2010. We intend to build on the positive momentum
created by Japan with the assistance of the United
Nations and to contribute to stability in Afghanistan
through the Security Council as well.
Turkey believes there is a long-term need for a
comprehensive approach that includes security,
governance, the rule of law, human rights and social
and economic development. All of those issues are
interlinked, and the following four areas therefore
deserve special attention: comprehensive economic
development with a visible impact on the people’s
living conditions; strong Afghan military and police
forces to take the lead in and ownership of national
security; inclusive national reconciliation in order to
strengthen peace and stability in the country; and
modern education and justice systems to effectively
combat extremism of all sorts.

14

Regional cooperation is also a must for
accomplishing our goals in Afghanistan. The
international community should encourage and help
regional cooperation. For our part, in April we hosted
the third Turkey-Afghanistan-Pakistan Trilateral Summit
in Turkey. For the first time, security and intelligence
officials met, along with the Presidents of the three
countries. We hosted the Friends of Democratic
Pakistan Senior Officials meeting and the Foreign
Ministerial Meeting on 24 and 25 August in Istanbul,
followed by the Afghanistan-Pakistan Special Envoys
meeting. We support a coordinated approach at the
regional level and enhanced cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbours. To that end, we will
continue our regional efforts in order to contribute to
stability in the region.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Turkey is confident that the country’s stability as
well as its social and political harmony will grow
stronger in the coming period. Turkey will always
stand by the friendly and brotherly Afghan people and
fully trusts that they will surmount the difficulties
confronting them in unity and solidarity. We must also
strengthen the hopes and expectations of the Afghan
people. Unless the international community wins the
hearts and minds of the Afghan people, peace and
stability will remain a distant objective.
Failure is not an option in Afghanistan. We must
succeed; we are confident that we will.
Ms. AlRashoud (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, my delegation wishes to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his sincere and continued
efforts to bring about success in Afghanistan. My
delegation highly appreciates the pivotal role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), as well as that of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan in leading and
coordinating civilian efforts there.
The State of Kuwait denounces all acts of
violence and suicide attacks in Afghanistan, and it
firmly condemns the armed terrorist attack that took
place at the end of last month against a United Nations
guest, taking the lives of five United Nations
employees, whose duties included assisting election
teams and other field work that contributed to the
maintenance of peace and security. It also denounces
the increased targeting of United Nations missions,

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

since this has led to a growing number of victims
among Afghan civilians, members of international
assistance agencies and all those who work to deliver
humanitarian assistance in the field.
The State of Kuwait welcomes the commitment
of the Secretary-General to continue United Nations
efforts in support of Afghanistan, based on the moral
duty to carry out desperately needed humanitarian work,
while also reaffirming the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan.
The State of Kuwait welcomes the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1868 (2009) on 23 March,
the 15 July statement of the President of the Security
Council on the situation in Afghanistan (S/PRST/2009/
21), and all relevant international resolutions.
The State of Kuwait also conveys its
congratulations to President Hâmid Karzai on his
election for another term, and wishes him success in
leading the country and in achieving stability, security
and progress for Afghanistan, while affirming its
sovereignty.
We also thank the representative of Germany for
introducing draft resolution A/64/L.8 on the situation
in Afghanistan, of which my country is sponsor. We
stress the importance of the fundamental and impartial
role performed by the United Nations in promoting
peace and stability in Afghanistan and in leading the
efforts of the international community.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
peace and security (A/64/364), there have been
accomplishments and progress in some areas, such as
demining, limiting opium cultivation and building and
fostering the capacity of the national Afghan army and
police forces. But, despite all of that, the rate of change
in the living conditions of the Afghan people is still
very slow and is a source of increasing despair for
them. Furthermore, the strong ties between the drug
trade and the terrorist activities of extremist groups
pose a serious threat to security, the rule of law and the
development of the country.
Therefore, the State of Kuwait appeals to all
Member States, the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations to continue providing all possible
assistance for Afghanistan in all humanitarian fields, in
close cooperation and coordination with the

09-59876

Government of Afghanistan and consistent with its
national development strategies.
In this context, we refer to the contributions of
the State of Kuwait to the reconstruction of
infrastructure in Afghanistan. The Kuwait Fund for
Arab Economic Development provided a loan in the
amount of $30 million, in fulfilment of its pledge
during the donors’ conference held in the Japanese
capital, Tokyo. This included $15 million for the
rebuilding and rehabilitation of the Kandahar-Spin
Boldak road; the remaining $15 million went to the
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund. Moreover, the
Kuwait Red Crescent Society has over the past few
years provided assistances in the amount of more than
$6.5 million. Also various Kuwaiti civil society and
charitable organizations continue to provide assistance
to Afghanistan.
In conclusion, it is our hope that the United
Nations will continue in its endeavours to provide
assistance to the Afghan Government, in order to
consolidate peace and stability in Afghanistan, which
will have a positive effect in the region and will enable
the country to resume its natural role in the
international community.
Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada is pleased to be among the sponsors of draft
resolution A/64/L.8, on the situation in Afghanistan.
Once again this year, we warmly welcome the fact that
the draft resolution will be adopted by consensus, thus
reaffirming the collective commitment of all United
Nations Member States to Afghanistan. The draft
resolution expresses our hope and resolve that
Afghanistan, with the support of the international
community, will continue to make progress in
achieving a better life for its people.
We are conscious of the challenges that
Afghanistan and the international community face in
achieving that progress. In this context, Canada offers
its sincere condolences to the families and friends of
the victims of the latest attack on the United Nations in
Kabul. We also offer our condolences to the families
and friends of all Afghans as well as to those of the
civilians and soldiers from many of the countries
represented here today who have lost their lives in the
fighting in Afghanistan. We condemn the insurgents’
disregard for human life and for all the toil and
sacrifice invested by so many to build a better future
for Afghanistan. Canadians are saddened by the losses

15

A/64/PV.40

of all those who mourn. Canada too has made
sacrifices. Yet we will not falter in our commitment to
help Afghans achieve peace and stability.
Despite the problems in Afghanistan, it is
important to remember that progress has been made in
certain respects. That can be seen in the advances in
education and health care since the fall of the Taliban
in 2001. Furthermore, as noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s September report (A/64/364), Afghanistan
has seen some real progress this year in the following
areas. With the support of the International Security
Assistance Force and the international community, the
Afghan security forces are increasingly taking charge
of their own security and protecting the Afghan people.
Strong ministers in key positions have made important
progress on issues such as policing, agriculture and
rural development. Afghanistan has also seen a
significant increase this year in its own revenue
collection. At the same time, opium production has
decreased in Afghanistan, and the economy is being
boosted by increased efforts to buy locally.
(spoke in English)
Continued progress will require a renewed
relationship of trust among President Karzai, the Afghan
Government and Afghan citizens. While the elections
in Afghanistan were not without challenges, Canada
acknowledges the decision of the Independent Election
Commission not to hold a second round and commends
the Afghan people who made their voices heard.
Now, Canada, along with its international
partners, looks to President Karzai and the new
Government to turn their immediate attention to
building the legitimacy of the Government at all levels.
To do that, the needs of the Afghan people must be
central to the setting of realistic objectives by the
Afghan Government. Delivery on those objectives will
require the appointment of effective and credible
ministers and governors. We look to the Government of
Afghanistan to undertake serious, credible and visible
efforts to improve good governance, combat corruption
and promote and protect human rights.
Our expectations of the Afghan Government are
high, but we set these expectations while continuing
our work to rebuild Afghanistan in a concerted effort
with the Government of Afghanistan, the Afghan
people and the international community.

16

Canada has successfully transformed its efforts in
Afghanistan into a fully integrated civilian and military
mission. We are supporting the delivery of measurable
results in Kandahar, where our efforts are concentrated,
but also throughout the country, as we contribute
50 per cent of our assistance to national programmes.
Canada continues to make progress on our three
signature projects: schools are being built, rehabilitation
of the Dahla Dam is advancing and children are being
vaccinated against polio in Kandahar and across the
country.
In addition, our stabilization operation, which
aims to increase security in Kandahar city and its
populated approaches, has brought increased stability
in the pilot project village of Deh-e-Bagh by clearing
insurgent elements, initiating basic infrastructure projects
and working with Afghan security forces to build longterm security in the village and its surrounding areas.
The tangible results of our efforts are
encouraging. However, many important challenges still
lie ahead. There is increased violence by an insurgency
attempting to derail reconstruction efforts, progress is
slow in many areas such as governance and rule of law
and access by humanitarian workers to vulnerable
populations has become increasingly constrained.
In the face of these challenges, we stand behind
the United Nations as the voice of the international
community in Afghanistan. We are heartened to see
that the violence has not deterred the United Nations
from its vital role in Afghanistan and we would like to
pay special tribute to Special Representative Kai Eide
and his team for their tireless efforts.
We call upon the international community to
unite behind the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and give it the necessary tools
to continue its work in Afghanistan, including UNAMA’s
important coordination and outreach role in the more
difficult areas of the country.
In conclusion, while we need to continue to be
realistic about the challenges we face in Afghanistan,
we must maintain our collective resolve and continue
to work with the Government of Afghanistan, the
United Nations and the rest of the international
community to ensure a brighter and safer future for the
people of Afghanistan.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the progress made in Afghanistan since this

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

time last year, and in particular congratulates the
people and the Government of Afghanistan on holding
and participating in the first elections run wholly by
Afghan authorities. While New Zealand was very
concerned by the level of fraud of those elections, we
welcome the respect shown by the parties for the
electoral complaints process.
New Zealand believes that attention must now be
focused on securing a safe and secure future for
Afghanistan. To this end, we call on President Karzai
to move swiftly to form a new, inclusive, credible and
effective Government. We encourage him, with the
support of the international community, including New
Zealand, to build a renewed relationship with the people
of Afghanistan by addressing deep-seated problems
facing the country in security, governance, corruption,
human rights, development, justice and narcotics. New
Zealand also urges the new Government to ensure that
the legislation that was enacted immediately before the
election complies with its international human rights
obligations, particularly those protecting women and
children.
New Zealand strongly condemns the recent attack
on United Nations staff in Kabul, and we express our
sympathy to the victims and their families. New
Zealand agrees with the Secretary-General on the
importance of protecting United Nations personnel,
who often work in trying and dangerous environments
in their efforts to build a secure future for Afghanistan.
And while we accept the need to relocate many
personnel, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
commitment that the United Nations will not be
deterred from its important role in Afghanistan.
The security situation, particularly in the South
and East, continues seriously to hamper development
by limiting the reach of the Afghan Government and
humanitarian agencies and hindering their ability to
improve the lives of the Afghan people. Afghan
military and police capability must be strengthened to
deal with the deteriorating security situation, and in
this regard we welcome International Security
Assistance Force commander General McChrystal’s
renewed focus on training and mentoring. Indeed,
empowering Afghan forces to lead security efforts in
Afghanistan is a key commitment for the international
community, and New Zealand is doing its part to meet
that commitment.

09-59876

Although New Zealand faces other security
challenges closer to home, the New Zealand Defence
Force has led the provincial reconstruction team in
Bamyan province for more than six years. The team is
building the capacity of the Afghan National Police to
take responsibility for security in the province. In
addition, we recently deployed our special forces to
Kabul to work alongside the Afghan Crisis Response
Unit. That redeployment and our work on the Bamyan
provincial reconstruction team demonstrate New
Zealand’s long-standing desire to promote the safety
and security of the Afghan people.
In parallel, New Zealand is expanding its civilian
assistance to Afghanistan, with a particular focus on
agriculture in Bamyan. We are also continuing our
support for rural livelihood programmes, education and
health services and the capacity-building of provincial
governmental, non-governmental and civil society
organizations.
While we welcome the progress made in recent
years, we believe that a continued, sustained
commitment by the international community will remain
necessary to help Afghanistan build a positive future.
And New Zealand is committed to playing its part in
securing that outcome for the people of Afghanistan.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to extend our gratitude to the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative, Mr. Kai Eide, and all their
colleagues in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan for their firm commitment and valuable
dedication to strengthening peace and stability in
Afghanistan.
The central role of the United Nations in
coordinating international efforts in Afghanistan is of
paramount importance and enjoys our full support. I
would like here to salute the heroism and sacrifices of
United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and extend
my condolences to the United Nations family over the
loss of the lives of United Nations personnel in the
recent terrorist attack on the guest house on 28 October.
The Islamic Republic of Iran welcomes the recent
presidential election held in Afghanistan and
congratulates the people of Afghanistan on their active
participation in that historic election and His
Excellency Mr. Karzai upon his re-election.
We are pleased to see the progress achieved by
our brotherly neighbour Afghanistan in all areas, in

17

A/64/PV.40

particular in institution-building. As reiterated in the
recent report of the Secretary-General (A/64/364), the
Afghan State must be founded on solid institutions
staffed with competent officials selected and promoted
on the basis of merit. Much effort has gone into
creating these institutions over the past eight years, yet
some of that effort has been insufficient, despite the
achievements made to date. But the deteriorating
security situation has also significantly hampered
attempts to build the governmental institutions and
infrastructure necessary to the smooth running of the
Government.
As in the past, we extend our full support and
assistance to the people and Government of Afghanistan
in their efforts to achieve security, stability and
comprehensive and sustainable development. We call
for the expeditious withdrawal of foreign forces from
Afghanistan and the handing over of the control and
management of Afghani affairs to the people and
Government of Afghanistan.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains the
biggest challenge. The latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan and realities on
the ground clearly indicates that there have been some
accomplishments in strengthening security and stability
in the country, but that increased terrorist attacks and
violence in some parts of Afghanistan, coupled with
the pervasive drug trade and the military operations by
foreign forces, are yet other concerns preoccupying the
people of Afghanistan and international public opinion.
Along with security concerns, the continuing
poppy cultivation, production of narcotics, drug
trafficking and the humanitarian crisis, among other
issues, remain to be effectively tackled and continue to
endanger Afghanistan’s stability and development, as
well as that of the region and beyond.
The recent rise of insecurity in Afghanistan
indicates clearly that the attempts made in the name of
national reconciliation by some of the Powers present
in Afghanistan to appease some extremist and terrorist
groups have been shown to be counterproductive and
have only emboldened such groups. We are of the view
that peace and stability are achievable only by making
the people of Afghanistan see the results of the help and
support of the international community in their daily life
through the reconstruction of infrastructure, capacitybuilding, training, education and the development of
important sectors such as agriculture, among others.

18

Furthermore, we believe that the hearts and minds
of the Afghan people, who have undergone many
hardships and much suffering in recent decades, cannot
be won by relying on military operations. Instead of
dispatching more troops to the country, we should
strengthen the Afghan National Army and National
Police expeditiously to enable them to take charge of
security in Afghanistan.
Despite a small drop in narcotic drug cultivation
and production in some provinces, Afghanistan
remains, according to the recent assessment report of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
world’s biggest producer of narcotic drugs. The
continuing cultivation, production and trafficking of
narcotics is adversely affecting security there.
Combating this menace unquestionably demands a
long-term, multifaceted strategy. The magnitude of the
threat requires more resolute and coordinated efforts by
Afghanistan and the international community. For its
part, the Islamic Republic of Iran has spared no effort
in combating this threat, and we have made many
sacrifices in this regard. While our determination to
continue this fight is unwavering, we expect the
international community to get more seriously involved
in the quest to save people across the globe from the
destructive effects of this menace.
Despite all these concerns and uncertainties,
however, one thing is clear — the Government and
people of Afghanistan continue to demonstrate their
steadfast resolve not to bow to the difficulties they are
facing, but to surmount them and work for a stable,
prosperous and democratic Afghanistan. In this regard,
they need the support of every one of us in the
international community. The forthcoming conference
on Afghanistan will provide us with another
opportunity to reassure the Afghans that as they
continue on their journey towards stability, security
and development, the international community stands
with them, offering its help and support.
Iran, along with other neighbouring countries and
the world at large, has a vital interest in a secure, stable
and prosperous Afghanistan at peace with itself and
with its neighbours. In recent years, we have
participated in projects aimed at rebuilding and
reconstructing the country, focusing mainly on
infrastructure and capacity-building. So far, the Islamic
Republic of Iran’s official assistance to Afghanistan
amounts to about $500 million for those projects. In
the area of regional cooperation, we have also held

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

trilateral meetings at various levels with Afghanistan
and Pakistan to foster cooperation in the economic and
development sectors. Within that context, after several
rounds of expert consultations, the heads of State of
Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran
met in Tehran in May.
We have also extended our hospitality to more
than 3 million Afghan nationals over the past three
decades. At present, close to 1 million Afghan refugees
are registered in Iran, while a similar number of
unregistered Afghans are also living in our country. For
all these years, Afghan nationals have continued to
enjoy Iran’s educational and welfare facilities and to
benefit from the same subsidies that our own people
receive.
Let me conclude by expressing our hope for a
better and more prosperous future for Afghanistan and
a commitment to help its people build a better world
and a better future.
Mr. Cornado (Italy): Italy welcomes and
supports today’s draft resolution (A/64/L.8) on the
situation in Afghanistan and looks forward to its
adoption by consensus. That will confirm the strong
ongoing commitment of all United Nations Member
States to assisting Afghanistan on its path to peace,
stability, democracy and reconstruction. And we thank
Germany for its leadership in the negotiations that
enabled the achievement of this important result.
Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union and joins previous speakers in
welcoming the conclusion of the first elections run
entirely by the Afghan authorities, with the support of
the international community. We congratulate the
people of Afghanistan and President Hamid Karzai on
his election, and applaud the other presidential
candidates for a campaign that addressed key issues
and challenges for Afghanistan and its people. We also
welcome the efforts of the Afghan electoral institutions
to address irregularities in accordance with Afghan
election laws and the Afghan Constitution. In this
process, important lessons have been learned and need
to be remembered, in view of the forthcoming elections
in 2010.
As the Group of Eight foreign ministers stated on
3 November, the conclusion of this process gives
Afghanistan a new opportunity for peaceful, effective
and productive cooperation among all the political and

09-59876

social components of its society. It also paves the way
for a new season of collaboration between the Afghan
authorities and the international community, under
United Nations leadership. Strengthening regional
cooperation, particularly among countries crucial to the
stability of the region, will also play a key role in
promoting security and development in Afghanistan.
For the sake of national unity, we encourage
President Karzai to rapidly form an effective, qualified
and credible Government. The biggest challenges
facing the new executive are improving State and local
governance, fighting corruption, promoting the rule of
law, justice and human rights, as well as increasing
accountability and achieving progress on reintegration,
security and stability.
As one of the largest troop-contributing countries,
Italy confirms its resolute support for the people and
leadership of Afghanistan in their fight against
terrorism and the cultivation and production of narcotic
drugs, in promoting good governance, and in tackling
acute socio-economic problems. We remain unwaveringly
committed to strengthening the ownership and
responsibility of the Government of Afghanistan, to the
ultimate benefit of the Afghan people. Italy looks
forward to participating in the inauguration of
President Karzai and, upon the installation of his
Government, to stepping up its dialogue with the
Afghan authorities.
Mr. Das (India): I would like to begin by
expressing India’s appreciation for the convening of
this discussion on a subject of great importance for us,
our region and the world. I commend the effort by the
delegation of Germany in coordinating intergovernmental
negotiations that have led us to this annual General
Assembly resolution on the situation in Afghanistan.
As we have been doing for the last several years, we
are happy to be a sponsor of this resolution, which is
traditionally adopted by consensus.
The successful conclusion of the first Afghan-led
presidential and provincial council elections is a major
milestone in Afghanistan’s evolution as a democracy.
We congratulate President Hamid Karzai on his
re-election and express our appreciation to all
democratic forces in Afghanistan. I would be remiss if
I did not place on record our appreciation for the
critical supportive role played by the United Nations
and the international community towards organizing
those elections. India appreciates the resolve and

19

A/64/PV.40

determination of the Afghan people who participated in
this historic election process, notwithstanding threats
and intimidation by the Taliban.
Once a new Government assumes office, a fresh
opportunity will be provided for a renewed
commitment by the international community to rebuild
Afghanistan. While determining the contours of a new
Afghanistan compact, we need to assimilate and
integrate the experiences drawn from the past
compacts, such as the ones agreed to in London in
January 2006 and in Paris in June 2008. Those
agreements placed the responsibility for institutionbuilding and governance mainly on the shoulders of the
Afghan people and Government, without adequately
funding that effort and eliminating the growing threat
from terrorist groups destabilizing the country. This
time we need to be mindful of those aspects.
In the arduous journey towards lasting peace and
security in Afghanistan, significant challenges lie
ahead. First and foremost is the imperative need for
security. The challenge from a resurgent Taliban and
Al-Qaida is real, and it is one that threatens us all.
Asymmetric warfare and complex terrorist attacks are
being mounted in Afghanistan and the wellsprings that
sustain such terror show no signs of being drained.
Civilians, humanitarian personnel, international workers,
including United Nations staff and diplomatic
personnel, as well as our own mission in Kabul, have
been targeted in terrorist attacks.
There is increasing recognition that the surge in
terrorist actions in Afghanistan is linked to the support
and sanctuaries available in the contiguous areas. That
explains the particularly high level of violence in the
border areas of Afghanistan. Security and stabilization
of Afghanistan will remain a distant goal unless we are
able to root out the elements of Al-Qaida, the Taliban
and other terrorist and extremist groups operating
within and outside Afghanistan’s borders.
Therefore, in addition to the strengthening of the
International Security Assistance Force, it is crucial
that the Afghan national security forces be enlarged
and developed in a professional manner and at a much
faster pace, while being provided appropriate resources,
combat equipment and training. We welcome the
expansion of their capacities, as this is the only viable
guarantee for a successful conclusion to the military
engagement in Afghanistan. We note with appreciation

20

the efforts being made by third countries to strengthen
the capacities of the Afghan national security forces.
Indeed, there are no quick-fix solutions. In the
battle for winning the hearts and minds of ordinary
Afghans, we need to guard against the risk of
pessimism and defeatism pervading our thought
processes. Perseverance and tenacity are critical to
handle the challenge posed by Al-Qaida, the Taliban
and other terrorist and extremist groups squarely and
effectively.
This brings us to reconciliation. It requires
strategic clarity, unity of purpose and due recognition
of the nature of those with whom we seek to reconcile.
Without consensus among relevant parties over key
issues, such as with whom to reconcile and how, we
may well be dividing ourselves, not those we seek to
peel away from terrorist groups. It is for this reason
that we must go beyond unworkable divisions between
so-called good and bad Taliban. Terrorism cannot be
compartmentalized. History suggests that facile
attempts to strike Faustian bargains with terrorists
often result in such forces turning on the very Powers
that sustained them in the past. Any effort which
weakens the authority of the central Government and
its institutions would be counterproductive. We need to
be extremely cautious while moving forward on this
sensitive issue.
We support the Afghan Government’s determination
to integrate those willing to abjure violence and live
and work within the parameters of the Afghan
Constitution, which provides the framework for a
pluralistic and democratic society. This should, of
course, go hand-in-hand with actions to shut down the
support and sanctuaries provided to terrorist groups
across the border.
A sustainable strategy for stabilization of
Afghanistan must be predicated upon short-, mediumand long-term strategies to address the development
challenge. While the Afghan Government should spell
out its priorities, the international community should
come forward to provide the resources for fulfilling
them. The efforts of the international community in
Afghanistan can only be sustained in the long term if
we invest in developing Afghan human resources. For
this, a multipronged approach is required. At one level,
we must invest in rebuilding the economic and social
infrastructure of the nation, while generating jobs. At
another, we must progressively transfer skills and

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

authority to our Afghan friends, to enable them to take
full ownership of the reconstruction of their country.
In India’s efforts towards stabilization of
Afghanistan, the focus has been on development.
Stabilizing Afghanistan is not only integrally connected
with our own security, it is also connected to the
civilizational legacy of our friendship. Our commitment
to Afghanistan has now cost $1.2 billion. It includes
the widest range of activities, from a cold storage plant
in Kandahar to the 218-kilometre-long Zaranj-Delaram
highway to a power transmission line to Kabul, which
has provided a round-the-clock electricity supply for
the first time since 1992. We are constructing the
Afghanistan Parliament building — the edifice of
democracy — while simultaneously targeting communitybased local projects that provide immediate peace
dividends, such as schools and hospitals. In all of this,
capacity-building is a core element. It is in support of
this core task that India has expanded, by 35 per cent,
the current allocation of 1,000 seats in our institutions
for capacity-building and scholarship programmes.
Turning to the regional aspect, the stabilization of
Afghanistan must be a central part of regional
processes, if the country is to regain its role as the
crossroads of South, West and Central Asia. This
includes regional economic processes, such as the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and
the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan. Those processes benefit the entire region,
while hindering them affects Afghanistan and the
region as well. We must expand, rather than hinder
trade, transit and transport ties, including overland
transit and trade. That is the best way of bringing the
regional dimension into play in a positive manner.
Given the turbulence of the past eight years and
the recent dramatic decline in security, there is need for
an intensified focus on security, governance and
development on the part of the Afghan Government,
and here the international community should do what it
can to assist. Failure to stabilize Afghanistan will entail
a heavy cost for both the Afghan people and the world
at large.
When we speak of recommitting ourselves to
helping Afghanistan defeat the forces that seek to
destroy all that has been achieved since 2001, it is
important to recognize that all of us have an abiding
interest in the success of this endeavour. We believe
Afghanistan needs a long-term commitment from us,

09-59876

even while we remain mindful of the challenges. The
Afghan people have displayed resilience and a survival
instinct, even against the greatest odds. We must do our
utmost to support them.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to join other Member States in
sponsoring the draft resolution on the situation in
Afghanistan contained in document A/64/L.8.
The draft resolution recognizes the progress that
the Afghan people have made in rebuilding their
country, but it acknowledges that far more work has yet
to be done. We recognize the Afghan Government and
security forces for their continuing efforts to address
challenges in security, governance, human rights and
the rule of law.
We also thank the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative for Afghanistan, Kai Eide, the staff of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and other United Nations personnel and the forces
participating in the International Security Assistance
Force and Operation Enduring Freedom for their
shared commitment to the people of Afghanistan.
The draft resolution highlights the challenges
posed by those who seek to disrupt Afghan efforts to
build a prosperous and stable country. Violent attacks
by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremists and
criminal groups undermine efforts to bring stability,
security and a representative Government to Afghanistan
and the draft resolution rightly denounces them.
The brutal attack on 28 October on the guest
house in Kabul demonstrated tragically once more the
need to stand firm against violent efforts to undermine
the peace and stability that the Afghan people are
working so hard to establish. Afghanistan has now
reached the conclusion to its presidential election
process. We congratulate President Karzai on his
victory and we congratulate all the candidates who
stood in Afghanistan’s second presidential election, in
particular, Mr. Abdullah.
This first-ever Afghan-led election was held
under challenging circumstances, but the result was in
line with Afghanistan’s laws and its Constitution. As
we move beyond the election, the credibility and
success of the new President and his Government will
rest on its ability to deliver better security, governance,
justice and economic progress to the Afghan people.
We stand ready to support the new Government in that

21

A/64/PV.40

regard and we call on all Member States to redouble
their efforts to work with the new Afghan Government
to promote stability and prosperity for the Afghan
people, along with peace and security for the region.
Mr. Korček (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to express my full support and associate Slovakia with
the statement delivered by the representative of
Sweden on behalf of the European Union. Allow me to
underline several important issues in my national
capacity.
We welcome the draft resolution on Afghanistan
contained in document A/64/L.8, and we appreciate the
efforts of Germany to facilitate a message of support
from the international community to the Afghan
people, who hope for a safe, stable, prosperous and
democratic country. We are proud to be sponsors of the
draft resolution.
Slovakia advocates massive engagement on the
part of the international community in Afghanistan.
The main objective of our common endeavour should
be to help the new Afghan Government to become
ready for taking full responsibility for the country, as
far as security, stability, rule of law and development
are concerned.
International forces are playing a crucial role in
helping to bring about a stable and secure Afghanistan.
I would like to pay tribute to all of the women and men
of all nationalities, members of United Nations staff
and many Afghans, who have lost their lives fighting
for a better, fear-free and prosperous future for
Afghanistan.
I would like to take this opportunity to again
convey the condolences of my Government to the
families of the most recent victims of violent
extremism. We strongly condemn all subversive acts by
the Taliban and Al-Qaida, especially those aimed at
civilians and international civil personnel.
Slovakia is fully aware of its share of the
responsibility for the situation in Afghanistan. That is
why we have significantly increased our engagement in
the military and civilian fields. Despite the economic
crisis, we are fulfilling our commitments and we
remain fully involved in the International Security
Assistance Force operation.
Only five months ago, the Government of the
Slovak Republic and the National Council of the
Slovak Republic extended a mandate to 262 Slovak

22

military personnel in the country and recently we
announced at the defence ministers meeting in
Bratislava that my country is considering increasing
the number of our troops, as well as doing more in the
construction field.
Slovakia is also involved in the training of the
Afghan National Army and in preparing the full
engagement of the Afghan National Police force by
providing our own police personnel to the European
Police Office mission.
Security is the main precondition for further
development of the country. However, we cannot wait
until the country is secure to address the humanitarian
situation.
Durable peace and stability in Afghanistan can be
achieved only when adequate measures to promote the
socio-economic construction of the country have been
adopted. It is crucial to improve the effectiveness of
our joint efforts so that the greatest number of Afghans
can enjoy a positive impact on their lives as soon as
possible.
Since 2003, Afghanistan has been a high priority
country for Slovak development assistance. In 2009,
Afghanistan was upgraded to a programme country
under the new Slovak 2009-2013 medium-term
strategy for development cooperation. Our goal is to
allocate nearly €1 million to Afghanistan assistance in
the upcoming period.
Slovakia directs its development assistance in
Afghanistan in line with its sectoral priorities —
developing democratic institutions, civil society and
peace; social development; support for health care and
education; and developing the economic and market
environment and infrastructure. In 2009, six bilateral
development projects prepared by Slovak organizations
totalled €850,000.
Afghanistan is one of the four countries in the
world with the lowest success rates in the fight against
polio. This year, the Government of Slovakia has
funded the distribution of polio vaccine to 250,000
children in Afghanistan, in cooperation with UNICEF.
In September, we delivered humanitarian assistance in
the form of tents and blankets for people in the
province of Uruzgan who had been affected by natural
disasters.
Afghanistan must remain at the top of our agenda
over the long term. We are committed to our common

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

objective to help to improve the everyday lives of
people in the country. Let me express my sincere hope
that the international community, led by the United
Nations, will step up its multilateral efforts to provide
assistance to the Afghan Government with a view to
consolidating peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): My
delegation looks forward to the adoption by the
General Assembly of draft resolution A/64/L.8, on the
situation in Afghanistan. This draft resolution is the
result of a constructive and active negotiation among
Member States, which, I believe, represents the
political will of all Member States and which supports
the Afghan people in their political and national
reconstruction process. In this vein, the Republic of
Korea joined in sponsoring this draft resolution in
order to add its own political will to the international
collaboration in support of the Afghan people. My
delegation also expresses its appreciation to the
German delegation for drafting and facilitating this
draft resolution.
For the last couple of months, we have witnessed
an intense political evolution in Afghanistan. We were
at times encouraged by progress and at times
disappointed by setbacks. Most of all, we were deeply
saddened and disheartened by the terrorist attack on
28 October. However, at the same time, as SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon said, we were more than
resolved not to be deterred, and we remain determined
to continue the work of the United Nations in
Afghanistan.
My delegation admires the courage and
determination of the Afghan people in participating in
the electoral process and exercising their constitutional
rights in one of the most difficult and threatening of
environments. The Electoral Complaints Commission
and the Afghan Independent Election Commission (IEC)
deserve our respect in upholding the constitutional
process. The experience and the lessons learned during
the elections will lay a valuable and solid foundation
for the future process of democratization and national
restoration of Afghanistan. In this regard, my
Government welcomes the decision of the IEC to
declare Mr. Hâmid Karzai the newly elected President
of Afghanistan and congratulates President Karzai on
his election.
We believe that the United Nations and the
international community are ready to support and

09-59876

cooperate with the new Afghan Government. We also
believe that international engagement is crucial to
rebuilding Afghanistan’s stability and national capacity.
To earn trust and confidence and establish a credible
partnership with the international community, President
Karzai should reach out to Afghan political leaders and
ethnic groups to expedite the national reconciliation
process and ensure good governance, including bold and
determined measures to eradicate corruptive practices.
The Korean Government has been contributing to
international efforts to support the national reconstruction
process of the Afghan people, and we are ready to
continue to work with President Karzai and his new
Government. As was announced last month, the Korean
Government will launch a provincial reconstruction
team in Afghanistan in addition to the existing Korean
medical support and vocational training team in
Bagram, Afghanistan. This decision was made at the
request of the Afghan Government and in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council. Through this reconstruction
team and other channels, the Korean Government will
continue its support and cooperation with the people
and the Government of Afghanistan.
Lastly, my delegation would like once again to
express our deepest condolences to the victims and
their families for their tragic losses in the vicious
terrorist attacks on 28 October. This cowardly attack
targeting unarmed civilians and workers of international
organizations should not be condoned under any
circumstances. My delegation strongly urges the Afghan
Government to take all necessary measures to secure
the safety and security of civilian workers in the
country. We also stand determined to support the
initiatives of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, including
the taking of necessary budgetary measures, to
strengthen security for all United Nations staff in
Afghanistan.
Mr. Gebreel (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I would first like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his detailed and comprehensive report
(A/64/364). We commend the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for its remarkable work in that
country. We wish to express our regret with regard to
the incident that led to the death of United Nations
staff on 28 October and present our condolences to our
colleagues and to family members.

23

A/64/PV.40

Since 2005, we have continued to receive reports
of the deterioration of the security situation in
Afghanistan. Today’s report again shows a rise in loss
of life and a deterioration in the security situation. That
is a source of concern for us, particularly when we see
deaths among civilians caused by attacks by armed
groups as well as by air attacks by the international
forces in Afghanistan. We are extremely concerned
about the number of civilian victims — especially
because of the actions of the international forces —
despite calls by international and local forces for
caution in the exercise of their missions. We urge all
measures to be taken to ensure the safety of civilians,
as well as full respect for international law and human
rights law.
Another source of concern is mentioned in
paragraph 5 of the Secretary-General’s report: “Efforts
undertaken over the past several years to increase the
number of national and international security forces
have failed to stem the insurgency”. This leads us to
recognize the reality that a solution does not depend on
the number of troops or their equipment, but on a
comprehensive policy based on national reconciliation
and development. In this context, we agree with the
Secretary-General’s statement in paragraph 8 of the
report concerning the need, noted by some political
leaders of the country, to establish a ceasefire with the
Taliban as a first step towards ensuring the stability of
Afghanistan.

evaluate these installations or say whether or not they
are run in accordance with international law and
international humanitarian law. We therefore call upon
the parties running these centres, be they the Afghan
authorities or international forces, to respect the rules
and norms of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and to ensure
that detainees receive fair trials and are allowed
contact with the outside world and specialized
international organizations, such as the International
Committee for Human Rights.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): When the
General Assembly met last year to discuss the situation
in Afghanistan, many if not all of us underlined the
significance of the August presidential elections for
Afghanistan and the need for the United Nations to
work with the Afghan authorities to ensure that they
were credible, inclusive and secure. The fact that those
elections went ahead in what were very challenging
circumstances is an achievement in itself. We welcome
the United Nations support for the elections. There
were problems but they were addressed, and it was
right that we saw the process through.
We must remember that these were the first
Afghan-led elections in over 30 years. There was a
genuine dialogue and debate about the future of the
country on a wide-ranging set of issues during the
elections. Candidates campaigned vigorously and
millions of Afghans turned out to vote, which would
never have happened under Taliban rule.

The ultimate goal of the international community
is to assist the Afghan people in building a democratic,
prosperous and stable State. The objective of the
international community is not the defeat of the Taliban
or others per se. The use of force alone will not restore
security and stability if it is not accompanied by a
dialogue leading to national reconciliation incorporating
all components of the Afghan people, and if we do not
fight corruption and drug trafficking. The international
community must therefore undertake programmes to
ensure that Afghanistan can assume its full
responsibilities as a sovereign country capable of
providing security and a dignified life for all Afghans
and conditions conducive to the withdrawal of
international troops, which is essential for national
reconciliation.

I wish to reiterate the United Kingdom’s
continued support to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). UNAMA does vital
work in incredibly difficult circumstances, particularly
following the terrible attack in Kabul on 28 October.
Over the past 10 days, the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative have shown impressive resolve
and determination to stay the course in Afghanistan.

According to the report of the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative has visited a number of
detention centres, including that at Bagram, which is
run by international forces. But the report does not

In the light of the attack on 28 October, we agree
that the United Nations must look to improve security.
We stand ready to engage on how best this can be
achieved. We all want to look carefully at existing

24

Though the elections were Afghan-led, the United
Nations played a crucial role in facilitating and
monitoring the process. From the early planning stages
right up to the process’s conclusion in recent days, the
United Nations has provided admirable political
leadership, resource coordination and technical expertise.

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

proposals that form part of the wider uplift package to
see whether they can meet UNAMA’s security needs or
whether they need to be adapted.
Despite the many challenges Afghanistan faces, it
is heartening to be able to note the continuing positive
trend in counter-narcotics. Following a 19 per cent
decrease in 2008, opium cultivation looks set to fall by
a further 22 per cent this year. In Helmand, close work
with the Afghan authorities has resulted in a decrease
in cultivation of one third, and the operations
conducted this year under trilateral initiative of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime provide
grounds for cautious optimism at the regional level as
well.
I should like to touch briefly on the issue of
civilian casualties. The United Kingdom position
remains as set out in previous discussions. We deeply
regret — deeply regret — any civilian casualty. Each
and every innocent life lost is a tragedy. As General
McChrystal has made clear, protecting the Afghan
population is at the core of our international mission,
in stark contrast to the Taliban and their fellow
insurgents who, as the Secretary-General’s recent
report (A/64/364) makes clear, continue to be
responsible for the vast majority of civilian deaths.
Afghanistan now needs to work to tackle the
significant challenges it faces. Following the clear and
authoritative announcement by the Independent
Election Commission on 2 November, my Prime
Minister spoke to President Karzai on 2 November to
congratulate him. My Prime Minister told Mr. Karzai
that we now look to him to take forward a programme
that represents the interests of all Afghans. President
Karzai, at his press conference on 3 November, made
clear that he is ready to make progress and take firm
action to tackle, among other things, corruption.
The top priority for the international community
shall now be to drive forward the process of
Afghanization by working with the new Afghan
Government to build up its security forces, make
progress on reconciliation, improve local governance,
deliver services for all Afghans, continue to expand the
economy, tackle corruption and build constructive
relations with its neighbours. We urge the international
community to seize this debate in the General
Assembly as an important opportunity to reaffirm our
shared commitment to Afghanistan’s young democracy
and to its stability and security.

09-59876

I emphasize our shared commitment. What we are
all doing together in Afghanistan is vital not only to the
people of Afghanistan, but also to the international
community as a whole. As my Prime Minister said in a
speech on Friday, we will succeed or fail together, and
we must succeed.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Indonesia is pleased to
co-sponsor draft resolution A/64/L.8 on the situation in
Afghanistan introduced by the representative of
Germany. The draft reflects the crucial aspect of the
support and cooperation of the international community.
Only through an effective and well-coordinated
discharging of commitments under the various
international, regional and bilateral agreements can we
ensure that the Government of Afghanistan is supported
fully in executing its national strategies.
In only a few years, Afghanistan has achieved
notable progress in various sectors. Both the national
authorities and civilians are to be commended for their
work in the extremely arduous circumstances. Yet now,
what Afghanistan has accomplished is being
continuously eroded by serious challenges to its
security and stability. Fear of sliding back into a
conflict situation is increasing as the activities of
militants escalate. The series of recent bomb attacks
reflects the urgent need to address those security
challenges. In that regard, we condemn the recent
wanton killings of United Nations staff members in
Kabul. The courageous United Nations staff and other
assistance partners provide help at great personal risk
and deserve the full support of the international
community.
We attach primary importance to increasing the
capacity of the Afghan security forces to address the
security challenges. We are mindful of the strong
wishes of the Afghan people and Government to
empower and strengthen their capacity in various
sectors, including ensuring the security and stability of
the country. National ownership is indeed critical.
Sustained consultation and coordination with the Afghan
authorities on the implementation of international
assistance is therefore of paramount importance.
Military measures indeed remain crucial in
responding to security challenges and the increasing
attacks of militants. The role of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) has been central in
assisting the Afghan Government to tackle such
challenges. We also acknowledge the complex

25

A/64/PV.40

situations faced by ISAF in the execution of its tasks.
However, the military is not the only instrument
necessary to achieve peace and stability. As the
militants continue to rely on asymmetric attacks, it is
becoming obvious that other steps will be needed in
addition to full-scale military responses. The situation
in Afghanistan must be dealt with through a strategy
that incorporates not only security sectors, but also the
promotion of governance and the rule of law, as well as
socio-economic development.

expansion of its presence to additional regions of the
country and the increase of its capabilities and
resources. Such an expansion will hopefully contribute
to bringing about a political surge towards an early
establishment of peace and stability in the country.

An Afghan-led reconciliation process will
continue to be needed in order to achieve sustained
peace. The elements among insurgents that renounce
violence, respect justice, equality, freedom and tolerance
and declare loyalty to Afghanistan’s constitution
should continue to be engaged politically in the
reconciliation process. Addressing the narco-economy
is also an urgent matter as it is closely linked to
sustaining the insurgency. The continuing effort should
be sustained and intensified. The progress achieved in
reducing opium cultivation needs to be consolidated.

Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia
welcomes this opportunity to endorse and to be a
sponsor of the General Assembly’s draft resolution on
Afghanistan (A/64/L.8) and to reaffirm our
commitment to international efforts to build a more
stable and more secure Afghan State.

Indeed, there will be high expectations of the new
Government of Afghanistan. The new Government will
have an opportunity not only to shape a new agenda for
cooperation, but also to improve governance and
services in the socio-economic field for its people. In
spite of the fact that the capacities of the authorities are
still limited and there is the danger of insurgent
violence, it is crucial that the new Government deliver
positive changes to the daily life of its people. A key
ingredient to a successful outcome, needless to say, is
national ownership. Each and every Afghan has to
embrace a new Afghanistan. The participation of all
Afghan people in the political, social and economic
processes is imperative.
Partnerships between Afghanistan and neighbouring
States in addressing security challenges and in finding
mutually acceptable solutions to humanitarian problems
will remain key to sustainable peace and development
in Afghanistan. In that regard, we welcome the
commitment of Afghanistan and its immediate
neighbours to contribute to regional security and
prosperity.
Finally, with regard to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, my delegation
believes that the Mission will remain pertinent in
assisting the country in tackling the various challenges
to its security and development. We welcome the

26

In closing, allow me to reiterate Indonesia’s wish
for Afghanistan to be a peaceful, democratic and
prosperous country. We also reaffirm our full support
for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of Afghanistan.

We would like first to take this opportunity to
record Australia’s deep sorrow over the deaths of the
United Nations workers so callously murdered by the
Taliban on 28 October in Kabul. I suspect that there are
very few of us here who do not personally know
someone who either has served or is serving in
Afghanistan. We support all efforts to meet the security
needs of United Nations staff in Afghanistan, while at
the same time enabling the United Nations to continue
to play its indispensable role throughout the country.
Our collective task remains both difficult and
urgent, as developments in Afghanistan over the last
year, including a worsening of the security situation in
many parts of the country, have shown. The coming
year or two will be critical to the success of efforts by
Afghans, and the international community supporting
them, to meet the pressing challenges facing
Afghanistan. Achieving that will require commitment
to a focused agenda for action that is capable of
delivering real improvements in the priority areas of
security, governance and economic development.
Today, Afghanistan stands at an important
juncture. The difficulties that accompanied the
presidential election are well known, although it is
important to note, as many speakers today have done,
that the outcome respected the constitution and the
Afghan-led electoral process. Looking forward, the
task before President Karzai is to form a Government
that can win the trust of the Afghan people by
strengthening Afghanistan’s security, fighting corruption
and delivering effective Government services. Through
our ongoing commitment in Afghanistan, Australia

09-59876

A/64/PV.40

stands ready to work with the new Afghan Government
and other international partners in support of those
objectives.
There has been a growing recognition that the
challenges facing the coalition in Afghanistan demand
a comprehensive approach that builds strong
connections between the military and civilian spheres
and views them as complementary parts of a single
endeavour. Winning support for our mission among the
Afghan people will depend as much on our success in
helping the Afghan authorities deliver better services
and clean government as on our achievements on the
battlefield. That is reflected in Australia’s approach to
Afghanistan, which stresses the importance of a
comprehensive capacity-building and development
assistance effort, in addition to a substantial military
and combat commitment.
On the military front, Australia announced in
April a substantial increase in the number of our troops
from 1,100 to around 1,550. The principal aim of that
increased contribution was to bolster our efforts in
training Afghan forces in the southern province of
Oruzgan in order to get them to the point where they
themselves can take responsibility for providing
security in the province. Thus, we committed
additional troops to form two further operational
mentor and liaison teams in Oruzgan, in addition to the
team that we already had in place. Australia also
undertook to provide additional logistic support forces
and force protection elements in Oruzgan, extra
embedded planning and staff officers and some 120
troops to assist with security for the elections and
general security in the province.
Australia is also providing $200 million over the
next five years to the Afghan National Army Trust
Fund. Contributing to the Trust Fund supports the
Australian Government’s objective of creating a selfsufficient Afghan national army, capable of providing
security for the Afghan nation. Further, we are
deploying extra Australian Federal Police officers to
train and advise members of the Afghan National
Police force. The Australian Federal Police are
providing training to the Afghan National Police at
Oruzgan’s Provincial Training Centre and also
contributes through its role in counter-narcotics,
combating serious organized crime, providing strategic
advice to the Interior Ministry and working with
international partners. It has also helped to develop
national Afghan police investigation teams and

09-59876

contributed to the establishment of strategic police
programmes.
In addition to its work on the security front,
Australia has also made a substantial contribution to
the equally important civilian assistance effort. Since
2001, Australia has committed $600 million to aid,
capacity-building and reconstruction, including a
pledge of $250 million in June 2008 for development
and reconstruction assistance over three years.
Through the efforts of the Australian Defence
Force’s Reconstruction Task Force and of advisers
from the Australian Agency for International
Development, Australia has already completed a range
of important development projects, including in
Oruzgan province, such as upgrades to hospitals and
health clinics and the construction of bridges.
Australian aid has contributed to Afghan Government
efforts to build over 800 schools and provide basic
health services to approximately 80 per cent of the
population.
We are increasing Australia’s aid efforts to
support capacity-building and service delivery. We will
provide up to six technical specialists, who will provide
advice to key service delivery agencies including the
Ministries of Health, Education, Agriculture and Rural
Reconstruction and Development.
One of our principal objectives on the civilian
front is to help pave the way for a more effective,
credible and durable system of Government, extending
from the capital of Kabul all the way down to the
district level. What Afghanistan desperately needs is a
system of national Government that is both trusted by
its people and capable of delivering much-needed
services throughout the country. Without it, the risk is
that disillusioned Afghans will increasingly look to the
Taliban and other destructive forces, rather than to the
legitimate Government, to meet their needs.
With this in mind, Australia is helping to build
the capacity of the Afghan Government at both the
central and the provincial levels so it can deliver better
services to its people. By contributing $87 million to
the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, Australia
has supported significant improvements in the Afghan
Government’s public financial management practices.
This support is helping the Government to produce
transparent budgets and to ensure public funds are
being used for their intended purpose. It is also being
used to establish an external monitoring agency to

27

A/64/PV.40

oversee donor contributions to the Afghan Government’s
budget and to strengthen the procurement and audit
functions of the Afghan Ministry of Finance.
As part of our contribution to the Trust Fund, we
are also supporting the National Solidarity Programme.
Run by the Afghan Ministry of Rural Reconstruction
and Development, the programme is aimed at providing
small-scale, community-implemented infrastructure
projects and at expanding the economic opportunities
of the Afghan people. That has already reached 22,000
villages, or 68 per cent of the rural population, through
delivery of more than 44,000 infrastructure projects,
such as irrigation systems, safe drinking water and
health clinics, to those rural communities.
Australia’s efforts in Afghanistan are, of course,
only part of a broader campaign by the international
community to build a better future for the Afghan
people. As the international community scales up its
efforts in Afghanistan, effective donor coordination
mechanisms will become even more important, if we
are to ensure transparency and the effective distribution
of resources.
In
such
a
complex
environment,
the
organizational role played by the United Nations in
Afghanistan is becoming ever more important and
challenging and we would like to note our appreciation
for the efforts of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Kai Eide, and also the United Nations
Mission in Afghanistan personnel he leads.
Australia supports the draft resolution and we
thank the delegation of Germany and its efforts in
making it happen. We welcome, in particular, the draft
resolution’s call for reform of the country’s public
administration in order to ensure good governance and
accountability at both the national and the subnational
levels. Likewise, we welcome its interest in seeing
further progress on the part of the Government in
establishing a more effective, accountable and
transparent administration to lead the fight against
corruption, and its call for improved service delivery in
key sectors such as energy and water supply.
Mr. Thiebaud (France) (spoke in French):
France associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, and we would like to say how much we
appreciate the German delegation’s draft resolution
contained in document A/64/L.8, of which we are a
sponsor.

28

May I associate France with those delegations
that have expressed their sincerest condolences to the
families and the loved ones of the victims of the recent
attack on the United Nations facility in Kabul on
28 October.
We also would like to express our sympathy to
the families of all the civilian and military personnel
who were killed in the line of duty in Afghanistan, as
well as to the Afghan people, who have been sorely
tested.
The electoral process has just concluded. We now
need to turn towards the future. A new Government
will soon take office. It will need to meet the specific
expectations of the Afghan people in terms of progress
in their daily lives as well as in terms of good
governance. To do this, President Karzai will need to
work non-stop to bring together all Afghans of goodwill.
France will be at the Afghan people’s side in this
critical phase in the democratic life of the country, a
life that will also allow them to redefine relations
between Afghanistan and the international community
for the years to come.
With its allies and partners, France will remain
committed as long as necessary so that Afghanistan
will be able to regain full control of their destiny.
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/64/L.8.
I would like to inform the Assembly that, since
the issuance of draft resolution A/64/L.8, the following
countries have become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Chile, El Salvador, Fiji, Mauritius, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Togo,
the United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and Yemen.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.8?
Draft resolution A/64/L.8 was adopted (resolution
64/11).
The Acting President (spoke in Russian): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

09-59876
