S/2014/859

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 November 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from
4 September to 19 November 2014
I. Introduction
1.
The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past three months, pursuant to
the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended by
subsequent resolutions, most recently resolution 2163 (2014).

II. Situation in the area and activities of the Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic generally was maintained, albeit in an increasingly volatile and
deteriorating security environment attributable to the ongoing conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic and despite a number of significant violations of the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement of 1974 by Israeli and Syrian forces, which are set out below.
The heavy fighting in the area of limitation and in the area of separation between
the Syrian Arab armed forces and armed members of various armed groups,
including the Nusra Front — which had started late in August as detailed in my last
report (S/2014/665) — intensified during the reporting period. The significant
deterioration of the security situation necessitated the temporary relocation, between
13 and 15 September, of UNDOF personnel and military observers and equipment
of Observer Group Golan of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO) from a number of the remaining positions in the area of separation to the
Alpha side. The Syrian armed forces carried out military activities and security
operations against armed groups, often in response to offensives carried out by the
armed groups. Inside the area of separation, the presence of the Syrian armed forces
and military equipment, as well as any other armed personnel and military
equipment, is in violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. As
underscored by the Security Council in its resolution 2163 (2014), there should be
no military activity of any kind in the area of separation.
3.
In the context of the clashes between the Syrian armed forces and armed
groups, there were several incidents of firing from the Bravo side across the
ceasefire line. On 4 September, United Nations personnel at a temporary
observation post on the Alpha side observed several impacts on the Alpha side; the
14-65402 (E)

031214

*1465402*

S/2014/859

point of origin was not observed. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) informed
UNDOF that two rounds had impacted on the Alpha side. On 14 September,
personnel at United Nations position 22 reported fire, which was assumed to have
been a tank round originating from the Bravo side, landing north-west of their
position on the Alpha side. On 23 September, in the morning, IDF informed
UNDOF that it had shot down a Syrian air force aircraft, alleging that it had crossed
the ceasefire line. United Nations personnel did not observe the fighter aircraft over
the area of separation or crossing the ceasefire line but saw a mid-air explosion
followed by debris falling to the ground in an area east of Jaba in the area of
limitation on the Bravo side. On 3 October, UNDOF observed an explosion two to
three kilometres from United Nations observation post 73 close to the technical
fence, at the time that an IDF patrol was moving nearby on the patrol path. IDF did
not report any casualties or damage to the vehicle.
4.
On 11 September, 45 UNDOF peacekeepers, who had been detained since
28 August, were released unharmed to UNDOF at United Nations position 80 near
Al Rafid village. However, the intense fighting between the Syrian armed forces and
members of various armed groups that began late in August in the central part of the
area of separation continued into the current reporting period, with significant
consequences for UNDOF operations. On 4 September, armed groups launched
coordinated heavy attacks in the towns of Majdotiyah, Masharah, Muraba’at and
Nab’as Sakhr in the area of limitation. The attacks were supported by tanks,
artillery, mortar and rocket fire. In an effort to ensure the safety and security of
United Nations personnel in the face of the deteriorating security situation, on
10 September, UNDOF consolidated United Nations personnel and equipment from
position 32A to positions 30 and 37.
5.
In view of the heavy fighting, which was approaching close to the UNDOF
headquarters at Camp Faouar and the mission’s positions in the central part of the
area of separation, the Force Commander briefed both parties early in September on
the Force’s plans to relocate its personnel and assets should the Nusra Front or other
extremist fighters who posed a clear threat to the mission endanger the safety and
security of the United Nations personnel. It should be noted here that from
information posted on social media as well as in the course of its efforts to secure
the release of the peacekeepers, the United Nations learned that its personnel had
been taken and held by members of the Nusra Front. There were indications that the
Nusra Front intended to detain additional UNDOF personnel and take from UNDOF
more weapons and vehicles as opportunities arose.
6.
On 12 September, armed groups, including members of the Nusra Front, using
two tanks, artillery and heavy mortars, launched an attack against Syrian Arab
armed forces positions along the main road connecting Camp Faouar and Camp
Ziouani, inside the area of separation as well as in New Hamidiyeh. The Syrian
armed forces retreated from their positions towards Al Baath, heavily bombarding
the positions they vacated. The armed groups in turn took control of the area up to
the western outskirts of Al Baath. At this stage, UNDOF activated its temporary
relocation plan for the Force’s personnel and assets. The plan foresaw that all
military and civilian personnel and essential assets would be relocated in a phased
manner, from 12 to 17 September, to the Alpha side. As a first step in the relocation,
UNDOF temporarily relocated personnel from United Nations positions 25, 32 and
62 and observation post 72 to Camp Faouar; the following morning, the personnel
relocated to Camp Ziouani. On 15 September, heavy fighting broke out between the

2/11

14-65402

S/2014/859

Syrian Arab armed forces and armed groups north of the main supply road in the
area of separation. During the course of the day, the Syrian armed forces conducted
a number of airstrikes in the areas of Jabbata, Ufaniyah and Tal al-Kurum in the
area of separation. During the morning of that day, the armed groups took control of
observation post 72 and attacked Terese Hill, to which the Syrian armed forces
responded with heavy artillery, mortar and tank fire. As the fighting threatened to
isolate Camp Faouar, UNDOF decided to advance the final stage of its relocation
plan by two days and vacate Camp Faouar that day. During the relocation on
15 September, all personnel from Camp Faouar as well as United Nations positions
10, 16, 31 and 37 and observation post 71 were relocated temporarily to the Alpha
side. One day prior, the Force Commander had briefed the Senior Syrian Arab
Delegate about the UNDOF plans to vacate Camp Faouar. The relocation took place
without incident and all UNDOF personnel safely reached the Alpha side.
7.
Armed groups had seized a number of vehicles during the incidents involving
the detention of the 45 peacekeepers from United Nations position 27 and the
confinement of others at positions 68 and 69 late in August. While UNDOF
hurriedly moved personnel and most United Nations assets, including vehicles, from
Camp Faouar and other United Nations positions were temporarily vacated,
unfortunately some assets and equipment were left behind. UNDOF commenced the
necessary administrative processes in relation to all United Nations assets that were
seized by armed groups and those left at Camp Faouar or at United Nations
positions temporarily vacated.
8.
Throughout the period of the heavy fighting and the lead-up to the temporary
relocation of UNDOF, the Force Commander remained in regular close contact with
the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate and IDF. Both parties provided full support to
UNDOF in ensuring the safe evacuation of peacekeepers from positions that had to
be vacated as well as their safe relocation.
9.
Since mid-September, intermittent heavy fighting between the Syrian Arab
armed forces and armed groups continued in the central part of the area of
separation, as well as in the area of limitation. The Syrian armed forces carried out
more than 40 airstrikes in the days immediately following the UNDOF relocation,
targeting areas including Jabbata al-Khashab, Ufaniyah, New Hamadiyeh, Ruihinah
and Braika in the area of separation, as well as the general area of Tal al-Mashara,
Tal al-Mal and Kafar Nasej in the area of limitation. The local truce arrangement
between the Syrian armed forces and armed groups covering Jabbata, Trunje and
Ufaniyah, which had been in place since the early part of the year, ended late in
August as extremist armed groups from the southern part of the area of separation
linked up with armed members of the opposition in Jabbata. This in turn raised fears
among the local population in Hadar, where a number of families were seen leaving
the village. Subsequent to the link-up of the armed groups from the south with those
in the north, no further northwards movement of the Nusra Front was observed in
the area of separation.
10. The Syrian armed forces continued firing on locations controlled by armed
groups in the central part of the area of separation throughout the reporting period in
order to restrict their movement. Armed groups shifted the main focus of their attacks
to the area of limitation, where, early in October, they captured the large Syrian
armed forces position on Tal al-Harrah and a number of the surrounding towns and
villages. The Syrian armed forces responded with dozens of airstrikes. The capture of

14-65402

3/11

S/2014/859

Tal al-Harrah by armed groups allowed them to move largely unimpeded between
the southern and central parts of the area of operations, and in particular in the areas
between the two main highways linking Damascus with Quneitra and Dara’a.
Following the capture of Tal al-Harrah, there was heavy fighting between the Syrian
armed forces and armed groups in the areas of Al Baath, Tal al-Kurum and Tal
al-Shaar in the vicinity of Jaba. On a few occasions, the Syrian armed forces
unsuccessfully attempted to regain ground in the area of New Hamadiyeh.
11. In the course of fighting and clashes between the Syrian armed forces and
armed groups on 4 September, seven mortar rounds, fired from areas known to be
strongholds of the armed groups, landed in and near United Nations observation
post 56. Peacekeepers went into shelter. On 6 September, two individuals
approached observation post 54 and made gestures of cutting throats towards the
United Nations personnel at the post. The same was reported by United Nations
position 80 on 18 October. UNDOF deployed peacekeepers at observation post 54 to
enhance protection of the military observers. On 16 September, 11 armed
individuals approached the gate of United Nations position Hermon South. They
attempted to gain information about the personnel strength of the position and if or
when United Nations personnel would vacate it. In addition, they were understood
to be seeking refuge in the position, which was denied. The individuals stayed for
about 40 minutes and thereafter left the area. On 4 October, two rounds, possibly
fired by a tank from a north-eastern direction, landed 50 m south of United Nations
observation post 51. The United Nations personnel at the post went into shelter
immediately and heard a similar type of round land nearby.
12. Crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians, primarily shepherds, was observed
on an almost daily basis. On 24 October, United Nations observation post 73
observed 12 IDF soldiers who detained one civilian between the Alpha line and the
Israeli technical fence south-east of the observation post and subsequently took him
away. IDF informed UNDOF that they released the person within one hour at the
same location. On 27 October, position 80 observed two IDF soldiers east of the
technical fence returning from the direction of the Alpha line towards the technical
fence. UNDOF observed IDF opening the technical fence gate and letting two
individuals pass from the Bravo to the Alpha side. Following the evacuation of
UNDOF personnel from position 85 on 28 August, UNDOF sporadically observed
armed members of the opposition interacting with IDF across the ceasefire line in
the vicinity of United Nations position 85.
13. UNDOF protested about all firing across the ceasefire line to the Senior Syrian
Arab Delegate and IDF. All incidents of firing into the area of separation and across
the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing by individuals of the ceasefire line, are
violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
14. In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed by the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line. During periods of heightened
tension, as well as during and in the immediate aftermath of firing incidents across
the ceasefire line, the Force Commander was in ongoing close contact with both
parties to the Disengagement Agreement to prevent an escalation of the situation
across the ceasefire line.
15. Over the course of the reporting period, the Syrian armed forces withdrew
from additional positions and checkpoints in the areas of separation and limitation,

4/11

14-65402

S/2014/859

leaving armed groups in control of more territory in the UNDOF area of operations.
The Syrian armed forces maintained a strong presence in the urban centres of
Al Baath and Khan Arnabeh and some areas immediately to the north and south,
including the position it established on Tal al-Kurum in the area of separation,
surrounding United Nations observation post 56, in addition to locations in the area
of limitation. The Syrian armed forces maintain at least three tanks in the area of
separation, including at their position at Tal al-Kurum, and several others in
locations in the area of limitation adjacent to the area of separation. On various
occasions, UNDOF observed up to four tanks in locations controlled by armed
groups in the area of separation in addition to armoured personnel carriers, infantry
fighting vehicles and heavy artillery pieces.
16. UNDOF protested about the presence of Syrian armed forces and equipment in
the area of separation, and the firing into and inside the area of separation. The
Force Commander reiterated to the Syrian authorities the obligation of the armed
forces to halt military operations in the area of separation and to cease firing from
the area of limitation, stressing the importance of abiding by the terms of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and ensuring the safety and security of United
Nations personnel on the ground. Senior United Nations officials have conveyed
similar messages to the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the United Nations.
17. During the reporting period, UNDOF observed two tented camps housing
internally displaced persons in the vicinity of United Nations position 80. The
number of tents has varied over the period. At the time of reporting, approximately
40 large and medium-sized tents were seen in the vicinity of Al Aishah village,
north of position 80, and two tents placed approximately 300 m south of position
80. UNDOF estimates that from 60 to 70 families live in the camps. On
23 September, position 80 observed armed individuals gathered in Al Aishah village
unloading weapons from a truck. Some individuals were in civilian attire and others
in camouflage uniforms. A vehicle with a mounted anti-aircraft gun was observed in
proximity to the place of unloading. Late in September, the Senior Syrian Arab
Delegate sent a letter to the UNDOF Force Commander stating that the camps for
internally displaced persons were not used for humanitarian reasons but as a base
for “armed terrorist” groups who also crossed to the Alpha side. The Delegate
requested that UNDOF remove the camps within a period of 15 days, after which
the camps would be considered a legitimate target for the Syrian armed forces. He
requested that UNDOF transfer the civilians out of the camps to prevent them from
being used as human shields by “armed terrorist” groups. The Force Commander
informed the Delegate that it was not within the mandate of UNDOF to relocate
Syrian civilians who had been displaced as a result of the Syrian conflict. He also
strongly urged that no attack be carried out against the camps. In addition, UNDOF
conveyed to the Delegate that it had informed the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other United Nations entities in Damascus of the request.
18. Since its temporary relocation in mid-September, UNDOF has continued to
maintain visibility of the area of separation and the ceasefire line, albeit limited,
from a number of positions it continues to hold in the area of separation. The Force
continued to maintain four positions on Mount Hermon in the northern part of the
area of separation and position 80 in the southern part, as well as position 22 on the
Alpha side. The UNDOF operations continued to be supported by the UNTSO
military observers in Observer Group Golan, who maintained five fixed and four

14-65402

5/11

S/2014/859

temporary observation posts on the Alpha side. The focus of Observer Group Golan
activities remained on around-the-clock static observation, investigations and
situational analysis. Through Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry
out fortnightly inspections of equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on
the Alpha side. On one occasion, Observer Group Golan observed five 155-mm
artillery weapons deployed in the 10-km zone. Liaison officers from the Alpha side
accompanied Observer Group Golan inspection teams. Inspections and mobile
operations in the area of limitation on the Bravo side remained suspended because
of the security situation. As in the past, the Force faced restrictions on freedom of
movement and its inspection teams were denied access to some positions on the
Alpha side. Observer Group Golan members continued to experience restrictions of
movement on the Alpha side when entering and exiting United Nations observation
post 73, which is located east of the Israeli technical fence.
19. Further to the Security Council presidential statement of 19 September 2014,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in coordination with UNDOF, held
consultations with the parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement on the
necessary steps to maintain the ability of UNDOF to carry out its mandate. The
consultations included options for monitoring the ceasefire and the separation of
forces even under circumstances when security conditions constrain UNDOF from
fully operating on the Bravo side. The Department held consultations with the
Permanent Missions of Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic in New York on the
reconfiguration and activities of UNDOF. A senior delegation from the Department
visited the Syrian Arab Republic and Israel from 28 September to 4 October to
undertake further consultations with respective officials. In addition, a planning
team comprising officials from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support visited the UNDOF base on the Alpha side, Camp
Ziouani, in support of these efforts. Troop-contributing countries were kept
informed of these consultations.
20. Both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic expressed their strong commitment
to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement and the continuation of UNDOF with its
present mandate. The parties regarded the relocation of UNDOF from Camp Faouar
and a number of its positions in the area of separation to the Alpha side as a
temporary measure and expressed a strong desire to see the full return of UNDOF to
the area of separation, when the security conditions allow. In this connection, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNDOF agreed with the Syrian
Government that Syrian authorities and UNDOF would review, every three months,
the situation in the area of separation. The Department and UNDOF also agreed
with the parties that, in the interim, the headquarters of UNDOF would be
established in Damascus, with its configuration and size to be determined. The
UNDOF positions on Mount Hermon will continue to be resupplied from the Bravo
side as long as the security situation permits.
21. UNDOF has continued discussions with the parties on some of the practical
arrangements to be put in place, including the establishment of the mission
headquarters in Damascus, crossing procedures between the Alpha and the Bravo
sides in the absence of the established crossing at Quneitra, and the use of
technology to offset the loss of situational awareness in the area of separation, as
well as additional locations required, including a logistics hub on the Bravo side and
positions for observing the ceasefire line on the Alpha side.

6/11

14-65402

S/2014/859

22. In considering the way forward, the Department and UNDOF were informed
by the situation on the ground as well as consultations with the parties. With the
ultimate aim of returning to the area of separation when the security situation allows
and based on the key assumption that the security situation on the Bravo side, in the
foreseeable future, would continue not to permit UNDOF to return fully to the area
of separation, the option being pursued would entail a short-term temporary
reduction of the UNDOF troop strength to 750 military personnel and redeployment
of up to 200 personnel. In addition, further to the currently manned positions of
UNDOF and Observer Group Golan, there would be a requirement to establish new
United Nations positions west of the ceasefire line. This interim configuration
would allow UNDOF to continue to monitor, verify and report on violations of the
Disengagement Agreement and exercise its critical liaison functions with the
parties, particularly in preventing escalation of incidents. The UNDOF headquarters
would be established in Damascus and the operational base in Camp Ziouani. A
Force reserve company, four UNDOF positions on Mount Hermon and position 80
in the southern part of the area of separation and position 22 on the Alpha side
would be maintained. In addition, Observer Group Golan observation posts along
the ceasefire line and in its vicinity would be maintained, and the functions of the
military observers optimized. The establishment of an UNDOF logistics hub on the
Bravo side is under consideration.
23. As at 12 November, UNDOF comprised 929 troops, including 30 women, from
Fiji (445), India (190), Ireland (138), Nepal (154) and the Netherlands (2). In
addition, 80 military observers from UNTSO, including one woman, assisted the
Force in carrying out its tasks. Following the decision by the Government of the
Philippines to withdraw its contingent from UNDOF, 344 Philippine peacekeepers
left the mission between 18 and 27 September.
24. Since the temporary relocation of the Force on 15 September, movements of
UNDOF personnel on the Bravo side have been limited. On Mount Hermon,
UNDOF conducts foot and vehicle patrols twice daily. Convoys between Damascus
and the Mount Hermon positions to ensure the resupply as well as maintenance of
the positions are conducted in armoured vehicles and with UNDOF security escort.
National staff report to work at the UNDOF office in Damascus. As a result of the
heavy fighting that commenced late in August, the movement of United Nations
personnel along the UNDOF main supply route between Camp Faoaur and Camp
Ziouani was suspended. From 4 to 15 September, UNDOF, in consultation with the
parties, utilized a crossing point between the Alpha and Bravo sides in the vicinity
of United Nations position 37B. At the time of reporting, UNDOF continues to
engage the Syrian authorities regarding an alternate crossing route, in the Mount
Hermon region, between the Alpha and Bravo sides. Owing to the closure of the
established crossing between the Alpha and Bravo sides late in August, UNDOF is
currently not in a position to facilitate, in cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, humanitarian crossings, including for students.

III. Financial aspects
25. By its resolution 68/260 B of 30 June 2014, the General Assembly
appropriated the amount of $64.1 million for the maintenance of the Force for the
period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015.

14-65402

7/11

S/2014/859

26. As at 10 November 2014, unpaid assessed contributions to the UNDOF Special
Account amounted to $14.7 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations at the same date amounted to $2,620.0 million.
27. As at 10 November 2014, amounts owed to contributors for troop costs
totalled $2.7 million. Reimbursements for troop costs and for equipment and selfsustainment have been made for the periods up to 31 August 2014 and 30 June 2014
respectively, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

IV. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
28. The Security Council, when deciding in its resolution 2131 (2013) to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 30 June 2014,
called upon the parties concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338
(1973) and requested the Secretary-General to submit, at the end of the period, a
report on developments in the situation and the measures taken to implement that
resolution. The search for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, in particular the
efforts made at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was dealt with in
my report on the situation in the Middle East (A/69/341), submitted pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 68/16 on Jerusalem and 68/17 on the Syrian Golan.
29. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict is further reducing the
prospects for their resumption and progress towards peace between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just
and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

V. Observations
30. I am gravely concerned about the developments in the area of separation that
forced UNDOF to take the decision to temporarily relocate from the Bravo to the
Alpha side. As reported in my last report to the Security Council (S/2014/665) these
developments saw armed groups, including members of the listed terrorist
organization, the Nusra Front, enter into direct confrontation with UNDOF,
abducting 45 of its peacekeepers and confining 72 others in two United Nations
positions. In the two weeks following those events, sustained heavy fighting
between the Syrian armed forces and armed groups came so close to the UNDOF
headquarters in Camp Faouar and other positions in the central area of separation
that UNDOF had to relocate its personnel, thereby significantly reducing its ability
to carry out its mandate as agreed by the parties to the 1974 Disengagement of
Forces Agreement. Any hostile act against United Nations personnel on the ground,
including threatening their physical safety and restricting their movement and the
direct and indirect firing at United Nations personnel and facilities by anyone, is
unacceptable.
31. Armed opposition groups and other armed groups have expanded the area
under their control in the area of separation, and remain present along the section of
the main road connecting the two UNDOF camps. The crossing between the Alpha

8/11

14-65402

S/2014/859

and the Bravo sides remains closed. It is critical that countries with influence
continue to strongly convey to the armed groups in the UNDOF area of operations
the need to cease any actions that jeopardize the safety and security of United
Nations personnel on the ground, including firing at peacekeepers, threatening and
detaining them, and to accord United Nations personnel the freedom to carry out
their mandate safely and securely.
32. The primary responsibility for the safety and security of United Nations
personnel in the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side rests with the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. I welcome the assistance provided by
both parties in the safe and successful temporary relocation of UNDOF personnel. I
note the assistance provided by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in
facilitating the provision of essential supplies in support of the Force to ensure that
it continues implementing its mandate safely and securely. It is imperative that
respect for the privileges and immunities of UNDOF and its freedom of movement
be preserved. The safety and security of UNDOF personnel and Observer Group
Golan military observers must be ensured.
33. I remain deeply concerned about the continuing deterioration of the security
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, its impact on the Syrian population and
potential implications for the stability of the region. The ongoing military activities
in the area of operations and incidents across the ceasefire line continue to escalate
the situation and heighten tension between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic. The
increased use of heavy weapons by both the Syrian armed forces and armed groups
in the continuing Syrian conflict, including air power by Government forces in the
area of limitation on the Bravo side, is disturbing. There should be no military
forces in the area of separation other than those of UNDOF. I note with concern the
presence and use of tanks by both the Syrian armed forces and armed groups, and in
increasing number by the armed groups in the area of separation. I call upon all
parties to the Syrian conflict to cease military actions throughout the country,
including in the UNDOF area of operations. I call on the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic to stop the use of airstrikes, which cause suffering to the civilian
population and destroy its livelihoods. I reiterate that all military activities in the
area of separation conducted by any actor pose a risk to the ceasefire and to the
local civilian population, in addition to the United Nations personnel on the ground.
34. The presence of the Syrian armed forces and unauthorized military equipment
in the area of separation, in addition to the firing from the Bravo side across the
ceasefire line, are grave violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. All
incidents of firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire line by either
party are also grave violations of the Agreement. I stress that it is important for all
parties to liaise with UNDOF in the first instance to prevent any escalation of the
situation. I call upon all parties to take all necessary measures to protect civilians
and ensure respect for the safety and security of United Nations personnel, in
addition to the freedom of movement for UNDOF throughout its area of operation.
For its part, the United Nations will spare no effort in ensuring that the long-held
ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic continues to hold.
35. Both parties have stated their continued commitment to the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement and the presence of UNDOF. It remains critical that both sides
work through UNDOF to contain any incidents that occur along or across the
ceasefire line. The mandate of UNDOF remains an important element in ensuring

14-65402

9/11

S/2014/859

the stability of the region. UNDOF is undergoing a reconfiguration to adjust the
structure and size of the mission as necessary to the current circumstances while at
the same time maintaining the required strength and capabilities to return to vacated
positions when the security situation allows. In accordance with its mandate,
UNDOF will continue to use its best efforts to monitor the ceasefire between Syrian
and Israeli forces and see that it is observed, albeit in increasingly challenging and
difficult circumstances.
36. The support of the parties and the Security Council is critical as UNDOF
continues to adapt to the evolving situation. It is equally critical that the Council
continue to bring its influence to bear on the parties concerned to ensure that
UNDOF is accorded the ability to operate freely and securely within its area of
operations and to carry out its important mandate. It is essential that UNDOF
continues to have at its disposal all necessary means and resources that will allow it
to return to the area of separation as the situation permits. UNDOF also needs to
retain the confidence and commitment of troop-contributing countries. I am grateful
to the Governments of Fiji, India, Ireland, Nepal and the Netherlands for their
contributions to UNDOF and for staying the course under these extremely trying
circumstances. I am also grateful for the contribution of the Philippines to UNDOF
during exceptionally challenging times. In addition, I am grateful to the Member
States contributing military observers to the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization. The continued credible presence of UNDOF remains an important
element in ensuring stability on the Golan and in the region.
37. Under the prevailing circumstances, I consider the continued presence of
UNDOF in the area to be essential. I therefore recommend that the Security Council
extend the mandate of the Force for a further period of six months, until 30 June
2015. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has given its assent to the
proposed extension. The Government of Israel, too, has expressed its agreement.
38. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the UNDOF Head of
Mission and Force Commander, Lieutenant General Iqbal Singh Singha, and to the
military and civilian personnel serving under his leadership, who continue to
perform with efficiency and commitment, under extremely challenging
circumstances, the important tasks assigned to them by the Security Council. I have
full confidence that UNDOF will continue to use its best efforts to carry out its
mandate.

10/11

14-65402

S/2014/859

14-65402

11/11
