S/2014/515

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 July 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 14 of Security Council
resolution 2113 (2013), by which the Council requested me to report every 90 days
on the implementation of the mandate of the African Union -United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The report provides an update and analysis of the
situation in Darfur for the period from the date of my previous report, 15 April 2014
(S/2014/279), until 15 July 2014, as well as an update on the progress achieved
towards the revised benchmarks endorsed by the Council in it s resolution 2148
(2014) and the streamlining of UNAMID. It also provides recommendations on the
further extension of the UNAMID mandate, which is due to expire, in accordance
with resolution 2113 (2013), on 31 August 2014.

II. Overview and analysis of the conflict dynamics and
operating environment in Darfur
A.

Analysis of the current trends and conflict dynamics in Darfur
2.
The reporting period was marked by continued clashes between Government
forces and rebel groups, tensions between tribes and an increase in criminality, with
a significant impact on the civilian population, especially in North, Central and
South Darfur. Following successive weeks of continued degradation of the security
situation and attacks against civilians in the first trimester of 2014, violence
decreased considerably in May before rising again in mid -June. The operations of
the Rapid Support Forces were considerably reduced during the reporting period.
Fighting between Government forces and rebel groups
3.
In North Darfur, local sources reported that on 7 April, air strikes by the
Sudanese Armed Forces hit the village of Lill near Um Baru, killing one civilian and
injuring eight others. It was also reported that on 26 April, an air strike on the
village of Orschi resulted in the deaths of three civilians and the destruction of a
water point, market and school. On 8 and 28 April, the Sudanese Armed Forces
reportedly targeted elements of the Sudanese Revolutionary Front with air strikes on
the villages of Kunjara, Tarne and Thabit.

14-57702 (E)

310714

*1457702*

S/2014/515

4.
In Central Darfur, reports were received of air strikes by the Sudanese Armed
Forces on 26 April on the villages of Noume, Tagora and Tajina. This followed air
strikes on the villages of Ro Fata, Logu and Osajiang in March. On 28 April, the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA-AW) reportedly attacked a Sudanese
Armed Forces camp in the town of Rockero. In the ensuing fighting, 7 Government
soldiers and 3 SLA-AW elements were reportedly killed and 13 Government
soldiers and 18 SLA-AW fighters were injured. On 29 April, Government forces
attacked the villages of Kirro, Bardane and Nawni near Golo town in Central Darfur,
displacing some 5,000 civilians to neighbouring areas.
5.
May and June witnessed a relative lull in the engagement between Government
forces and rebel groups. Rebel groups reportedly withdrew from their strongholds in
Kutum, Mellit, Korma, Birkat, Tawilla and Thabit in North Dar fur; from areas in
South Darfur around the village of Menawashi and between Nyala and Graida;
towards the north-western part of North Darfur around Um Baru, Muzbat and Wadi
Hawar; and from the Jebel Marra.
6.
Nonetheless, on 22 May, the Sudan Liberation Army-Mini Minawi (SLA-MM)
attacked the villages of Arowsharow and Gosmino (West Darfur), reportedly in
retaliation for the arrest of a number of its members by the Sudanese Armed Forces
in Jebel Moon on 22 May. On 26 June, a UNAMID patrol at the Fata Borno
internally displaced persons camp reported a clash in the village of Goba between
SLA-MM and Arab militia, reportedly supported by the Sudanese Armed Forces.
The Mission was informed that some four SLA-MM members were killed and 21
SLA-MM vehicles seized by the Sudanese Armed Forces during the attack.
7.
On 27 June, two SLA-MM commanders and the leader of the Sudan Liberation
Movement for Justice, Ali Karbino, were killed in the Al Quba area, north of Kutum
(North Darfur). The Sudanese Armed Forces stated that Karbino’s death occurred
during the repulsion of an attack led by the rebel leader. SLA -MM issued a
statement thereafter confirming the death of Karbino and two of its commanders.
8.
While the activities of the Rapid Support Forces in Darfur decreased d uring
the reporting period, on 7 April, the Forces reportedly attacked the villages of
Gadara, Bir Maza and Birdik in Kutum (North Darfur). Local sources reported that
on 16 April, a Rapid Support Forces convoy attacked the village of Gaoud al -Azraq
in Kutum, resulting in civilian deaths and injuries, including children. It was
reported that some 110 students and their teachers fled to the town of Kutum on
22 April. After the town was attacked by suspected Arab militia on 28 April, the
students and teachers fled to the UNAMID team site at Kutum. The students have
since returned to their respective villages.
9.
Reports indicate that the Rapid Support Forces returned to their barracks near
Nyala in April. While in May, civilians and internally displaced person s in Nyala
raised concerns about reports that the Governor of South Darfur had established a
Rapid Support Forces administrative and logistic base in Nyala, near the Dereig
internally displaced persons camp, the Governor of South Darfur denied those
reports to UNAMID. On 27 May, elements of the Rapid Support Forces staged a
protest over delays in the payment of their salaries. They fired shots in the air,
carjacked private vehicles and robbed civilians of personal belongings. The
authorities dispersed the protesters, recovered the vehicles and arrested the
perpetrators. In early June, medical staff at the Nyala Teaching Hospital went on
strike over harassment by members of the Rapid Support Forces. In response, the

2/19

14-57702

S/2014/515

South Darfur Security Committee issued a decree directing the Forces to avail
themselves of medical services from police and military hospitals and prohibiting its
members from entering the Nyala Teaching Hospital.
Activities of Government-aligned militia
10. During the reporting period, Arab militia continued to support Government
offensives against rebel groups. Some 45 incidents of attacks and criminality
reportedly involving Arab militia were observed. The attacks were characterized by
incidents of killings, rape, burning of houses and looti ng of livestock.
11. Thirty of the attacks occurred in North Darfur, with 15 of them targeting
several villages in Korma, one of the localities hardest hit by Government military
operations against SLA-MM in early 2014. An inter-agency assessment mission to
Korma on 11 June confirmed that 14,160 new internally displaced persons sought
refuge at the UNAMID Korma team site from 5 to 7 June. This is in addition to the
7,160 people displaced to the team site during the attacks by the Rapid Support
Forces in East Korma in the first quarter of 2014. The Kutumarea was also attacked
at least seven times by Arab militia during the reporting period.
12. In South Darfur, six attacks mainly targeting internally displaced persons were
reported by affected communities. On 23 and 27 April, 127 families fled to the
Kassab internally displaced persons camp from villages around Wadi Innaam after
continuous attacks by Arab militia. An estimated 700 families from 18 villages
arrived in the El Salam internally displaced persons camp in El Fasher between
24 March and 1 April after attacks by Arab militia reportedly supported by the
Rapid Support Forces. UNAMID was later informed by the new arrivals that a
substantial number of internally displaced persons fleeing those attacks rema ined in
the villages of Shagra, Abu Degais and Um Hajalij. While Government authorities
insisted that the attacks were aimed at dislodging rebel groups from those areas,
local sources informed UNAMID that civilians were targeted, apparently with the
objective of depriving the rebels of any support bases in civilian areas.
Local violence and intercommunal conflict
13. During the reporting period, civilians suffered from an increase in tribal
fighting, mainly among Arab pastoralists, with 24 reported conf rontations and 93
confirmed deaths compared with 16 incidents and 80 deaths in the previous
reporting period. Tensions between tribes were such that relatively minor events led
to large numbers of casualties. The triggers were usually related to community
quarrels, owing to underlying grievances about land and resources, in an
environment of weakened traditional authority and State authority. The most
significant tribal clashes involved the Ma’alia and Southern Rizeigat in East Darfur;
the Ma’alia and Hamar on the border between East Darfur and West Kordofan; the
Northern Rizeigat and the Beni Hussein in North Darfur; and the Salamat and
Misseriya in Central Darfur. The Ma’alia and Southern Rizeigat clashed three times
in May in the localities of Adilla and Abu Jabra (East Darfur) over theft of livestock,
resulting in the death of six Southern Rizeigat and seven Ma’alia tribesmen. On
5 July, renewed tribal clashes between the Southern Rezeigat and Ma’alia tribes in
the village of Al Fadul in the vicinity of El Daein (South Darfur) resulted in the
killing of 18 persons from the Rezeigat tribe and an unconfirmed number of
Ma’alia. UNAMID engaged leaders of both communities at the state and Khartoum

14-57702

3/19

S/2014/515

levels, including their respective Shura Councils. State authori ties also deployed
Government forces in the area.
14. Fighting between the Ma’alia and Hamar erupted on 22 May in the village of
El Guruf (East Darfur) when a Hamar tribesman was arrested and handed over to the
Sudanese Armed Forces on charges of trespassing on a Ma’alia cattle farm. The
incident resulted in the death of 20 people and the injury of 16 others. On 30 June
and 1 July, UNAMID received reports of renewed clashes between the Ma’alia and
Hamar in the border area between East Darfur and West Kordo fan, reportedly owing
to Ma’alia rustling of Hamar cattle. The incident resulted in the death of 4 Ma’alia
and the injury of 29 others and an unconfirmed number of Hamar casualties. Local
sources confirmed that following the intervention of East Darfur Sta te authorities,
through the deployment of Government forces in the area, the situation stabilized.
The Mission also engaged youth leaders to de-escalate the situation. The two
communities have agreed to continue talks in July and August to resolve outstand ing
disputes.
15. Renewed fighting and retaliatory attacks between the Northern Rizeigat and
the Beni Hussein in El Sireif locality, North Darfur, included at least 10 attacks, 7 of
which were launched by the Northern Rizeigat and 3 by the Beni Hussein, r esulting
in 26 deaths of Beni Hussein and an unknown number of casualties among the
Northern Rizeigat. Clashes were triggered by cattle rustling and retaliatory attacks.
From April to June, the El Sireif-Kabkabiya-Saraf Umra road was blocked by the
Northern Rizeigat to prevent Beni Hussein movement. Following renewed fighting
over stolen livestock between the two communities, 13 Beni Hussein were killed
and at least 23 injured in Siriki on 26 June. An unknown number of Northern
Rizeigat casualties were reportedly taken to Saraf Umra. To draw the Government’s
attention to the fighting and increase in killings and attacks in El Sereif locality,
Beni Hussein community members demonstrated in front of the National Assembly
in Khartoum on 29 June and submitted a memorandum stating that 1,013 people had
been killed and 700 injured since the escalation in violence in 2013.
16. In Central Darfur, the Salamat and Misseriya tribes clashed repeatedly between
19 and 23 June in locations near Um Dukhun and Mukjar over competing land and
resources claims. The violence resulted in a large number of casualties on both
sides. In the village of Salayle in Um Dukhun, on 19 June, four Misseriya and six
Salamat tribesmen were killed and six others injured following the rustling of about
300 livestock belonging to the Misseriya. In a related incident in the Mukjar market
on 20 June, Misseriya elements allegedly opened fire, killing three Salamat. In
retaliation, Salamat elements reportedly killed two Misseriya. Humanitarian
agencies from Um Dukhun informed UNAMID that on 21 June, at Muradaf, at least
10 Misseriya were killed and 10 injured during clashes with the Salamat. As a result
of the conflict, some 3,700 civilians fled towards Chad; since that time, most have
returned to Um Dukhun. The Mission received reports that on 23 June, on the orders
of the Central Darfur authorities, Government authorities arrested 102 local leaders
of the Misseriya and Salamat from Zalingei and four other localities (Wadi Salih,
Mukjar, Bendisi and Um Dukhun) in an attempt to de-escalate tensions.

4/19

14-57702

S/2014/515

Increase in criminality and banditry
17. Economic stress and the competition over resources continued to exacerbate
the security situation and led to an increase in criminality and banditry in Darfur
during the reporting period. In addition, the withdrawal of Sudanese Revolutionary
Front elements from their strongholds, in particular in Kutum, Mellit, Korma,
Birkat, Tawilla and Thabit in North Darfur and around Menawashi and between
Nyala and Graida in South Darfur, provided criminal groups and other unidentified
armed elements the opportunity to expand control over those locations through
continuous intimidation and attacks against the civilian population.
18. Criminal activities included attacks on villages, rapes, hijacking and
abduction. Recorded crimes increased from 331 cases in the previous reporting
period to 422 cases in the current period. Several alleged cases of abductions of
internally displaced persons by criminal groups were recorded. Most of th e incidents
occurred in areas located near the perimeter of the internally displaced persons
camps.

B.

Humanitarian situation
19. Despite multiple challenges, humanitarian access improved in April and May
compared with the first quarter of 2014. Humanitarian agencies were able to reach
most of the areas affected by fighting and tribal clashes after sustained advocacy
with state authorities. These include El Lait and El Taweisha localities (North
Darfur) and some villages in South Darfur affected by hos tilities in the first quarter
of 2014. About 80 per cent of newly displaced persons received emergency
assistance from contingency and pre-positioned stocks. Altogether, more than 20
inter-agency assessment missions were conducted during the reporting peri od.
20. The number of people estimated to have been displaced by conflict in Darfur
since the beginning of the year increased from 250,000 in the previous reporting
period to 385,000 in the current period. Of those, an estimated 258,000 people
remained displaced at the time of reporting, alongside more than 2 million long term internally displaced persons.
21. Humanitarian needs generated by this new displacement come on top of the
needs of some 2.5 million internally displaced persons, 1.7 million of whom live in
camps, displaced by a conflict that has lasted over 11 years. It also comes at a time
of increasing food insecurity across the Sudan, with 5 million people estimated to be
experiencing varying levels of food insecurity. The majority of the newly d isplaced
people moved into existing camps and settlements, where services were in many
cases already stretched owing to the reduced presence of humanitarian actors,
funding shortfalls and insecurity.
22. Despite some improvement in access, the fragile security environment
continued to impede the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance and the
protection of civilians. Assistance for some 27,000 people was temporarily
suspended at the end of May in the Bileil camp in South Darfur owing to the looting
of health and nutrition facilities in the camp by unknown armed men. Verification
activities in the El Salam camp in South Darfur by the International Organization
for Migration were also temporarily suspended for security reasons. A clinic
managed by an international non-governmental organization in Central Darfur was

14-57702

5/19

S/2014/515

robbed in early May. That same month, three international non-governmental
organization vehicles were carjacked and a truck contracted by the World Food
Programme (WFP) was ransacked in East Darfur by unidentified armed men.
23. The two-month blockade by the Northern Rizeigat of the road connecting El
Sireif with Saraf Umra, Kabkabiya and Tine prevented the movement of goods into
El Sireif, further exacerbating rising food prices and contributi ng to the
deterioration of the nutrition situation. Humanitarian actors had to devise alternative
arrangements to deliver humanitarian aid, mainly through commercial transporters
and the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service.

C.

Operating environment
24. Restrictions of movement of UNAMID decreased considerably during the
reporting period. Between 1 April and 30 June, UNAMID land movements were
restricted on 21 occasions, compared with 72 restrictions in the previous reporting
period. Restrictions were highest in East Darfur. The authorities also denied 15 of
3,432 planned flights compared with 72 of 4,386 planned flights in the previous
period.
25. On 1 June, a UNAMID MI-8 flight carrying a delegation of Sudanese officials
landed at the authorized location in Tawisha (North Darfur). Following the
disembarking of Government officials, three Government personnel forced the pilot
and the crew at gunpoint to re-enter the aircraft, restart its engines and fly to a
nearby location that was not an authorized landing site for civilian aircraft. The
Mission formally protested the incident, which constituted a grave violation of the
status-of-forces agreement and international civil aviation rules and regulations. The
Ministry of Foreign Affairs responded to the Mission’s protests by denying that the
perpetrators were Government officials.
26. During the reporting period, UNAMID and humanitarian organizations
experienced a total of 11 carjacking incidents and 65 house break -ins and robberies
compared with 47 in the previous period. On 10 April, five armed men broke into
the private residence of UNAMID women police advisers and robbed them of cash
and other personal items. One of the police advisers was assaulted by the
perpetrators. The Government of the Sudan police apprehended three of the
perpetrators and recovered some of the stolen items. The Special Criminal Court for
Darfur Crimes commenced trial proceedings for three suspects on 15 June.
UNAMID is monitoring the proceedings.
27. A UNAMID soldier kidnapped on 9 March in Nyala was released on 30 April
and a civilian UNAMID contractor kidnapped in El Fasher on 11 March was
released on 12 June. UNAMID expressed gratitude to the Government of the Sudan
for its valuable assistance in these safe releases.
28. Humanitarian actors continued to face delivery challenges owing, inter alia, to
the activities of criminal elements. On 18 June, armed men abducted five
non-governmental organization and international non-governmental organization
staff members and one United Nations agency staff member who were travelling to
the Kutum team site helipad to catch a United Nations Humanitarian Air Service
flight. On 18 June, 14 non-governmental organization and international
non-governmental organization staff members were abd ucted at the Karakasaya area

6/19

14-57702

S/2014/515

in Kutum. Shortly thereafter on the same day, an additional three non-governmental
organization staff members were abducted in the area. Eighteen non-governmental
organization and international non-governmental organization staff members were
released on 18 June and two others on 2 July. On 18 July, the last three staff
members (one from the United Nations and two from international
non-governmental organizations) remaining in captivity were released as a result of
joint efforts by UNAMID and local authorities. The United Nations is grateful for
the assistance of the Government of the Sudan in the release of these personnel.
29. During the reporting period, certain areas remained completely cut off from
assistance, in particular Hashaba North in Kutum, North Darfur, and the eastern part
of the Jebel Marra mountains spanning Central and North Darfur. The suspension of
operations of the International Committee of the Red Cross in February created
significant gaps in the delivery of humanitarian assistance and in food security and
livelihood services for an estimated 100,000 people in the Jebel Marra area. About
49,000 people in need of assistance in Adilla and Abu Karinka in East Darfur have
remained inaccessible since August 2013. The withdrawal in May of an international
non-governmental organization from West, South and East Darfur left gaps in health
and nutrition assistance.
30. During the reporting period, the Government of the Sudan issued 510 entry
visas for UNAMID personnel. This included 7 civilian personnel, 188 military,
3 police, 172 contractors, 120 official visitors and 20 dependants of Khartoum -based
staff. As at 30 June, 34 visas were pending, including for one civilian staff member,
two United Nations Volunteers (UNVs), 25 military personnel, three contractors and
three official visitors. The Government of the Sudan recently rejected four entry
visas for senior staff members without providing justification. In addition, the
Government has suspended all UNV visa requests and no entry visas for UNVs were
processed in 2014. UNAMID has raised this issue at several tripartite meetings. The
Government has informed UNAMID that in its view, nationals should be considered
for the UNV posts.
31. With regard to the 43 military and police units currently deployed to
UNAMID, 15 have achieved an equipment serviceability rate of 90 per cent.
Unfortunately, the serviceability rate of three units has fallen below 50 per cent.
Shortfalls in contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment, especially in the
areas of catering, communications and level-1 medical capacities, put a burden on
the Mission’s resources and limit the much-needed temporary deployment capability
of the troop-contributing countries. Moreover, continued shortfalls in major
equipment, mainly armoured personnel carriers, undermine the effectiveness of
UNAMID military operations, including long-range patrols crucial to the protection
of civilians in remote localities.
32. UNAMID and the Secretariat continue to engage with both troop- and policecontributing countries to rectify all contingent-owned equipment and selfsustainment shortfalls. A biweekly coordination mechanism with all stakeholders
has been established to review progress, identify the bottlenecks and expedite the
deployment of all the required but missing equipment. While some progress has
been made in addressing the shortfalls, several troop- and police-contributing
countries have yet to fulfil their agreed memorandum of understanding
commitments. Additionally, efforts are also being made by the Mission to expedite
approvals by the Government of the Sudan for the deployment of contingent -owned

14-57702

7/19

S/2014/515

equipment. As a result of these efforts, a serviceability ratio of 96 per cent and
81 per cent for armoured personnel carriers has been achieved in Sector North and
Sector West respectively. The Mission and the Secretariat are closely monitoring the
progress in Sector South, where the serviceability ratio is 70 per cent.

III. Achievements and impact of the Mission
33. During the reporting period, the Mission continued to focus its activities on the
three strategic priorities reflected in its revised benchmarks (see S/2014/279)
endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 2148 (2014).

A.

Inclusive peace process
34. The African Union and United Nations Joint Special Representative and Joint
Chief Mediator for Darfur, Mohamed Ibn Chambas, continued to engage regularly
with senior officials of the Government of the Sudan on the imperative need for
direct negotiations. In these discussions, the Government underscored its
commitment to a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Darfur. The Joint Special
Representative/Joint Special Mediator also held consultations with officials of the
Government’s committee for outreach to non-signatory movements to the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur to discuss ways of bringing the rebel groups into the
peace process and the potential that the proposed national dialogue initiative put
forward by the Government might have on durable peace in Darfur.
35. In his interventions with Government officials, the Joint Special
Representative/Joint Chief Mediator stressed that it was important f or the
Government to ensure that the four key freedoms enabling a conducive environment
for the national dialogue were respected, namely: (a) freedom for political parties to
carry out their activities, in accordance with the law; (b) freedom of the press,
provided it commits to the Sudan’s media code of ethics; (c) the release of political
detainees, provided they are not facing pre-existing criminal charges; and
(d) assurances that the rebel groups can participate in the national dialogue
preparations freely and with security guarantees.
36. The Joint Special Representative/Joint Chief Mediator consistently called upon
the armed movements to join the peace process. He encouraged them to utilize the
national dialogue as a platform to promote their proposal for a holistic approach to
the settlement of the conflict and challenges facing the Sudan. On 13 April, the
Sudanese Revolutionary Front issued a road map to comprehensive political
settlement in the Sudan, in which it reiterated its call for a holistic a pproach to
settling the conflicts in the Sudan and bringing democratic change to the country. It
urged the Government to create a conducive environment for national dialogue and
to introduce confidence-building measures that include protection of civilians in
regions of conflict, a negotiated cessation of hostilities, including an agreement on
unhindered humanitarian access to all conflict areas, and the holding of a
preparatory conference outside the Sudan for all stakeholders to discuss the
modalities for the national dialogue. They suggested that a preparatory conference
could be held under the auspices of the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and UNAMID.

8/19

14-57702

S/2014/515

37. On 5 May, the Joint Special Representative/Joint Chief Mediator and the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security met the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of State for Cabinet Affairs of Qatar. They reiterated their commitment
to work closely together in facilitating discussions on the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur.
Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
38. Some progress was made towards the implementation of the provisions of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. During the reporting period, in a meeting
between the Government of the Sudan and the Justice and Equality Movement Sudan (JEM-Sudan) convened by the Ceasefire Commission on 18 May, JEM -Sudan
committed to commence a troop verification exercise and to submit the location of
its troops to the Ceasefire Commission. On 4 June, one battalion of JEM -Sudan
combatants, mainly from Tine and Kornoi in North Darfur, arrived in El Fasher to
prepare for their encampment. JEM-Sudan is now fully represented in the
Implementation Follow-up Commission, the Ceasefire Commission and the Joint
Commission.
39. The Government of the Sudan and the Liberation and Justice Movement also
met on 13 April and 19 May, under the auspices of the Ceasefire Commission, to
assess progress towards the integration of 2,430 of the Movement’s combatants into
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the police, as agreed at the meeting of the Joint
Commission held on 25 February in Khartoum. Encampment barracks in South
Darfur for Liberation and Justice Movement combatants have been prepared by the
Government of the Sudan and verified by UNAMID. The Government also
earmarked the required funding for integration activities in its 2014 budget.
However, the Movement has yet to submit the disposition of the 2,430 combatants.
40. In addition to the progress on the security arrangements, on 26 May, the
Implementation Committee of the Darfur internal dialogue and consultation was
officially launched in El Fasher. The 17-member Committee comprises figures who
were identified following extensive consultations by the dialogue and consultation
facilitators. The Committee will govern and implement the dialogue and
consultation process, chair and oversee the dialogue and consultations , ensure
inclusivity and transparency of the process, and undertake technical and logistical
preparations with support from UNAMID. However, prevailing insecurity, lack of
adequate funding and intimidation of participants are concerns that could undermine
effective implementation of the Darfur internal dialogue and consultation. The
body’s secretariat raised these concerns with the Implementation Committee, which
plans to visit all Darfur state capitals in August 2014 to bring these challenges to the
attention of state officials. The Darfur internal dialogue and consultation is
estimated to cost $7 million, to be funded by voluntary contributions through the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). To date, Qatar has pledged
$1.7 million as seed money.
41. On 15 June, the Darfur Regional Authority inaugurated the Justice, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, one of the key institutions of the Darfur internal
dialogue and consultation. Established by presidential decree, the Commission is to
assess the root causes of the conflict in Darfur and address issues related to the
reparation of victims and impunity as part of a wider process of building peace and
reconciliation. It is comprised of the Justice Committee, which has 22 members,

14-57702

9/19

S/2014/515

mostly lawyers, politicians and the Native Administration, and the Truth and
Reconciliation Committee, which has 26 members and is made up of tribal leaders.
Both Committees were formally launched on 22 June. The Commission includes
five women members.
42. As part of its efforts to enhance the technical capacity of Darfur Regional
Authority institutions, UNAMID conducted four training workshops on
geographical information systems and remote sensing as well as geographical
positioning systems and map reading for officials of the Darfur Land Commission.
The skills and knowledge gained will inform the implementation of the
Commission’s project on a natural resources and land use database and mapping of
Darfur that will be the basis of land use laws and policies, as well as instituti onal
and technical capacity needed for sustainable management of Darfur’s natural
resources.
43. UNAMID and the Darfur Regional Authority also commenced technical and
legal arrangements for the joint broadcast of radio programmes. The initiative will
enable the Authority to utilize UNAMID infrastructure, while at the same time
providing UNAMID with the platform to run three-hour daily live broadcasts during
primetime.
44. There has also been some progress in the implementation of the Darfur
Development Strategy. At the second meeting of the Strategy’s Executive Board,
held in El Fasher on 27 April, the Government of Qatar confirmed its pledge of
$88.5 million to finance the Strategy’s foundational and short -term projects. This
commitment was signed between the Government of Qatar and the United Nations
Resident Coordinator in the Sudan on 27 April. Out of the total amount, $10 million
was transferred to the Darfur Reconstruction and Development Fund ahead of the
meeting, providing it with its first contribution.

B.

Protection of civilians
Provision of physical protection
45. During the reporting period, UNAMID continued to provide physical
protection to over 50,000 civilians who sought refuge around its team sites
following the hostilities in the first quarter of 2014, largely in Korma, Khor Abeche,
Labado and Mellit.
46. In Khor Abeche, the Mission constructed a buffer zone near its team site to
accommodate internally displaced persons and enhanced its patrols around the
newly constructed protection site. The Mission also facilitated a mediation process
between the Khor Abeche internally displaced persons and the communities of
Neteaga (South Darfur), which led to the release, on 17 April, of three internally
displaced persons abducted by members of the Misseriya community in March. In
Korma (North Darfur), UNAMID enhanced security and confidence-building patrols
around the team site in the light of the influx of newly displaced persons. The
Mission also provided security and logistical support for the delivery and
distribution of humanitarian assistance to displaced persons around the team site.
47. During the reporting period, the Mission prevented two attacks on civilians by
armed elements. On 5 April, a UNAMID escort convoy successfully repelled an
ambush by an unidentified armed group near the Sindi exchange point in North

10/19

14-57702

S/2014/515

Darfur. On 7 May, a quick reaction force was deployed to the Kalma internally
displaced persons camp in response to reports by the community policing centre of
shots being fired in the vicinity of the camp by Arab nomads on horseback,
motorbikes and a vehicle mounted with a machine gun. The nomads fled upon
arrival of the quick reaction force. The situation was stabilized after UNAMID
intensified patrols in the area.
48. On 24 May, UNAMID troops intervened to protect civilians at the Birgi
market in Kabkabiya from a group of 60 Arab militiamen. In that regard, following
altercations between Fur tribesmen from the village of Al Salam and the Arab
militiamen, the peacekeepers intervened to facilitate a mediation meeting. The Arab
militia nevertheless became hostile and started shooting at the peacekeepers, at
which point they returned fire. As a result of the ensuing fighting, four Rwandan
peacekeepers were wounded, one of whom died from his injuries. The fighting left
an unconfirmed number of casualties among the militia group. The Mission’s
response and steps taken to defuse the tensions have been key factors in controlling
the situation and preventing an escalation.
Logistic and security support to humanitarian operations
49. During the reporting period, UNAMID continued to provide military escorts to
WFP humanitarian aid convoys in Darfur. Between April and June 2014, 4,767
metric tons of food and 24.62 metric tons of non-food items were escorted to
various locations. This work was enhanced by the co -location of WFP logistic
officers with UNAMID to ensure timely delivery of food and non-food items to
beneficiaries across Darfur.
50. The efforts of UNAMID and the United Nations country team to stabilize the
situation in and around Saraf Umra led to the successful return of 66,473 people to
their places of origin. Moreover, during the reporting period, nine medical
evacuations of internally displaced persons in critical condition wer e carried out,
and on 30 June, 11 critically injured people were evacuated from El Sireif to El
Fasher following the clashes between the Beni Hussein and the Northern Rizeigat.
51. In collaboration with local non-governmental organizations, WFP concluded
rapid food distribution on 22 June at the Korma team site while the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the State Ministry of Health established a temporary
health clinic at the site. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) distributed
non-food items to 7,160 persons displaced in March and made arrangements to
provide for newly displaced persons.
52. Humanitarian actors carried out an inter-agency mission to Nertiti and Guldo
in Central Darfur from 29 June to 1 July. This followed an earlier visit to G uldo and
Gornei on 17 June, during which a lack of basic services and rising commodity
prices owing to intermittent intercommunal tensions, road blockades and protection
fees at checkpoints were observed. The area has remained inaccessible to UNAMID
and humanitarian actors since 2011 owing to a combination of factors, including
restrictions by the Government, clashes between the Sudanese Armed Forces and
SLA-AW elements, as well as the rugged geography of the site. The joint
assessment mission found that nearly all the 30,000 internally displaced persons
who had fled from Guldo and Golo to Nertiti town during the December 2012
clashes between the Sudanese Armed Forces and SLA-AW had returned to the area.
The last food distribution in the area took place in J une 2013. Following the visit,

14-57702

11/19

S/2014/515

humanitarian actors started preparations to resume activities in the area. The mission
to Guldo represents significant progress with regard to humanitarian access in the
Jebel Marra area. Follow-up missions are planned to other localities, including Golo
and Rockero, which are under Government control, with a presence of rebel groups
in the surrounding areas.
Protective environment
53. The protective environment remained tenuous, as intercommunal conflict and
criminality continued to affect vulnerable civilians. During the reporting period,
UNAMID military personnel conducted 13,511 patrols, including 7,063 routine
patrols, 2,485 night patrols, 1,162 administrative patrols, 1,240 humanitarian
escorts, 1,241 short-range patrols and 320 long-range patrols. UNAMID police
conducted a total of 7,253 patrols, including 3,911 inside internally displaced
persons camps, 254 firewood and farm patrols, 3,043 patrols in villages, towns and
markets, 873 medium-range patrols and 259 long-range patrols.
54. The Mission continued its efforts to support the capacity-building of
Government police in the areas of crime investigation, crime scene management,
public order, detention and treatment of suspects and community policing.
55. In collaboration with the United Nations Mine Action Service, UNAMID
assessed 887 km of routes, surveyed 73 villages covering 164 square km and
destroyed 725 items of unexploded ordnance and 8,314 small arms ammunition
during the reporting period. Education on the risks of explosive remnants of war
was also provided to over 60,000 internally displaced persons. Four million people
were expected to have been reached through radio messages. A pilot explosive
ordnance disposal course was conducted for 20 Government police personnel and
operations and quality management training was provided for personnel of the
National Mine Action Authority.
56. The Mission documented 209 human rights violations and abuses involving
484 victims, compared with 156 incidents involving 314 victims in the previous
reporting period. Of the 209 documented cases, 54 cases and 88 victims involved
violations of the right to life, 95 cases and 276 victims involved violations of the
right to physical integrity (including 17 cases and 55 victims of abduction), and
2 cases and 17 victims involved arbitrary arrests and detentions. The majority of
perpetrators were identified as belonging to the Government security services or
members of armed movements. Some were described by the victims as “armed men”
and “militia groups”.
57. Accountability for human rights violations and abuses continued to be
undermined by a number of factors, including weak justice and law enforcement
systems, the absence of local police in some areas, lack of confidence in
Government authorities or fear of reprisals, as cited by some of the victims. Of the
209 cases recorded by UNAMID, only 96 were reported to Government authorities.
Investigations were initiated in 39 cases, leading to 15 arrests, with six arrested
perpetrators eventually released on bail.
58. On 19 June, the United Nations Independent Expert on the situation of human
rights in the Sudan met with various stakeholders in El Fasher, including the
UNAMID leadership, as part of consultations before submitting his report to the
Human Rights Council in September.

12/19

14-57702

S/2014/515

59. Sexual and gender-based violence remained a pervasive feature of the conflict
in Darfur. UNAMID documented 58 cases of sexual and gender-based violence
involving 103 victims (27 minors), an increase from 35 c ases involving 53 victims
in the previous reporting period. The majority of the victims were internally
displaced persons. Of the 58 cases recorded by UNAMID, 20 were alleged to have
been perpetrated by members of the Government’s forces. All but 2 of the 58 cases
involved armed perpetrators. Most of the victims were attacked while collecting
firewood and engaging in livelihood activities. Of the 58 incidents, 30 were reported
to have been perpetrated by Government police. Investigations were initiated in 1 9
cases, leading to 10 arrests, with four alleged perpetrators released on bail. In one
case, a member of the internally displaced persons community police in the Hujaj
camp in West Darfur, who had received UNAMID training on community policing,
successfully apprehended a man who was attempting to rape an internally displaced
person and handed him over to Government police. UNAMID continued a number
of training activities and workshops in internally displaced persons camps to raise
awareness on sexual and gender-based violence.
60. With regard to child protection issues, collaboration between State authorities
and the United Nations country team on child protection issues was further
strengthened during the reporting period through 15 child protection worki ng groups
and other advocacy meetings, which served to promote local ownership of the
protection agenda for children.
61. UNAMID also continued to provide capacity-building on international human
rights standards, including training for Government and civil society
representatives. In that regard, during the reporting period, the Zalingei prison in
Central Darfur instituted systems to ensure compliance with human rights standards
in the treatment of prisoners. In its efforts to support the strengthening of the
corrections system, UNAMID trained a total of 146 newly recruited prison officers
in basic prison duties, riot control, documentation and record-keeping.
62. Regarding the investigation and prosecution of those responsible for the
attacks on civilians in North and South Darfur in February and March, the General
Prosecutor informed UNAMID that 1,000 cases had been registered in both states,
6 of which had been referred to the Special Court. The Mission provided logistical
support for the Prosecutors’ missions in various locations in Darfur to investigate
crimes.
63. As part of its efforts to increase access to and build the capacity of rule of law
institutions, the Mission completed five quick-impact projects through which it
rehabilitated the infrastructure of Government police and victims support centres in
East and Central Darfur, as well as the Malha Rural Court in North Darfur. The rural
court will provide access to the judicial system to a population of over 150,000
people.
64. UNAMID continued to help to mitigate violence and stabilize communities
through the implementation of community-based labour-intensive projects. Twentysix new projects were approved for the fiscal year 2013 -2014, all of which are under
implementation. The projects targeted approximately 4,000 at-risk youths, with up
to 70,000 local community members benefiting from rehabilitation or construction
activities. Needs assessments for new projects to be implemented in the fiscal year
2014-2015 are ongoing.

14-57702

13/19

S/2014/515

C.

Prevention and mitigation of community conflict
65. In response to renewed fighting between the Northern Rezeigat and the Beni
Hussein in April and May, the Mission engaged tribal leaders from both sides, as
well as local and state authorities and Sudanese security agencies, to contain the
conflict. From 5 to 7 June, the Mission provided technical and logistical support to a
reconciliation conference conducted by the Native Administration and the Ajaweed
(mediation) Council for over 250 participants, including tribal leaders and
government officials, from El Sereif, Saraf Umra and Kabkabiya localities. The
conference brokered the release on 7 June of seven Beni Hussein tribesmen
abducted by members of the Northern Rizeigat tribe on 26 May and established
committees to strengthen existing reconciliation mechanisms.
66. UNAMID continued to support the efforts of the Ajaweed Council to resolve
the conflict between the Ma’alia and the Southern Rizeigat in East Darfur. In efforts
to reconcile the two tribes, the Mission engaged with the nazir (traditional chief) of
the Ma’alia to encourage adherence to the cessation of hostilities agreement signed
with the Southern Rizeigat in August 2013 and to initiate a reconciliation
conference. To that end, UNAMID provided technical support to a series of peaceful
coexistence campaigns launched by the young people of the Ma’alia and the
Southern Rizeigat tribes. A reconciliation conference between the two tribes
commenced on 10 June in Al Foula, West Kordofan State, with support from
UNAMID, the Ajaweed Council and local authorities. The conference focused on
the need for Government security forces to strengthen the monitoring of the
cessation of hostilities agreement in order to prevent a return to conflict, and to
ensure the permanent opening of the El Daein-Khartoum road.
67. In Central Darfur, the killing of an Ereigat tribesman by the Nawaiba in Nertiti
locality on 3 April created tensions between the two communities. In an effort to
de-escalate tension, UNAMID provided technical support to a mediation process led
by the Ajaweed Council on 5 and 10 April. On 15 April, both tribes welcomed the
outcome of the mediation, thus ending weeks of tension.
68. As noted in paragraph 16 above, following clashes between Misseriya and
Salamat communities in Um Dukhun and Mukjar (Central Darfur) from 19 to
27 June, local authorities deployed forces to the area and arrested over 100 persons
from both communities accused of fomenting the clashes. UNAMID continues to
support and engage Government authorities and local authorities of both
communities on the root causes of the conflict and to encourage the implementation
of the July 2013 cessation of hostilities agreement.
69. UNAMID also continued to engage Government institutions, the Native
Administration, local peaceful coexistence committees and agriculture protection
committees to prevent and mitigate intercommunal conflicts. Six conferences on
peaceful coexistence were organized in West, East and Central Darfur, leading to
concrete plans to open nomadic migratory routes in these areas, thereby facilitating
smooth seasonal migration and reducing conflicts between pastoralists and farmers.
UNAMID, in collaboration with the Tawaf al-Rahil Organization, a local
non-governmental organization, facilitated 11 youth-led peace campaigns with over
1,500 participants in different nomadic settlements in Kutum, Kabkabiya and Saraf
Umra localities to promote peaceful coexistence, social cohesion and the role of
traditional conflict resolution mechanisms.

14/19

14-57702

S/2014/515

70. Between April and June, UNAMID conducted eight workshops on
strengthening traditional conflict resolution mechanisms for 320 participants in all
Darfur states. Four workshops on the principles of governance in democratic
systems were also conducted in East, West and Central Darfur for members of the
legislative councils, civil society organizations and other stakeholders. In North
Darfur, UNAMID facilitated a dialogue session for local government officials on the
establishment of a transparent, accountable and inclusive local civil administration
in Darfur. These initiatives are expected to enhance local capacities in preventing
and mitigating conflicts and in promoting inclusive governance.

IV. Implementation of the strategic review
71. In accordance with the strategic priorities of the Mission outlined in my report
of 25 February 2014 (S/2014/138), UNAMID has taken concrete measures to
refocus its activities and resources to achieve greater effectiveness and cost efficiency. These measures include the implementation of revised standard operating
procedures to enhance capacity for physical protection, in particular in respect of
the military and police components, and to increase the robustness of the Force and
formed police units. In addition, the Force headquarters has stepped up its efforts to
monitor team site operational readiness and has developed guidelines for protection
actions under different scenarios.
72. In addition, UNAMID continues to increase and strengthen its coordination
and collaboration with the United Nations country team. UNAMID police have
identified areas of coordination in seven programmes, which have been jointly
developed with the country team, for Government police capacity-building and
community-oriented policing in furtherance of the memorandum of understanding
between UNAMID and the Ministry of the Interior on police development.
UNAMID is encouraging its national counterpart to nominate members of police
development committees at the national, state and local levels to facilitate the
implementation of these programmes. Efforts are also under way to improve the
effectiveness and impact of escorts for humanitarian agencies. UNAMID and the
country team have also nearly completed work on the revised integrated strategic
framework, which should help to maximize United Nations resources dedicated to
programmes of mutual concern. A comprehensive revision of the mission concept is
also under way in support of the effective implementation of the Mission’s strategic
priorities.
73. Planning and implementation structures are being strengthened to enhance
coordination, monitoring and reporting of Mission activities at all levels. Notes
verbales documenting access restrictions that impede UNAMID from fully
implementing its mandate are now being submitted on a monthly basis to the
Government, reminding it of its obligation regarding the freedom of movement of
UNAMID personnel.
74. With regard to the implementation of the first phase of the streamlining
exercise, as outlined in my previous report, the restructuring of the military
component is ongoing in the five sectors. The heavy transport company (155)
ceased operations on 30 June and will be repatriated by the end of July. The military
is in the process of reducing its staff by 200 staff officers, liaison officers and

14-57702

15/19

S/2014/515

military observers, 121 of whom will leave by December 2014, 59 by March 2015
and the final 20 by May 2015.
75. The police component was reduced by 723 individual police officers in
May 2014, while skills profiles were conducted in accordance with the restructuring
and revised selection processes in order to identify the right skills for new arrivals.
Three of the four formed police units that were to be repatriated as part of the
streamlining process have departed the Mission area. The fourth will depart by the
second week of August 2014. The reduction in civilian posts as part of the first
phase of the streamlining exercise will be completed by 31 December, while a
recruitment freeze has been instituted in the affected sections.
76. Realignment of the UNAMID civilian staff components within the revised
strategic priorities continues. In that connection, phase two of the UNAMID
streamlining exercise has focused on the Political Affairs Division, the Joint
Mediation Support Team, the Civil Affairs Section, the Human Rights Section, the
Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section, the Public Information
Office, the Humanitarian and Protection Strategy Coordination Division and the
Joint Support and Coordination Mechanism, as well as the Front Offices of the Joint
Special Representative/Joint Chief Mediator and his two deputies. The final
decisions related to phase two of the streamlining will be taken in July. The results
of the third phase will be reflected in my next report and will focus on Mission
support, security and the Khartoum Liaison Office.

V. Observations and recommendations
77. The underlying causes of the conflict in Darfur persist and civilians continue
to bear the brunt of the hostilities. However, during the reporting period, the
security situation improved slightly, as did access for UNAMID and agency
personnel. I call upon the Government and armed elements to ensure that these
gains are not reversed.
78. Long-term stability in Darfur will require large-scale support for recovery and
development. This will go a long way in addressing the underlying causes of tribal
conflict and the demands of rebel groups for economic and political parity with
other parts of the country. It will also facilitate the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. The United Nations is ready to heed the Government’s call for
such support. However, there are preconditions. The trends observed in the current
reporting period must continue. Secure conditions and access must be strengthened
throughout the five states. UNAMID, protection and development actors must enjoy
uninhibited access.
79. Despite positive developments in the reporting period, the rights of civilians
continue to be threatened by all armed elements, including the Government, rebels,
militia, criminals and belligerent tribal elements. The exposure of civilians to
wanton killing, sexual abuse, the destruction of their homes and displacement is
unacceptable. The Government is primarily responsible for the protection of its
citizens and I call upon it to do more to protect the basic rights of the people of
Darfur. UNAMID and the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes stand
ready to support the Government in strengthening its protection capacity. Ending all
violence and providing access is the first step.

16/19

14-57702

S/2014/515

80. I call upon the Government and non-signatory movements to take advantage of
the efforts of my Joint Special Representative/Joint Chief Mediator for direct
negotiations. In that regard, I welcome the steps taken by the Government towards
an inclusive national dialogue. The national dialogue has the potential to offer an
opportunity to address political grievances and pave the way for lasting peace
throughout the Sudan. The honouring by the Government of its commitment to
enable an environment conducive to the national dialogue would constitute a key
step towards achieving a credible, transparent and inclusive process.
81. Efforts by the signatory parties, supported by international partners, towards
the effective implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur are
welcome. In particular, I thank the Government of Qatar for its generous
contributions to the implementation of the Doha Document, including for the Darfur
internal dialogue and consultation and the Darfur Development Strategy. In that
regard, I appreciate the generous contribution made to the Darfur Reconstruction
and Development Fund.
82. While progress has been made, more efforts are required to ensure an impact
on the ground and in particular to address the conditions of internally displaced
persons and other conflict-affected people in Darfur. Concrete measures need to be
put in place to expedite the implementation of the Doha Document for Peac e in
Darfur. I also call upon the parties to the Doha Document to expedite the creation of
feasible mechanisms to address intercommunal conflict, to implement the security
provisions of the peace framework, and to address issues of justice, protection and
economic and social recovery.
83. I am pleased to note that following sustained advocacy by humanitarian actors,
state authorities have granted access to most of the areas affected by new
displacements, including El Lait and El Taweisha localities in Nort h and South
Darfur. I urge the Government of the Sudan to allow unhindered humanitarian
access to other areas in North and Central Darfur and eastern Jebel Marra where
significant gaps in humanitarian assistance remain, especially in terms of health,
water, sanitation, hygiene, food security and livelihood services for an estimated
100,000 people.
84. Despite recent gains, the humanitarian situation in Darfur remains acutely
fragile, with significant numbers of displaced persons and others in need of
humanitarian assistance. The reduced presence of humanitarian actors has
exacerbated the situation. I call upon the Government to ensure that humanitarian
actors can operate in Darfur in support of addressing basic needs and upon donors to
provide the financial resources necessary to reach those in need.
85. In the past months, UNAMID, with the support of its troop - and policecontributing countries and the United Nations country team, has made significant
strides in implementing the recommendations of the strat egic review. UNAMID
components have been streamlined around the main priorities of the Mission and
strategic and operational coordination has been strengthened to ensure that all
resources are used for maximum effect on the ground. I commend the leadership of
UNAMID for its dedication and commitment in spearheading that process.
86. I believe that the Mission’s focus on the three strategic priorities, and the work
done to increase their effectiveness, are having an impact on the ground. Our troops
and police are becoming more proactive and the work of the various components of

14-57702

17/19

S/2014/515

the Mission, including with the United Nations country team, is being streamlined
around common actions.
87. I wish to express my deep condolences to the family and the Government of
Rwanda for the loss of a Rwandan soldier in Kabkabiya on 24 May. This Rwandan
soldier died in the line of duty while taking proactive and robust action to protect
civilians. His actions are to be commended.
88. On 30 July 2013, under its resolution 2113 (2013), the Security Council
extended the mandate of UNAMID for a period of one year, until 31 August 2014.
The Council requested that the United Nations, in consultation with the African
Union, conduct a forward-looking review of the implementation of the UNAMID
mandate, taking into account developments in Darfur since the Mission was
established. It also requested that I submit to the Council a report on the review by
February 2014. On 3 April 2014, under its resolution 2148 (2014), the Security
Council endorsed the findings of the review, reflected in my report of 25 February
2014 (S/2014/138), and noted its intention to monitor closely the implementation of
its recommendations and the streamlining of the Mission. As noted in the same
report, I intend to make further recommendations on the configuration of UNAMID
in the first quarter of 2015, pending a close examination of the outcome of the first
year of work on increasing the Mission’s impact and effectiveness.
89. In the meantime, under its Communiqué PSC/PR/COMM. (CDXLVI) of
16 July, adopted following its meeting held on 9 July on the situation in Darfur a nd
the activities of UNAMID, the African Union Peace and Security Council welcomed
the progress made in the strategic priority areas of UNAMID and in the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, while calling upon all
parties to recommit to finding a peaceful resolution of the conflict, and decided to
extend the mandate of UNAMID for a further period of one year. The African Union
Peace and Security Council called upon the Security Council to also consider a
one-year extension of the mandate of UNAMID. In the light of the progress
achieved to date, I recommend that the Security Council consider extending the
Mission’s mandate until 31 August 2015, without prejudice to any further
recommendations I may make following examination of the progres s made in the
implementation of the findings of the strategic review.
90. In conclusion, I would like to thank the Joint Special Representative/Joint
Chief Mediator, Mohamed Ibn Chambas, and all the women and men of UNAMID,
who continue to work tirelessly to protect civilians and promote peace in Darfur. I
would also like to express my sincere appreciation to all humanitarian aid workers
for their determined efforts to assist and improve the lives of people in need in what
are often very challenging conditions in Darfur.

18/19

14-57702

S/2014/515

Annex

14-57702

19/19
