UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

1862””

MEETING:

8 DECEMBER

1979jN

~~~~~~~y

JUN 15 'MO

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1862) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
((I) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the -President of~the Security
Council (S/l 1892);
(h) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1893) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.1862

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~rpp1~w~vtt.s of the OjJidtrl Recut-& of’thc Suwv’ty Co~r~cil, The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in’ 1964; are published in yearly volumes of Rcw~rrtions trntl
Drcisior~s czf’the Sccwrity Corrtwil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965,became fully operative
on that date.

Held in New York on Motiday, 8 JhxiWer
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

Palestine Liberation
in the discussion.

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United
Republic
of Cameroon,
United
Rep-ublic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/f862)

of the agenda

wus culled to order ut 6.15 p.m.
Adoption df tbe agenda

3. The delegation
of the Byelorussian
SSR’ has
iistened with the keenest attention to the observations
made by the representatives of Lebanon, Egypt, Sy’ria
aQd the PLO [0?5SPth meeting],
who have given a
detailed account of events testifying to the fact that
a new act of aggression has been committed
by
Israel against Lebanon and the Palestinians. We agree
fully with the description given by the representatives of those countries of the piratical acts of Israel,
which has flagrantly violated the territorial
integrity
of Lebanon and has perpetrated barbarous air-raids
against a number of settlements in that Arab State,
and against the Pqlestinian camps on that territory.
By reason of that fact- as has been shown by the
press, the statements of the representatives
of the
Arab States and of the PLO-there
were victims among
the -civilian
population.
Hundreds
of peaceful
inhabitants
have been injured or killed, especially
women, the aged and children. A number of dwellings
an,d buildings were destroyed. Even -the American
press was obliged to recognize that for a year and a
half now the greatest number of victims, as a result

The agendu wus udupted.
in the Middle

(PLO) ‘to participate

2. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation
from Russiun): First of all, the delegation of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic wishes to say how
pleased it is to find that, in the work of the Security
Council which is called upon to consider a new act
of aggression committed
by Israel, we have the
representatives of the PLO participating.
In fact, after
the General Assembly it was the Security Council
which took an important historical step by affording
the PLO, as well as the other parties concerned, an
opportunity
to participate
in the discussion of this
all-important
and urgent question. Another important
‘United Nations organ, entrusted with special responsibilities for the maintenance of interndtional
peace and
security, has made ‘a just decision by taking account
ti ‘the fact that, without the PLO, questions relating
to the tiiddle
East ,can neither be discussed nor
resolved.

(b) utter dated 3 becember 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14893)

The situation

Grganization

At the inr;itation
of the President,
Mr. Ghorru
(Lehunon),
tir. Ahdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Alluf
(Syrian Aruh Republic)
and Mr. Aql (Pulestine
Liherution Orgunization)
took .pkuces at the Security
Council tub/e.

The situation in the Middle East:
(u) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1892);

The meeting

1975, at 3.30 p.‘in.

East:

w Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent

Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addiessed to the Presidefit of the Security Council
(S/11892);

8) ‘Iktter

dated 3 December 1975 from the ,Permanent
Representative
of Egypt, to the Unfted &&ions
addiessed to the Pre’sident df the Security Council
(S/11893)

In actordance with the.deci1. The PRESIDENT:
sions taken at the i859th meeting, under rule 37 of the
provisional
rules of procedure I propose, with the
consent &f the Council, to invite the representatives
of Lebanon, Egypt and the Syrian Arab R&ublic,
to participate in the discussian, without the right to
vote. In accordance with the decision also taken
at the 1859th meeting, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite the repreientative
of the
1

of those barbarous Israeli
among the civiliatrpopulation.

attacks,

is to be found

name a single State, another State, which, like Israel,
has committed
itself systematically
to carrying out
acts of aggression against neighbouring
sovereign
States?

4. We categorically
condemn those barbarous acts
which trample underfoot the most elementary rules of
international
law..i This new infamous act perpetrated
by Israel comes at a time when the General Assembly
and the Securityt.Council
are making every effort to
contribute
to ;the settlement
of the Middle East
problem.

11. From year to year Israeli militaristic
extremists
are attempting to find some kind of basis for carrying
out their raids and intrusions into the territory of
Lebanon. At the same time, the representatives of
Israel have stated their wish for peace. In truth, the
logic of these people is preposterous. They reckon
with nothing and stop at nothing in order to put into
effect their deep-laid plans. We can no longer tolerate this policy of hypocrisy and treachery. The aggressor not only disregards United Nations decisions
but in actual fact haughtily states that it will not take
part in the discussion of the Middle East question if
the PLO also takes part in those discussions. Along
with this it carries out premeditated
acts of aggression, in an attempt to complicate the whole situation
in the Middle East and prevent a just and peaceful
settlement, and undermines the steps already taken
in that direction.

5. With regard to the position of the Byelorussian SSR on this question, it is well known that all
Israeli troops must be withdrawn from the territories
they occupiedin
1967. The inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people must be recognized, including their
right to their own State. If these questions are not
solved, there can be no peace in that region.
:G
6. The overwhelming majority of the Members of the
United Nations, and the world community, insistently
and rightly clamour for a just settlement of the Middle East problem. They know that the only way. to
establish ‘peace in the Middle East-to
eliminate this
explosive situation-would
be to solve these fundamental, problems in a just and durable manner. In
order to arrive at an over-all settlement
of the
problem, the Geneva Peace Conference-which
was
established
for that purpose-must
be convened
as soon as possible in order to settle the Middle
East problem with the participation
of all the parties
directly concerned, including the PLO, the representative of the Palestinian people.

12. Israel is making attempts to intimidate the Arab
peoples, particularly the people of Palestine, and to
exert pressure on them. But the Israeli militarists
have chosen a course that is too dangerous, primarily
for themselves. Israel still attempts to disregard the
PLO, and slanders that organization,
which is a
legitimate
representative
of the Arab people of
Palestine; Israel is unwilling to face up to this fact.
It is time finally for Tel Aviv to understand that
without the participation
of the PLO there can be no
peaceful settlement in the Middle East. The PLO
must take part on an equal footing in all efforts to
find a settlement for the conflict in the Middle East,
and this includes the Geneva Peace Conference.

7. Events in the Middle East since the latest savage
bombardment
by Israel against the civilian population
of Lebanon show quite clearly that the measures taken
recently-either
partial measures or half measureshave not succeeded in reducing tensions in the region
or in bringing us closer to a solution of this problem.

13. Our delegation would like to associate itself with
those who have categorically
condemned
Israeli’s
piratical act of aggression against Lebanon. In carrying
out this barbarous .attack on the peaceful Lebanese
population and on Palestine refugee camps, Israel has
added one more crime to its existing list, of aggressive actions against Lebanon and there can be no
justification
for that crime. The intrusion into the territory of another sovereign State, an attack by one
State against another, is an international crime and the
Security Council cannot tolerate such a thing. It is the
duty of the Council energetically
to condemn the
piratical actions of Israel against Lebanon and to take
measures which will put an end to’the systematically
repeated acts of aggression on the part of Israel.

8. Obviously, one can have no illusions that there
will be peace in the Middle East so long as the key
problems of the Middle East conflict are not solved.
However, Israel defies United Nations resolutions and
disregards the will and the wishes of the international
community.
The most eloquent proof of this is the
act of aggression by Israel against Lebanon which is
at present under discussion in the Council.
9. Incidentally,
these piratical acts of Israel are
committed
consistently by Israel against Lebanon,
despite the numerous resolutions
of the Council
which resolutely condemn that kind of act. Moreover,
the Council has warned Israel that unless it puts an
end to such acts, the Security Council will be compelled to take stronger measures against it.

14. The General Assembly and the Security Council
have shown a profound desire to promote a peaceful
settlement
of the Middle
East problem-the
strengthening
of peace and security in this area.
However, in order to resolve the fundamental problems
of a comprehensive and general settlement in the Middle East, a climate’ of calm and peace is, of course,
necessary.

10. We are duty-bound to note that Israel, emboldened by the protection and the financial and economic
support cn the form of mass deliveries of arms, defies
and scorns international
law. Indeed, can we now
2

15. The delegation of the Byelorussiaan SSR believes
that draft resolution S/l1898 submitted by the five
non-aligned members of the Security Council correctly
expresses serious concern at the deterioration
in
the situation whichis a result of the violation by Israel
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon
and the resolutions of the Security Council, and also
points out that the massive air attacks on Lebanon
by Israel were premeditative
in nature. Nor can we
ignore the fact that this draft resolution categorically
condemns the Government
of Israel for its premeditated air attacks on Lebanon. It also calls upon
Israel to call an immediate halt to all military attacks
on Lebanon and once again issues a serious warning
to Israel that if there is a repetition of such attacks
the Council will have to consider the question of taking
appropriate steps and adopting measures to ensure
compliance with its decisions. Our delegation wholeheartedly supports this entirely well-founded ‘draft
resolution proposed- in connection with this act of
aggression on the part of Israel against Lebanon.

Mount ‘Hermon to Kafr Shuba and including most of
the farming land of Kafr Shuba--and Shebba,-established military posts on the hills and mountain slopes
of Lebanon all the way from Mount Hermon to the
coast; built 54 kilometres of roads:inside Lebanon to
gain strategic dominance over the Argoub-a
100 kilometre square mountain area lying beside the SyrianIsrael frontier and thus the most convenient route for
any Israeli efforts to encircle Syrianrforces defending
Damascus.
20. Israel’s objectives
are twofold:
to terrorize
the people in the hope of depopulating
the region,
and to expand and annex more territory. This Zionist
Israeli policy is neither new nor is it limited to Lebanon
alone. It goes back to the earliest days of the establishment of the Zionist State, which had always sought
to justify its raids and attacks against its neighbours
on the basis of a so-called “right of reprisal”.
In
fact, the excuse of reprisal was no more than a pretext
for aggression. The Security Council had, from the
very beginning of the Israeli attacks, denied the
existence of any right of reprisal and ‘repeatedly
condemned Israel for its acts of aggression. That was
at a time when the United Nations was a totally
Western-dominated
organization
and no Israeli or
American official would have dreat of accusing it of
being subject to automatic majorities
or to ThirdWorld and communist-bloc
dominance.
I21. In fact, in its response to Israel’s first assertion
of a right of reprisal, the Security Council laid down
the following principle in its resolution 56 (1948b
“No party is permitted to violate the truce on the
ground that it is undertaking reprisals or retaliations
against the other party”. Israel, having no respect
for- the Council’s .injunctions,
was .-soon -engaged in
further acts of aggression against Jordan and Syria.
After a series of Israeli aggressions in the decade of
1950, the Council, in its resolution 111 (1956), condemned Israel for an attack on Syria and called
upon Israel to comply with its obligations “in default
of which the Council will have to consider what
further measures under the Charter are required to
maintain or restore the peace”. That resolution was
reafl’irmed in resolution 171 (1962) and again in resolution 228 (1966), condemning Israel’s attack on the
village of Samon in Jordan. The Council again
emphasized to Israel:

16. Mr. ZAHAWIE
(Iraq): I should first like to
extend, on behalf of my delegation, a warm welcome
to the representative
of the PLO who, for the first
time, is participating in a Security Council debate on
an item involving the Palestinian people. I wish also
to express our profound gratitude to all the delegations
which supported the proposal to invite the representative of the PLO to participate in the present debate.
This invitation
is only another step, long overdue,
towards the full recognition
of the rights of the
Palestinian people. The sooner those rights are recognized the better will be the chances of restoring
justice and peace in the Middle East.
17. Israel’s latest .armed attack against Lebanon
constitutes not only an act of aggression against a
State Member of the United Nations, but ‘is also
an act of terrorism and genocide against the Palestinian
people.
18. Statistics published in the September 1975 issueof
Micicile Ecrst intcwuttisncrl show that in seven years
Israel has committed more than 6.200 acts of aggression against Lebanon; nearly 4.000 air and artillery
bombardments
of villages, towns and refugee camps;
more than 350 military incursions, large and small,
employing
hundreds-on
occasion
thousands-of
troops equipped with tanks, helicopters and planes.
Forty per cent of these aggressions have taken place
since the October 1973 war when the Palestine resistance halted actions from Lebanon. Civilian casualties
include more than 500 dead, 765 wounded and
151 kidnapped; military casualties number 60 dead,
159 wounded and 30 kidnapped. More than 2.000 houses as well as roads, bridges and orchards have
been destroyed
or badly damaged;
more than
2.000 head of livestock
have been killed; crops,
grain and tobacco stocks have been burnt.

“that actions of military reprisal cannot be tolerated
and that, if they are repeated, the Security Council
will have to consider further and more effective
steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure against
the repetition of such acts.”
Similar resolutions were adopted
March and August of 1968.

by the Council

in

22. The same principle was upheld by the Security
‘Council from 1948 until 1972. .when the United States
delegation cast its veto [/66.&J wweting] to prevent

19. The Israelis have seized a strip of Lebanese
land about 30 square kilometres in area running from
3

Israel’s condemnation
for attacks on Lebanon and
Syria in September 1972. Thus, the United Nations,
unable since 1948’ to prevent violence, was then
put in a position where it was unable even to deplore
it.
I 1’
23. One may indeed reasonably claim that the failure
of the United Nations to prevent the recurrent Israeli
acts of aggression and terrorism was a significant
factor in the rise of the Palestinian armed resistance
movement.

disregarded.
But whatever Israel does must be
exonerated because Israel is fighting for survival.
Besides, it is a client State of the Western alliance.
It is time for Western Governments,
especially
Washington, to make rather more clear than they
have been prepared to; that this assumption enjoys
little popular support. The destruction of the airliner should certainly
be followed,
as Britain
quickly proposed, by an impartial
international
inquiry. But there should also be a more fundamental review of how much Israeli aggression, at
the cost of any prospect of a Middle East peace,
the West will continue to underwrite.”

24. The American veto cast at the Council’s meeting
on 10 September 1972 [ihid.] encouraged the Zionist
regime to drop -even the pretence of exercising the
right of reprisal which it had used to justify its
attack on neighbouring countries.

And the newspaper went on to say:
“The fact that the terrorism of the Sinai was
conducted not by guerrillas but by the forces of a
Government
and State does not make them more
authentic or justifiable,
but on the contrary is a
greater breach of international
order.”

25. On 15 October 1972, without any apparent cause
or reason, Israel’s American-made
Phantoms bombed
Palestinian
centres in Lebanon and Syria, causing
the usual loss of innocent lives. Israeli officials declared
that they had adopted a new policy: to strike wherever
and whenever they chose.

29. Now, the latest Israeli attack on the Palestinian
refugee camps in Lebanon is yet another “provoked”
attack. It is enough for the Zionist authorities now
to decide. that they deem it appropriate to take some
preventive measure and to strike anywhere and at any
time they choose with total impunity.
Let everyone
seated around this table contemplate for one minute
the consequences of establishing such a precedent,
where every Power around the world takes into
account the Israeli example
and the Council’s
response to it.

26. Two weeks later, on 30 October 1972, Israeli
planes bombed four refugee camps around Damascus,
killing 100 men, women and children .and wounding
and maiming a similar number. There can be no
question ; that this policy was encouraged by the
inability of the Council to restrain Israeli aggression,
and especially by the United States veto of 10 September which had the effect of condoning Israeli
attacks
on Palestinian
refugee camps and on
neighbouring Arab countries.

30. Even when the Israelis do not link their.aggression as an act of reprisal to any specific act of
violence,
we find here the representative
of the
United States seeking to establish such a linkage,
-Hestated-in
theCouncil
that:

27. On 21 February 1973, Israeli forces distinguished
themselves by two acts of terrorism which shocked
-the- world. -Palestinian refugees were massacred in
their camps in Lebanon by Israeli terrorists. And later
that same day, a Libyan Boeing aircraft which had
strayed off course over the Sinai was shot down by
Israeli fighters on the orders of the military command,
killing over 100 passengers.
28.

“the United States deeply deplores these attacks
just as we have consistently deplored those despicable terrorist incidents which have caused the loss
of life in Israel.” [1860th meeting, pctrct. 4.1
These are carefully chosen words indeed-nothing
stronger than “deplores:‘.
Of course, he has to be
careful there in order not to ruffle Israeli-Zionist
sensibilities.
Yet, “deplore”
is not strong enough
for Palestinian
actions;
hence the qualification
“despicable
terrorist incidents”.
Yet, the United
States representative’s
choice of epithets to characterize a Palestinian action, admittedly
non-existent
in this particular instance, only betrays the hypocrisy and the double standard of the United States.
It is, in fact; a hypocrisy tinged with racism as
well. Palestinian actions are despicable acts of terrorism; the Government
of Israel’s actions, on the
other hand, are only attacks. They are not acts of
terrorism and they are not despicable.

The Smd~~g Timrjs of London

editorial on 25 February
quote parts of it. It said:

published a leading
1973, and 1 would like to

“One hundred totally innocent travellers have
been killed. General Dayan speaks almost as if the
incident is one more badge of the national heroism
which began at the King David Hotel. He said the
pilots were absolutely
right. Underlying
this
impenitence is an assumption of which Israel and
Zionists around the world have long been possessed
-namely,
that for the cause of Israel the world
must forgive everything. Elsewhere rough codes of
morality are recognized, in principle if by no means
always in practice. Arabs in particular must always
be ferociously
condemned
and their legitimate
interest in, for example,
Palestinian
refugees,

31.. Then the United States representative spoke at
length about the efforts of his Government
to
4

achieve a peace agreement. Does he and his Government, with their double standards, seriously envisage
themselves as an honest, objective, successful peace
broker in the Middle
East? ‘The United
States
delegation rejected the invitation of the PLO to participate in the Council’s debate.

involving one of the most grotesque acts of defiance
against the fundamental
principle of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law and morality.
Amidst the high tension which Israel itself has
deliberately
created and fomented
in the Middle
East, and in rebuff to the serious efforts the United
Nations is undertaking
to settle the problem of the
Middle East, Israel has viciously chosen to launch
yet another massive raid on Lebanon,
a peaceloving Member of the United Nations, and a nonaligned country. The massacre committed
in these
aggressive raids has been amply reported throughout
the world and officially communicated
to the Council by Egypt and Lebanon in letters inscribed on the
agenda of the Council; it took away the lives of
57 innocent and defenceless people, and 110 more
have been wounded. It took place only three days
after the Council adopted resolution 381 (1975), by
which the Council decided to convene next month
a meeting of the Council to deal comprehensively
with the whole problem of the Middle East, including
the root cause of the conflict, namely, the Palestinian
problem.

32. The United States insists that the only possible
basis for serious negotiations is resolution 242 (1967),
which reduces the main party in the conflict, .namety,
the Palestinians, to the status of nameless refugees.
The United States representatives cannot bring themselves to even speak of Palestinian
rights. They
could .only talk of the “legitimate
interests” of the
Palestinians.
It is legitimate
Palestinian
rights that
are involved-inalienable
long-established
rights that
the United States chooses to ignore in order to defend
Israeli sensibilities and Zionist colonialist claims.
33. How is one to explain this behaviour of the
United States? It may all appear as a highly complex
situation,
but in fact it has a simple key, and
that key, in the view of my delegation,
was provided by a previous permanent representative of the
United States to the United Nations, Mr. Charles
Yost, who was representative
here from 1969 till
1971. In his book, The Conduct und Misconduct
of Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Yost speaks of a form of
disorientation
of United States forei,gn policy arising
from domestic factors, namely:

36. Thus when the Securitv Council has taken
the decision which provides for a rare opportunity
to discuss the probiem of the Middle East in its
entirety, thus facilitating
a peaceful and permanent
solution to the conflict, Israel chooses to demonstrate
its recalcitrance by arrogant and merciless bombings
civilians,
and killings
of innocent
Palestinian
Nothing
could
including
women and children.
demonstrate
more clearly Israel’s contempt for the
United Nations and its determined
opposition
to
any serious movement
towards a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

“the effect on policy of a powerful pressure group
or lobby, acting in most cases in what it claims
to be the national interest but in fact inspired and
stimulated
by the interest of a particular foreign
Government
with which the pressure group has
emotional or economic ties.”

37. It is not my intention to go into the details
of this latest manifestation
of callous disregard for
human life, demonstrated
by the Israeli authorities.
The.reports on the massacre have been amply elucidated by the representatives
of Lebanon and Egypt
and by the head of the delegation
of the PLO
[/859th meeting] whose historic participation
in our
Council proceedings we warmly welcome. I must,
however, stress that this latest criminal action against
an independent
sovereign non-aligned
State serves
to reinforce our conviction that the Security Council
can not tolerate indefinitely the persistent and constant
aggression committed
by Israel against Lebanon, as
well as its continuous acts of defiance against the
United Nations.

As an outstanding
example of this phenomenon,
and the most successful of all,‘Mr. Yost cites:
“the highly organized
and well-endowed
proIsrael lobby, activated and directed whenever the
need arises by the Israeli embassy in Washington,
which is able almost overnight to mobilize Congressional majorities for any bill or appropriation
favorable to Israel.“’
34. The Council has before it the draft resolution
S/l 1898 and my delegation is one of the non-aligned
members of the Council that are the sponsors of
this draft. If the Council were to adopt this draft
resolution it will not be the first time that it condemns Israel for an act of aggression ‘against a
neighbouring
State. The present circumstances
in
the Middle East would make the votes, however cast,
in favour of the draft or against it, highly significant.
It would help to clarify the true policies of all the
‘Powers involved in the Middle East situation-and
its meaning will not be lost on the peoples of the area.

38. The recent ma’ssive raid into Lebanon adds to
the series of continued acts of aggression and other
forms of provocations of Israel against neighbouring
Arab States and continued injustices to the Palestinian people, brought to the attention of the Council
and the world at large. In number and frequency
of condemnations
by the United Nations, Israel is
rivalled only by the crpcrrtheid regime in South Africa.
The aggression by Israel on 2 December comes after,

35. Mr. CHALE
(United
Republic of Tanzania):
The Council has been meeting to consider a situation
5

and therefore
notwithstanding,
the
numerous
resolutions
of the Security Council and General
Assembly, condemning and admonishing
it for such
acts.

gation that this draft represents the minimum
of
action expected ‘of the Council,
considering
the
magnitude and dimension of this latest Israeli aggression against Lebanon.

39. There is no doubt that the efforts of the Council, as well as those of the General Assembly, and
any other efforts in searching for a solution to the
Middle East problem, are rendered even more complicated by the Israeli displays of rebuff.

44. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
At the outset of this present debate in the Security
Council concerning the complaints of Lebanon and
Egypt about Israeli raids into Lebanon, the United
States spoke briefly but, we hope, consistently-consistent with a position we have maintained throughout the long and often heartbreaking duration of this
conflict, which is nearly coeval with the existence
of the United Nations itself; and we stated that we
considered that ‘all loss of innocent human life was
reprehensible and that we were prepared to deplore,
in strong terms, such loss of life, whether it occurred
from the acts of Governments
or from the acts of
organized
groups. We made no distinction-as,
indeed, no distinction
could be made with respect
to value or worth-between
the loss of the life of a
Lebanese child and the loss of the life of an Israeli,
or Syrian, or Egyptian child. We asked on that
occasion if it were not possible for the Council to
join in this perception which all of us share. None
of us around this Council table think otherwise;
none of the nations or organizations represented at
this table would share a different view. We said
that:

40. We believe, therefore, that the raid by Israel
on Lebanon, and the calculated massacre of innocent
refugees in Lebanese territory are, for those countries that have overtly or covertly condoned the
misleading claims by Israel, an admonition
for the
mistake they are making. It is too grave a repetition
of crimes for it to be passed over without serious
reassessment by those countries. They face a public
choice between peace and justice, on the one hand;
and military confrontation
and war and injustice, on
the other. We should like to believe that none of
our countries represented here wishes to be associated,
through its acts, with the persistent Israeli defiance
of the world community
and the very principles of
the Charter.
41. As members of the Security Council in particular,
we have a very heavy duty to discharge in our
primary responsibility
of maintaining
international
peace and security. If we are to face and live up
to that duty, we cannot but at the very least condemn, unreservedly and most vehemently, the raids
perpetrated by lsrael and the sinister motives behind
them, and-which
goes without saying-demand
that
Israel desist from any further acts of provocation
against the Arab States and the Palestinians.

“We are prepared to support an appropriate
resolution which registers the strongest disapproval
by the Council of all acts of violence in the
Middle East, particularly
those which result in
the death of innocent civilians, and which calls
on all parties to refrain from any action that
might endanger peace negotiations.”
[/860th merting, pwu.

42. My delegation calls upon those States which
have influence on Israel to prevail upon it to change
its intransigence
and pay heed to the decisions of
the Council; for if Israel persists in its current.
postures, and if such actions are given encouragement, then certainly the Middle East will be rapidly
heading towards a further military confrontation,
with
all its tragic consequences. If Israel entertains the
belief that it can continue with impunity to feast on
its illegal territorial acquisitions and to flout the rights
of the Palestinians,
it is certainly indulging in an
exercise of self-delusion;
for the truth is that the
more Israel commits these crimes against its Arab
which
neighbours
and the Palestinians-crimes
clearly fly in the face of the Charter and the opinion
of the rest of the entire world-the
more Israel invites
upon itself the inevitable fate of all those whose
policies are based on injustice.

4.1

45. Now, we said that in our capacity as a member
of the Council, but I think it will be granted that
ours is a special concern in this regard, owing simply
to the fact that we are the member of the Council
which is seeking, in the role of mediator, to bring
about peace. We are trying to mediate this seemingly unending conflict, and we cannot see the
role of mediator as in any way advanced by a onesided resolution, a resolution which would persuade
one or another party that an imbalance had occurred, that an injustice was being done. It is only
the even-handedness of the United Nations, just as it
is the ‘even-handedness
of the mediator, that bears
any promise of success.
46. In the past, the Council has seen and understood and acted upon this fundamental requirement of
responsible behaviour,
to wit, the requirement
of
even-handedness
and balance. The most recent
occasion on which a Security Council draft resolution of this kind had been before us was in April
of 1974, when we adopted resolution
347 (1974),
in a context not dissimilar from the present context:

43. It is in the light of the foregoing that my delegation is a co-sponsor of draft resolution S/11898,
so ably and eloquently introduced by my brother and
colleague, the representative
of the United Republic of Cameroon. It is the firm belief of my dele6

violence and counter-violence:
violence.
counterviolence and then violence counter to that. It is not
new to human history, certainly not to that of the
Middle East.

present draft resolution, which has three paragraphs,
a fourth and a fifth. Paragraph 4 would read:
“4.
Condemns
all acts of violence, especially
those which result in the tragic loss of innocent
civilian life, and urges all concerned to refrain
from any further acts of violence;“.

47. On that occasion the Council acted in a manner which was resolute but fair, concrete but balanced.
Resolution 347 (1974) was adopted by 13 votes to
none in opposition-such
that the whole of the
Council may be said to have approved that course
of action; and nothing, a year and a half later,
should suggest to us that there was anything imprudent
about what we did. On the contrary, it stands as
an example of responsible behaviour seeking effective
results. We all know this. There is no Government
at this table that does not know this, and it is not
required of me to do anything more than to say what
we also all know, which is that the draft resolution
before us is not balanced; it will not be perceived
as fair; it will not advance the cause of peace.- To
that extent it cannot be seen as responsible.

Paragraph

5 would read:

“5. Cc11l.supon all parties to refrain from any
action which might endanger negotiations aimed at
achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.”
I repeat, these are operative paragraphs which the
Security Council has already voted upon; it did so in
a similar situation-or
a not dissimilar situation-a
year and a half ago. There is no one present at this
table who opposed those paragraphs.
52. The purpose of paragraph 4 of the operative
part would be, very simply, to provide balance as
to those .acts which we condemn, reflecting nothing
more than our true feelings and our stated position,
that we condemn all acts of violence. I cannot imagine
that any Government
would not be willing to condemn and deplore violence which leads to the loss
of innocent lives; and I simply point out that there
is not a Government
at this table which did otherwise when faced with the possibility-more
than the
possibility,
the necessity-of
doing so a year and a
half ago.

48. We speak not just as a Government,
but as a
Government
seeking to bring peace in the role of
mediator. That is our role in the Middle East. It is
never an easy one. We find ourselves called upon
to make pleas to you for perspective and balance
in a matter and at a time in which we fully understand that there are Governments
at this table that
do not feel balanced at the moment. And we can
understand why they would not. Yet we, as mediators,
say: “Even so, it is not the moment that matters, it is
the progress we are making towards a just and lasting
peace; and the question is, will the action we take
today add to that progress, encourage it, facilitate
it, or will it do otherwise?”

53. Finally, paragraph 5 would.call upon all parties
to refrain from any action that would endanger the
negotiations
aimed at -achieving -a just and -lasting
peace in the Middle
East. I remind you, those
negotiations
have not failed in the year and a half
since the relevant resolution was adopted; on the
contrary, extraordinarily
difficult, dense, but in the
end successful, negotiation
has brought conditions
of peace, the absence of violence, and stability to
the, Sinai, and similar efforts are soon to be undertaken, we cannot doubt, with respect to the SyrianIsraeli border, and the relations of those two States.

49. Therefore,
the United
States, the mediator
country, would like to suggest two simple amendments to the draft resolution before us. We have
asked the Secretariat to circulate the amendments
without delay. I am sure it is doing its very best,
as it always does-and here, indeed, they are.
50. Now, these are not unfamiliar
amendments.
On the contrary, the language will be familiar to
you, Mr. President, and to a number-to
most, in
fact-of
the members of the Council, for the very
simple reason that most of the members of the Council
have already voted for them. These amendments have
won the approval of every permanent member of the
Council; they won the approval of all the members
elected to the Council who were here last year, and
they won the approval of all other elected members
who were there at that time, with the exception of one
permanent and one elected member that chose not to
participate in the vote. But with respect to all the participating nations, the vote was unanimous.

54. In those circumstances,
in the name of sanity,
in the name of peace, the United States proposes
these amendments and asks for a vote thereon.
55. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of the
United States of America has moved two amendments
to the draft resolution
at present before us. As
I understand the procedure of the Security Council,
those two amendments should be taken up separately,
and we should ,therefore commence
with such
debate as the Council thinks right and proper on the
first amendment, namely to add the new operative
paragraph 4. I would propose that after the conclusion of the debate on the first amendment,
we
proceed to vote on it. I would propose that we then

51. The amendments
[S/1190/] read simply. The
United States would add to the operative part of the
7

take up the second amendment,
upon which any
member of the Council could, of course, freely
express his views. I would then propose to move to
the vote on that second amendment.

62. But in this .instance we are dealing with an act
of State terrorism perpetrated by a State on the territory of a State Member of the United Nations.
If to condemn that State, we must water down that
condemnation
by invoking metaphysical concepts of
violence,
then I would say that this is neither
intellectually,
morally,
nor politically
admissible.
It is for this reason that on behalf of the non-aligned
members of the Council I state that we oppose the
most categorical non-possumus
to these amendments
proposed by the representative of the United States.

56. In relation to the first amendment,
I should
inform the Council that I have received a request
from the representative
of Saudi Arabia to take
part in this debate. As a procedural matter, it would
seem appropriate
that he should take part in the
debate on the new operative paragraph 4. It will,
I am sure, not inhibit him from expressing any views
that he would wish to put before the Council. May
I take it, therefore, that that procedure is agreeable to the Council as a whole? As I hear no objection, I invite the representative
of Saudi Arabia
to take a place at the Council table.

63. The PRESIDENT:
of Saudi Arabia.

64. Mr. BARQGDY (Saudi Arabia): I feel heartened
by the presence in the Security Council chair of a
noted parliamentarian
who has so far conducted the
deliberations on this question with justice and equity,
although I must say that he must have been irked,
like many of us, at the protracted consultations that
have been taking place. We were waiting for those
consultations to yield fruit.

57. The PRESIDENT:
The Council
will now
proceed to a discussion on the first amendment
[s///901] to draft resolution S/l 1898, which is to have
a new operative paragraph 4.
58.

Mr.

OYONO

65. But I find that I was hoping against hope. Our
colleague from the United States kept us guessing
for a couple of days as to what he would do. I must
thank him for having come out now with his two
amendments because they make the situation patently
clear, in the sense that his argument-and
he is a
professor, and here I must talk to a professor
-revolves
around ‘the premise that the United
States should continue to act as mediator. In other
words, the representative
of the United States is
arrogating to himself, and to the Government
he
represents, the role of mediator.
How can the
United States, which is. a parti pris, as the French..
say,--consider themselves as mediators? Is it by virtue
of the world power, my good Mr. Moynihan,
that
you wield, you and the Russians? You consider
yourselves as mediators when since 1947, at Lake
Success, you caused the partition of Palestine, and
ever since, year in, year out-you
were in short. pants
then-you
have been supporting Israel. Why? How
can you be mediators?

Republic of Cameroon)
I have asked for the
floor not only on my own behalf but as a spokesman
of the non-aligned members of the Council. We have
listened with very great interest to the statement made
by the representative of the United States concerning
the two proposed draft amendments,
the text of
which has just been communicated
to us.

(intc~rpretotior~

.frotn

I call on the representative

(United

French):

59. I should like, first of all, to state for the
benefit of the Council that this is a piece of goods
that the representative
of the United States .hadalready tried to sell pus‘under cover, and with which
we would have nothing to do. He knows full well
that we have undertaken interesting exchanges on
the subject and he is fully aware of our reaction to
his amendment. It is rather strange that we are faced
with this situation.
60. It is not because these amendments were adopted
in connexion with draft resolutions dealing with a
situation connected with Lebanon sometime in the
past that we now have to introduce them in this
new draft before the Council. And we all know that
comparisons are not reasons.

66. There must be two considerations. First, because
you consider Israel as a bastion of alleged democracy
in the Middle East, democracy
which has been
ritualized
and institutionalized.
Secondly, as was
mentioned by the representative of Iraq-he
quoted
Ir)rrr-tr. 3.3 above] from the book of our friend, your
predecessor, and no doubt your friend too, Mr. Yostthe Zionists bring pressure on your Government,
on your Senate, on your Congress, and you seem
to be helpless. Why not come out with the truth and
say, we cannot be with justice; after all we would
like to be with justice. I know that the United
States is a fair country. The people are fair. I have
lived amongst you for 35 years. You are a decent
fellow but for the epithets you sometimes use. Why
do you not come out with it? You want to wield

61. And what is the United States representative
proposing? Representatives
who have spoken in the
Council have been clear in their analysis of the
events that have taken place in Lebanon. There is no
misunderstanding
as to this question and as regards
the party that is to be condemned. But the representative of the United
States said a moment ago,
in the corridors, that because of the situation that
prevails in the region, why should we condemn
Israel? We should condemn all acts of violence
regardless of where they come from.
8

.

world power? Well, there is the Soviet Union also
which wants to wield power. But they are cleverer
than you. They are astute; they are watching you,
you see, everywhere. More power to them if they
can play that game. Do not think you are very
skilful at that game. They have been more skilful
than you since the days of the Czar. It is in them.

Covenants on Human Rights and is enshrined as a
principle not only in the Charter, but also in many
resolutions adopted by the United Nations.
72. In 1967 I happened to be in Geneva, just before
the June war; His late Majesty King Faisal was there
and the late General de Gaulle invited His Majesty
to have luncheon with him in Paris-General
de
Gaulle, that illustrious
man who at one time was
maligned by the Zionists for wanting to be independent in the policies of France on this question.
His Majesty asked if I would like to go too, but I
had just arrived from the United
States, so I
remained in Geneva. General de Gaulle said to His
Majesty, “The poor Jews suffered a lot in Europe,
and it is a fuit arompli”,
and His Majesty replied,
“When the Nazis invaded your country, General,
did you consider that a fuit uccompli?”
and he said
“You have a point. I can say nothing.”

67. I shall not say anything about our British
friends because of the respect I have for that gentleman who is sitting in the chair. Both you and the
British, or, rather, the British and you, created
Israel, What for? Shall we repeat and reiterate the
old arguments, historical arguments, religious arguments, that do not hold water-religious
arguments
because Israel flourished there. So did Christianity;
so did Islam, which identifies itself with the Holy
Land of Palestine.
68. If you go by the democratic
yardstick, there
are 16 million Jews, most of whom are not Zionists;
I daresay may be 14 million or 13 million of them
would like to be left alone, not to be always doggedly indoctrinated
by Zionists that “God gave
you Palestine”.
And for the hundredth time I say,
since when was God in the real estate business to
parcel out land and give it to one people or the other?
Since when? This fundamentalist
approach to the
Bible is prrssh. God does not parcel out land, for none
other than King David said “The earth is the Lord’s,
and the fullness thereof”.

73. This fuit mcompli
theory will not survive as
long as the fait ctcconlpli
is based on injustice, on
the usurpation of the rights of a people robbed of
their homeland.
74. There was no problem between the Arabs and the
Jews, between the Palestinians and the Jews. I have
said that time and again, and it bears repetition in
the Council. I told the United States Secretary of
State once, and he said he did not know this, that
many of the Palestinians, after the destruction of the
Temple in 70 A.D., became Christians; and later,
when Byzantium ruled the area again, the Byzantines
used Christianity
as a motive for their political and
economic ends and usurped the rights of the Christians,
many of whom had been Jews, because there were
Aramaians and others who embraced Christianity.

69. My ‘good friend Mr. Moynihan,
the other day
mentioned,
out of context, the argument of the
Zionists that God gave them Palestine. If God gave
them Palestine, and they are the chosen people of
God, then God is a discriminator,
and discrimination
is being fought in almost every committee
of the
United Nations.
70.

The

fuit

accompli,

75. Many Jews embraced Christianity. Who were the
disciples of Christ but Jews-Peter,
Paul, Matthew,
Mark and .Luke, and others who are not named
in the New Testament? What did they do? They got
tired of that type of Christianity
that was used. to
dominate them, and when Islam appeared on the
horizon many embraced Islam, to escape from that
wsutz, if I may use the word, Christianity
as practised
by the Byzantines; and those who are called refugees
are, ethnologically,
many of them the Jews of the
land, our brothers. And then who came but the
Khazars who had been converted to Judaism in the
eighth century A.D., on account of the balance of
power, such as the United States is practising with
our friends the Russians nowadays. Our friend the
representative
of China calls it hegemony. Call it
whatever you will, but what have they done? They
said, “Leave those pagans who settled in the first
century A.D. Let us not have them become either
Christians or Moslems, because they will upset the
balance of power”. There were a few rabbis there,
so they went and converted them to Judaism. They
never saw Palestine. They never laid eyes on Palestine.
I have researched Mr. Herzl, and those who espoused

United States might say that Israel is a
and that the United States has responsibility as a big Power. Of course it is a big Power.
So is the Soviet Union. Why is the Soviet Union not
championing
Israel? It is championing
the justice
that they think is due to the people who were
dislodged. I am not digressing. I am coming to the
core of the amendments of the United States representative today. I like Mr. Moynihan very much, but I
must say he is misguided, and becoming emotional,
swept by the emotionalism
of the Zionists around
him. Seventy-five
United States Senators toed the
line and voted for Israel.

71. In 1922, when Palestine was declared a mandated
Territory
by the League of Nations,
there were
hardly six or seven per cent Jews among the population and Mr. Woodrow Wilson, before he came
President, initiated the .principle of self-determination,
!.vhich it fell to me and some of my colleagues
between 1948 and 1956 to elaborate into a fullyfledged right which figures in the international
9

the Judenstaat,
and found that their forbears
converts; they never saw Palestine.

were

was usurped. We will never make a deal behind the
backs of the Palestinians.
Never! And as long as
there are Palestinians,
do not lose your breath and
come with all these amendments of yours.

76. Mr. Moynihan happens to be descended from
the Irish. The Irish are good Christians;
and the
English, many of them, are good Christians. Does
that make them Semites, because they have a semitic
religion? Does it make our Nigerian brothers, who
are Moslems, Semites because they have a Semitic
religion? The Khazars had a Semitic religion, but
they were not Semites. There is no such thing as
Jewish blood, or Arab blood, or Irish blood. The
Americans are not Semites, nor are the British. The
Sudanese are Semites, because Arabism became a
way of life.

82. What if you veto this resolution?
You will
alienate yourself. People will say “Look, the American
veto; either their Government
wants to alienate the
Arabs, or they want to curry more favour with
the Zionists”. And I feel sorry for the Jews because
you are endangering
the Jews everywhere in the
world. And they are human beings, they want to be
left alone and to be loyal to their country of birth
or adoption. But you do not leave them alone, or
they do not leave you alone. I do not know which.
It is a vicious circle.

77. So one cannot iust use religion as a motivation
for political and economic ends, just because of what
the late President Truman did. God have mercy on
his soul. One day I will tell him when we meet in the
hereafter what trouble he created. We warned him
through
Mr. Stettinius,
through
Mr. Acheson,
Mr. Rusk and many others. I have been here since
the beginning, and the State Department has always
said “We made a mistake”.
The mistake has been
increased, compounded.
I say to my dear friend
Mr. Moynihan, “What are you espousing?” The cause
of Israel, because it is an outpost of your so-called
American democracy.

83. I am talking to an honest professor, because
you are a scholar. Do not get mixed up in politics.
I have been at it since I was seventeen; I was
never a politician.
It is a dirty game. Do not let
anybody sell you any bill of goods that Palestine
was given to the Zionists. No, Sir.
84. And to return to that fnit accompli-this
does
not work. Do you remember the French maquis-the
maquisards-you
can find all kinds of inscriptions on
walls: “Here died so-and-so for the love of France”.
And I see your language has improved a little bit
today; you say “groups”
instead of “terrorists”.
He does not look like a terrorist, this fellow behind
me here. And see this bearded fellow? They call him
Santa Claus. I spoke to Arafat and he told me
time and again: “We would live with them if our
rights are not usurped”.

78. Does democracy constitute that wooden box?
You said there is no alternative. Maybe it is the best.
But why should you interfere in our area? What
have we done to you, you Americans? When I was
a young fellow I used to malign the poor English,
poor not in pocket but in the sense that I pitied
them. Those colonialists,
the stiff upper lip, the
aristocracy, they would say “God in the heavens
and the American on earth”. We loved you. Why
should you interfere in our affairs? Why?

85. And now we come to Lebanon. 1. caught on
immediately
when you read your amendments.
You
used the words “even-handed”.
Our friend,
Mr. Goldberg, used those words in the context of
the Palestinian question: “even-handed”.
And here
you say: “Add the following new operative paragraph 4” “ and urges all concerned”.
All concerned
includes Lebanon, too. Has Lebanon done any wrong
to any of its neighbours? The poor Lebanese are
fighting each other because many are pulling the
strings. I am not going to embarrass them; some of
them are seated around this table-not
the people,
but their Governments.
Ask me, I will tell you.

79. Do you want a balance of power? All right, we
will appeal to our friend here. Mr. Malik is your
brother-in
humanity if not in ideology. In humanity
we are all brothers.
Even the Zionists are our
brothers in humanity.
80. And that Zi0nis.t newspaper-The
Ne’M) Yet%
Times-when
I said “If they become the scapegoats,
I will be the first to snatch them from the claws of
.those who want to hurt them”, they said “Baroody
said this with anti-Semitic undertones”.
The crooks.

86. .Who drove the Palestinians to Lebanon, Syria
and Jordan-and
very few to Egypt, because of the
desert? Who? The Zionists. After Deir Yassin. And
after they blew up what? The King David Hotel.
And after there were massacres. It was a land of
pilgrimage.
They lived peacefully, the Palestinians,
they never killed a man, except perhaps’ once in a
while when there was a crime of passion or some other
crime. But who drove them into Lebanon? The
Zionists. They confiscated their land and drove them to
Lebanon.

81. We love you. We love the Russian people. We
love everybody. We should love one another here.
But what have we done to you, my dear Professor Moynihan, to interfere at a distance of 6.000 miles?
Balance of power? All right, we will appeal to our
Russian friends. You and the Russians “Hands off
the Holy Land of Palestine”.
And we will live in
peace; and maybe then we can make a deal with the
Zionists through none other than those whose land
10
.2
:

.

87. Do not let them give you that argument that
many Jews got scared in Arab lands and left. Israel
does not speak for all the Jews, but they wanted to
speak for them and they wanted to gather all the
Jews-in
Christendom
and outside than Christendom-into
Palestine; from the Euphrates to the Nile
and from the Nile to the Euphrates.
All this by
association they want to consider the Holy Land of
the Zionists.
Abraham,
our patriarch as well as
theirs, is not the patriarch of all the monotheistic
religions.

result”. But here it is said “Cmdetnns
all acts of
violence, especially those which result in the tragic
loss” and “urges all concerned...“.
Among the “all
concerned” are the Lebanese. What have they done to
the Zionist State of Israel? Have they encroached on
them? The American policy draws on them. That is
because they were frightened. They give you that line.
I ‘heard them say, “you know who sent them?“,
and then they said it was the Arab leaders. I checked
all the Arab Presidents and no Arab President said
to the people of Palestine, “Come ye to Lebanon.
We will fight”, because the Lebanese never fought
anybody outside their border. Unfortunately
now
they are fighting each other because there are many
foreign hands that are pulling strings. For your
information,
they never fought. They were known as
the Canaanites or the Phoenicians by the Greeks,
and whenever they were hard up they took to the sea.
They established Marseilles,
for your information.
They mined tin from Ireland. Perhaps we are mixed
up with you and that is why we are a little emotional.
They had settlements
in Ireland centuries before
Christ. In Tunis, in Carthage-they
never tried. But
who encroached on them? The Romans encroached
on them because they were prosperous in trade. But
I will not digress now because that is history.
which you know better than I.

88. And what have we done to you-for
the
hundredth time-so
that you can interfere and take
sides? We do not want you to side with us, but leave
us alone, for Heaven’s
sake, my good friend,
Mr. Moynihan.
If you want to be an arbitrator,
how can you be an arbitrator and year in, year out
send millions and billions in arms-and
Skyhawks. I
do not know what they call those planes; they rain
destruction on the Lebanese and on the other Arab
.peopie. How can you say your mediation is getting
more difficult? You cannot be a mediator, you cannot
be a judge, you are a pm-h ph. That is a good word.
89. Let us be honest with ourselves. If you want to
play politics, then I would not waste my breath to
reply to you. Why? Because essentially you are a
decent man. In order to become a professor at
Harvard, you must be a scholar, and a scholar searches
after the truth, and I am giving you the elements of
the truth so that you may know them. You are very
intelligent,
but you have no time to research everything. Ask me! Give me five minutes every day and I
will coach you. And I will do it objectively.

Why do you not tell those Zionists that we do
not hate them, although they have done a lot of harm,
and I will tell our friends not to hate them and
engage in rancour. If you want to be a mediator,
do not bring pressure but persuade them instead of
them persuading
you about this fundamentalistic
approach that God gave them Palestine; it is not a
matter of self-determination,
nor democracy,
nor
religious ~association. nor history.
92.

90. Do not impress us with your use of epithets. I
could use the epithets you use, but I do not want to
use them. But I find a good deal of improvement.
I congratulate ourselves on our good manners today.
We all make progress. I make progress. I am not
angry with Mr. Moynihan.
I am pleased with him,
because for once he shows you he is a gentleman.
But he has lost his temper. I lose my temper too.
But instead of losing my temper and calling such things
a big lie, I pound my fist, it is better than calling
names. Pound your fist. It will hurt you a little bit,
but it is better than antagonizing people.

93. Did you know that Jerusalem was called SalemUru--“Uru”
means city and “Salem”
means peace.
And when Joshua, our Joshua, came, that is the
Joshua of the Khazars who came from Europe and who
converted to Judaism in the eighth century A-D., he
stormed Jericho fifteen hundred years before Christ,
2.500 years earlier the Canaanites lived there. The
Canaanites and the Jews were one and as I have
mentioned time and again, Abraham had wives and
concubines that were Canaanites from the tribes. We
have no quarrel with the Jews. The quarrel is with
those who use Judaism as a motivation for a political
and economic end.

91. The amendment
says. “Con&/~rns
all acts of
violence, especially those which result in the tragic
loss” as if you are talking into the future. I am but a
humble student of English, but to say “which result”,
meaning in the future, is as if one were saying:
“the past was past”. I am not saying I think you are
right in having this amendment, but I think you meant
especially
to say, “C0ntlcnrn.s all acts of violence,”
those which have already occurred. In English you
can say “which had resulted in the past, result now,
or will result in the future”. It can be said, it is idiomatic. We will go back to our friend the President.
‘That is what he means, I believe, by saying “which

94. At one time, during the Crusades, Catholicism
used religion as-a motivation
for a political and economic end. The Borgias also used the Caliphate at one
time to spread their supremacy
over non-Arab
Moslems. That is nothing new. Now is the turn of
whom? Now it is the turn of the Khazars, the Central
European Jews. That is passe. that is finished.
-95. Do you want peace? We do not want to kill the
Jews. Persuade them to listen to reason, otherwise
II

t

they will not survive for long. But it will not be
through extinction,
throwing them into the sea. We
Arabs speak allegorically.
We speak in poetry. Who
is going to throw people into the sea? They live
there and finally they will intermarry. But that is their
trouble, they do not want to marry tlieir beautiful
girls to our men, or our beautiful girls to their men.
They will dissolve. They will assimilate. But let them
keep their religion. There is nothing wrong with that,
it is a question of the. conscience. For Heaven’s
sake, you Americans desist because we love you and
do not want you to get into trouble.
96. I am sure the Russians want to make peace
with you. They are importing from you and you are
exporting to them. What do you export-gold?
They
import wheat. The only ones who understand us without having an axe to grind are the Chinese. One
day I should like the Americans, the Chinese and the
Russians to become brothers instead of each trying
also to engage in that antiquated game of balanceof-power and spheres of influence which will backfire.
The world is becoming decadent.
97. Therefore, withdraw these amendments. They are
not good at all. You cannot be an arbiter. You do
not have to persuade our Jewish friends from our area
as we have a rapport
with those from our area.
They call me every now and then and say, “Why
are the Zionists doing this to us?” I say to them,
“Go and ask them”. We are friends. But try and tell
those Central
European
and Eastern European
Khazars, who are Jews, to listen to reason and seek
acceptance in the area, because sooner or later they
will not survive.
98. The Crusaders stayed for a couple of hundred
years, but now things go faster. With American and
Russian weapons of mass destruction we may have a
holocaust. Is it worthwhile? There is so much beauty
in life, in nature, in poetry, in art, in literature, in
friendship and in family. What do you want to do?
Just because you grew strong after two world wars
-who
told you to get into those two world wars?
Your forbears came from Europe not to be entangled
but you entangled yourselves. You cannot be isolationists. The world is one world since Wilkie wrote
a book about it. America has 6 per cent of the
world’s population. You cannot lord it. There should be
rtrpport
and you, Mr. Moynihan, are the man to bring
it about. So why not say “Professor Moynihan turned
a new page”. I like you because you are unorthodox
in your approach-I
do not mean in a literal sense.
I hear that you have a following in the United
States. The Zionists love you because you mentioned
some epithets that were inappropriate.
But let us
forget that, that is of the past. Now you can play a
role and bring those people here.
99. Does this gentleman look like a terrorist? No, he
is decent. I spoke to him, not because he happens
to be an Arab. His name is Basil Aql. “Basil” means

‘,‘courageous”
and “Aql” means “mind”.
He has a
courageous mind. Our Arabic names have meaning.
The name fits the character, and I have known many
of them. I have remonstrated
with the Palestinians
since the days of the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem when
he told me that they wanted a flag and a State and
they wanted to drive us out. It was in 1925--before
you were born-that
I went to Jerusalem. I was
twenty years old. Pound some good sense into them.
These Zionists are intelligent,
they are not dumb.
Tell them that if they want to seek acceptance they
should make it up with the Palestinians and should
either assimilate the Palestinians or the Palestinians
should assimilate them with a tolerance for religion. It
is the same God, the same prophets. What is the difference? They have technology and so everybody will
benefit.
100. For Heaven’s sake withdraw these amendments.
Even if there is an excuse for you to cast a veto, it
does not mean anything. The movement will still be
there. Unfortunately,
the fighting will be there. I am
not trying to condemn one or the other, and all this
phraseology does not get us anywhere.
101. I have been here 30 years, my good friend.
So instead of playing the role of partisanship, play the
role of personal mediator as a human being, not only
as an American, because you happen to be an American. And I think you got what you wanted from the
President. Go and tell him Baroody said this. Your
President made a speech when you were not here about
oil and food-stuffs. And I told him when we shook
hands with him in the Indonesian
lounge, that it
cost me $10 for a lunch here, and a barrel of oil costs
$10 or so. “You use it”, I said, “Mr. President,
for several weeks maybe. What are you griping about?
By the end of the day I may be hungry. It runs
your car”. He said, “What do you say, Henry”? I
said, “Now you discuss it with your Secretary. He
is a reasonable man”. He was amenable. He did not
take issue. So put your heads together with the
Zionists and say, “Baroody told us there is no future
for the Zionists unless the Palestinian right of selfdetermination
is observed”. And I will bet you anything, before you get to be my age you will be a hero
to both Arab and Jew in the Holy Land of Palestine.
In accordance with the pro102. The PRESIDENT:
cedure that the Security Council agreed to, I propose
now to move to the voting procedure on the first of
the two amendments
moved by the United States.
Does any delegation wish to explain its vote on
this amendment before the vote?
103. I call on the representative
point of order.

of Italy

for a

104. Mr. VINCI (Italy): From the statements which
have been made until now, it is my understanding
that we risk being stuck on the discussion of this
issue and being unable to take any action which can

,..

be fruitful. In other words, I believe that in spite
of the consultations that have been carried on throughout the day, we have not got to a point where we can
see the possibility or chance of some resolution which
will be voted on and adopted.

representative of Italy. We find no reason for us to
adjourn until tomorrow. The text of our draft resolution
was made available to,all the members of the Council
on Friday. It was decided in principle that we should
vote in this draft resolution
today. We have had
extensive consultations throughout the day, separately
and jointly,
with the parties interested in this draft
resolution. As has been explained by our colteague,
the representative of the United Republic of Cameroon, unfortunately
these consultations did not narrow the gap between the two positions explained
during this debate.

105. In spite of what my good friend, Mr. Baioody,
has said, the fact that we will be faced with a resolution which will be rejected, not because it failed to
have a majority-I
am sure it will have the majoritybut because it would not be useful. It would even be
of some damage. I have in mind especially the prospect
of the debate which we will have in January. Speaking
for m’y delegation and for myself, we are looking
forward to the debate which could produce a very
comprehensive review of the Middle Eastern situation,
including the Palestinian question, at that moment.
And it is my strong conviction that a positive conclusion or outcome of the discussion on this particular
case would certainly increase the chances of a good
discussion at that stage. I think it would certainly
show a great sense sf responsibility
on all sides.
It would be a good sign, a positive sign coincident
with the very first time the representative of the PLO
has sat at this table, and altogether open .much better
prospects than we could look for today.

110. Frankly, we see no hope of arriving at an
agreed draft resolution between the two positions even
if we adjourned the meeting beyond tomorrow. You
know better than everybody else on the Council,
Mr. President, that there are many other pressing
matters that require the immediate
attention of the
Council. We would oppose any motion to adjourn the
voting on the draft resolution before us today.
I1 1. The PRESIDENT:
Under the provisional rules
of procedure,,a motion to adjourn the meeting takes
precedence over the other business which the Council
is at that time considering. Unless any other member
of the Council wishes to speak on the motion made by
the representative of Italy, in accordance with the rules
of procedure, I now propose to put to the vote the
motion by the representative of Italy that the Council
adjourn further consideration
of this issue until
tomorrow morning.
.

106. This is why I would move for an adjournment
until tomorrow morning in order to give ,us a little more
time. We did it on several occasions before and we
never regretted it, because we always came out with
a positive conclusion. I do not see why we should not
try again.. We have been rather inactive for two days.
I do not think it would waste our time. It would give
us a better chance if we had 12 hours more to have
discussions among ourselves for our final consultation and see if we can come out with something which
will give the Council the possibility of a very positive
and constructive outcome.

Costa Rica, France,
Kingdom
of Great Britain
United States of America.

In jiwmr:

United
Ireland,

Italy,
and

Sweden,
Northern

Agcrinst:
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania,
Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Republic of Cameroon,
United Republic of Tanzania.

107. I made clear the position of my delegation, I
think, when I made my first statement on 4 December [1859th meeting].
We did not conceal our condemnation
of the actions which the Israelis have
carried out against the territory of Lebanon, inflicting
death on so many innocent victims. We certainly
have that in mind and we will never forget it. But I
think we have to look more to the future because,
unfortunately,
we cannot call back to life those poor
persons who have been sacrificed. So why not look
to the future? Why not give us one more chance,
12 hours more, to see if we can bring about a positive
outcome?
So, I would move for an adjournment
just until tomorrow morning.

Ahstcrining:

Japan.

112. The PRESIDENT:
I now propose to put to the
vote the first amendment submitted by the representative of the United States of America.

108. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Italy
has moved to adjourn the meeting to tomorrow
morning. As I understand it, that is a motion under
rule 33, paragraph 3, and under the terms of the
provisional rules of procedure that is debatable.
109. Mr. ZAHAWIE
listened very carefully

.

113. I call on the representative of Iraq to explain
his vote before the voie on the first amendment-submitted by the United States of America.
114. Mr. ZAHAWIE
(Iraq): My delegation feeks that
the amendments put %rth by the representative of the

(Iraq): My delegation
has
to the motion just made by the
13

United States seek; in fact, to equate the party that
has perpetratld the present act of aggression with the
victims of that aggression. We ,are all here gathered
because of the complaint
made by‘~the representative of Lebanon. Wk do not know of other acts of
violence connected with that particular aggression
perpetrated against Lebanon; even the party that perpetrated the present act. of aggression, namely, Israel,
has not tied it to any other act in,the area. My delegation, therefore, will not participate in the vote on
this amendment.

In f~wour: Costa Rica, France, Italy, Japan, Sweden,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America:
Aguinst:

Abstaining: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Guyana, Mauritania, Union of Soviei Socialist Republics, United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania.
The result of the vote wus 7 in fuvour, none uguinst,
with 6 abstentions.

,115. The PRESIDENT:
Does any other member of
the Council wish to speak in order to explain his
vote before the vote .on the’ first amendment
submitted by the United States of America? Since no one
wishes to speak, I now prop&e ‘to move to the vote.
The vote is to adopt the new operative .paragraph 4
set forth in document S/l 1901.

The amendment wus not adopted, huving fuiled
ohtuin the uffirmutive votes of 9 members.
Two members
in the voting.

In fcIt*o[{1’: Costa Rica, France, Italy, Japan, Sweden,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uhitkd States of America.
None.

Abstuining:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Guyana,. Mauritania,
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Republic of Cameroon,
United
Republic of Tanzania.

Tu*o members
in the’voting.

(Chinu und Iraq) did not participate

A vote wus tuken by u show of hunds.
In favour: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist -Republic,
China, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist ‘Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania.

The,resnlt qf the rWe wus 7 in fa~orrr, none uguinst,
Gth 6 nhstentions.
The; umendment wus not udopted, huving frrikd
obtain the crffirmutive votes’ of 9 members.

to

118. The PRESIDENT:
i now propose, to put to the
vote the draft resolution, unamended, as submitted
by Guyana,’ Iraq, Mauritania,
United Republic of
Cameroon and United Republic of Tanzania, contained in document S/11898. Does any member of
the Council wish to address the Council in explanation
of vote before the vote? Since there are none, I now,
therefore, propose to put this draft resolution to
the vote.

A vote wus tukhn by u show of hands.

Aguinst:

None.

to

Aguinst:
Abstuining:

(Chinu und Iruy) did not purticipute

United

States of America.

Costa Rica.

.

The resdt of the vote H~IS 13 in fuvow.
with one abstention.

116. The PRESIDENT:
That’ ‘&poses. of the first
of the two amendments
submitted
by the United
States of America. I now propose to move on to the
discussion of. the second amendment.
Does any
member of .the Council wish to address the ‘Council
before we move into.+the voting procedure on the
second amendment submitted by the Uriited States?

one against,

The druft resolution wus not adopted, the negutive
vote being thut of u permunent member of the Council.
119. The PRESIDENT:
A number of delegations
have asked to speak in explanation of their vote after
the vote. The first speaker is the representative of
Italy, on whom I now call.

$117. Since no member wishes to speak, I propose
to move into .the,vdting procedure. Does any member
of the Council wish to explain his vote before the
vote? Since there is none, I propose, therefore, to
-put to the vote the second amendment
submitted
by the United States of America, namely, that we
should add to the ,draft resolution the new operative
paragraph .5 in the document S/l 1901.

120. Mr. VINCI
(Italy): ,On 4 December [ibid.] ‘I
already had the opportunity
to explain the position
of the Italian delegation on the complaint made by
Lebanon. I stated in particular our firm condemnation of the “preventive”
raids by Israeli aircraft on
defenceless Lebanese villages and on Palestinian
refugee camps in Lebanon. The same condemnation
had been voiced the day before in Rome, where it was
especially felt that no one could overlook the gravity
14

of the action carried out by Israel against a friendly
country like Lebanon,
which is going through a
troublesome stage of its history; a country, furthermore, whose political
and territorial
integrity
is
essential to a just and lasting settlement in the Near
East. I do not think I need to say more on the
substance of the matter. I would rather restrict
myself to a brief explanation of the vote I have just
cast on behalf of the Italian delegation.
121. We share, of course, the shock of the sponsors of the draft resolution over the raids which have
taken an exceptionally
high toll of human lives, especially among’ women and children. We regret, however, that the wording they have used in their text
was somehow removed from the general context ‘of
the situation in the Middle East. The omission of
any reference to the well-known background of this
tragic incident made it less acceptable to my delegation. In other words, while we have been ready to
strongly condemn the Government
of Israel for the
air attacks against Lebanon, I feel duty bound to state
once again that we also condemn all acts of violence
in the Middle East, wherever they take place and from
whichever side they are undertaken.
122. Therefore, we cannot fail to condemn, for example, the recent fedayeen attacks in the centre of Jerusalem which caused the deaths of six innocent adolescents and wounded over 30 others. It is with horror,
indeed, that we heard that a second explosive charge
was discovered on 12 November
by some school
children in Jerusalem
near a large food market
[SCV S/11878]; fortunately,
it was defused before
exploding. We would have therefore liked to see the
sponsors,-while
taking note of the most recent casualties, also make reference to previous casualties as
well, so that.the memory of the innocent fallen on both
sides might not be forgotten. We believe that .it is
good policy not only to make the right move at the
right moment, but also to show at the same time
human understanding and solidarity with the suffering
of innocent persons, regardless of at whose door you
can place, in each case, the responsibility
for all of
the wrongdoing.
123. That is the reason why we regret in’ some way
that on one side some of the amendments,
at least
part of the amendments
proposed by the representative of the United States were not adopted, and that
we failed to adopt any action on this particular issue.
124. In my view, it would have sounded a positive
note if, as I said before, this first time that the representative of the PLO has sat at the Council table, we
might have had something acceptable to all, and
opening better prospects for constructive deliberations
in January, when we reconvene for a comprehensive
review of the whole Middle East situation, including
the Palestinian
question.
These are the simple
reasons why, as I said, we supported the amendments
proposed by the United States delegation. And my

delegation,
for the same reasons, was ready to
support some smaller changes, taking obviously into
account the substantial difference between the .present
case and what occurred in April 1974. May I conclude by saying that I also regret that we did not
have more time to try to reach a more satisfactory
conclusion of our deliberations this time.
125. Mr. SALAZAR
(Costa Rica) (interprdation
jiiom Spmislt):
The country my delegation represents
does not believe in violence as a means of solving
problems between men and between nations. We have
repeatedly declared, in respect of the problems before
us, that as a peaceful country that has no armed
forces, it is imperative that we oppose anything that
in any way encourages the use of violence. For the
same reason, we have always believed in peaceful
settlement as the only means of dealing with disputes.
126. Nevertheless, some may say that I am speaking
of something else; that here we are considering a condemnation
of Israel for its perpetration
of an act
of violence that, has taken a heavy toll of dozens
of innocent civilian victims. This is something my
delegation regrets and deplores. It was the insensate
product of violence. Whether perpetrated by a State
or by terrorist bands, it is nonetheless violence that
has broken out into a dispute.
127. My delegation considers this violence to be the
root-cause of the deterioration
of the situation in the
Middle East, and does not minimize its effects merely
because at times it is committed
by irregular forces;
nor do we consider it more serious when it is supported officially by any Government.
Let no one
believe that we are hereby trying to minimize. the.
extremely serious view my delegation takes of the
recent Israeli air-raids which resulted in many dozens
of innocent victims.
128. Far from it: we must declare categorically that
we fully disagree with such actions: we are shocked
by the number of victims and we sympathize with
their loved ones. But with equal candour, in order
not to judge such actions unjustly or improperly,
we must remember that these deplorable acts must
be viewed within the context of the complex Middle
East problem. Different aspects of this problem have
been considered by the Security Council for nearly
three decades, which bears witness to the fact that we
are faced not with a recent problem but rather with a
complex situation that has many antecedents; Be that
as it may, my delegation wishes to .make it clear
that we are not making this reference to the past
with any intention
of repeating
accusations
or
indulging in recriminations,
or, even less, of reviving
hatreds or resentments. In our view, we must look to
the past in order to stress that we are faced with an
old problem which in all its stages must be approached
in terms of all its dimensions.
‘129. Hence the grave events which we deplore today
should be rationally considered in terms of the over-

all problem of the Middle East. We believe that
violence, which we constantly repudiate, has been used
repeatedly both by Israel and its counterpart in the
most reprehensible way: leading to the loss of innocent
lives. We would merely be departing from reality
were we to emphasize the violence used by only
one of the parties and to shut our eyes to it when
it comes from the other side. That is the justification for our having abstained from voting on the
draft resolution submitted by the non-aligned countries, although we do not ignore the fact that it was
relevant to condemn Israeli action.

the Governments of Lebanon and Egypt through the
offices of their’ representatives,
who are with ,us :
tonight. But we also believe that the problem of loss
of innocent life resulting from incursions from Lebai ,
non and other neighbouring
States by Israel should
also be condemned.
I35. This is part of the cycle of violence with
which we are dealing and which the United States,
as a mediating Power, hopes to bring to an end.
We worked strenuously for a balanced resolution and
we have reluctantly had to veto the draft resolution as it
now stands, which we made clear from the beginning we did not consider to be balanced.

130. Moreover,
the draft contained no reference
to what might be regarded as a condemnation
of
violence as generated by the Israeli counterpart. My
delegation believes that merely with the introduction
of the amendments
proposed by the representative
of the United States the draft would have been
acceptable to us.

136. The PRESIDENT:
As there is no other Member of the Council wishing to speak in explanation of
his vote after the vote, I should like to make
a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the UNITED
KINGDOM.

131. I would now revert to what I said at the beginning of my statement: violence cannot replace peaceful settlement. If those responsible for’this tragedy
would reflect, they might feel that perhaps it is not
too late to do what they should have done from the
very outset: that is to say, talk matters over, negotiate,
and seek solutions through peaceful means which take
account of the just aspirations of all the peoples of
that region.

137. Once again the Council has been called to consider an act of violence in the Middle East which
has led to a tragic loss of life. This is not the first
time that the Council has met to consider a Lebanese
complaint against action undertaken by the State of
Israel, the most recent occasion being in April 1974
[1769t12 mecring] when the Council adopted resolution 347 (1974). Since that time, the Government
of
Lebanon has submitted numerous letters to the Council complaining
of further action by Israel against
refugee camps in Lebanon and of violations of Lebanese territorial integrity. The Council has also received
during the same period a number of letters from the
Government of Israel complaining of acts of violence
and terrorism undertaken by the PLO. The Israeli
Government
clearly believes -that-- -those--acts-have-originated
in and have emanated from Lebanese
territory.

132. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): Sweden voted for the
draft resolution S/l 1898. In so doing, the Swedish
delegation interpreted
the fourth preambular
paragraph, which refers to all previous relevant resolutions on the subject, as implying a clear rejection of
all acts of violence, and as a call upon all parties
to refrain from any actions which might endanger the
efforts towards reaching a peaceful solution of the
Middle East problem.

138. My Government has put on record many times
its total condemnation
of any and all .violence in the
Middle .East, wherever it may take place and .from
whichever quarter it comes. We consider that such
acts, involving as they do the loss of life and injury
to innocent civilians cannot conceivably be justified.
Nor can we accept the logic of those who say that
the only answer to violence is more of the same kind.
This senseless cycle of violence and counter-violence
must be ended if there is to be any chance of a just
and of lasting settlement in the Middle East.

133. Mr. MOYNIHAN(United
States of America):
As has been clear in what I have said here tonight
and what my delegation has done here today, this is
an outcome which is disappointing
to the United
States. On 4 December [1859th meeting], when this
matter first arose, we spoke briefly-lplainly-and
we
asked for balance. All day long, as my friend the
representative of the United Republic of Cameroon
has said, we spoke in private meetings with other
members of the Council, asking for some measure
of balance in the draft resolution.
We were not
successful. We introduced measures familiar to the
Council on behalf of our delegation wh;.f: we thought
would provide balance. The representative
of Italy
asked that we recess for 12 hours in order to talk
further about the proposals, and we voted with five
other members of the Council for such an adjournment, but it was not the wish of a majority.

139. It was against this background, therefore, that
my Government approached the draft resolution on
which we have just voted, which in its operative
paragraph 1 condemns the Government of Israel for
its air attacks against Lebanon. The information
which we have received suggests that a total of some
90 people were killed in the attacks and over 150 were
wounded. Many of those involved were women and
children. The Israeli Minister for Defence explained
on 3 December that these raids were aimed at

134. Now, the United States strongly deplores the
Israeli action which was brought to our attention by
16

preventing sabotage attacks against Israel, in particular of the kind that have taken place in the past few
weeks. We equally condemn those attacks and we
regret the loss of life they have caused. We understand the deep emotions that they have aroused in
Israel. For these reasons, we should have wished the
resolution for which we have voted to have recognized the significance of those attacks too as part of
the unhappy cycle of violence and counter-violence
to which I have just referred, and we would have
wished it to have expressed, as previous resolutions
of the Council have done, our deep concern over,
and our condemnation
of, all acts of violence that
endanger or take innocent lives. That is why we
voted in favour of the two amendments proposed by
the United States of America. We regret that they
were not adopted by the Council. But although we
regretted, and do regret, the lack of balance in the
draft resolution, we accept that these previous attacks
cannot justify in any way the recent raids by Israel
and ‘the scale of losses which they have caused.
We do not accept that any Government has the right
to take the law into its own hands in this way. It is
particularly
regrettable in our view, that this should
have taken place at a time and in a manner which
could put at risk the fragile peace and could damage
the prospects of reconciliation
in Lebanon,
a
country which has suffered such severe trials itself
over the past few months.

these lines. What we ask again of both sides is that
they should show the necessary statesmanship, moderation and restrtiint without which these goals cannot
be achieved.
142. The representative
of Lebanon has asked to
make a statement, and I now call upon him.
143. Mr. GHORRA
(Lebanon):
I want my first
words to be words of thanks and appreciation,
first
to the co-sponsors of the draft resolution, namely,
Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania,
the United Republic of
Cameroon and the United Republic of Tanzania; and
secondly, to those delegations,
the overwhelming
majority of the members of the Council, who have
supported that draft resolution. The fact that it was
not adopted does not, in our opinion, detract from its
value. The condemnation
is there, whether it was
vetoed or not vetoed. It was a condemnation
by
13 members of the Security Council.
144. My appreciation,
and that of my Government
and people, also go to all those delegations that have
expressed words of warm friendship towards my
country, especially inthese trying days when we do,
sincerely, need every friendly support. I shall not fail
to convey to the Government of Lebanon and to the
families of the victims the expressions of sympathy
that have also been expressed around this Council
table.

140. It was for these reasons and despite the reservations which I have expressed concerning the lack of
balance in the draft resolution submitted by the nonaligned countries, that my Government decided to vote
in favour of it. But, although we supported the action
which it was proposed the Council should take, it is
not, in our view, sufficient simply to condemn acts
of violence in the Middle East; we should act to
prevent them in the future. What was needed, therefore was a clear call from the Council to all the parties
concerned in the Middle East, and not only to one
side, that this violence should stop. If there is one
thing that perhaps can be learnt from the history of
the Middle East over the last 25 years, it is that
nothing lasting and permanent can, be achieved by
violence of this sort. It only hardens the positions
of both sides and makes the processes of negotiation
even more difficult than they are at present In our
view, only when the violence has stopped will the
parties be able to begin the real negotiations without
which there can be no hope of a settlement.

145. It is most regrettable that the United States
has chosen to veto this draft resolution and to kill it.
Our disappointment
is all the greater because of
the friendly’ relations which have always existed
between Lebanon and the United States. We had
every reason to expect from a friend, at this time,
every moral and political support. The United States
has on many occasions declared its support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon. The sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of Lebanon were brutally breached by a massive air
attack by the Israeli air force. It was an opportunity
for the United States to reconcile its vote with its
pronouncements.
I must add that those planes which
have attacked Lebanon and Palestinian refugee camps
situated in Lebanon were Skyhawks and Phantoms.
I certainly would have liked to hear from the representative of the United States whether his Government,
in its dealings with Israel, has placed any conditions
on the use of those planes, or any other armaments
supplied to Israel, against friendly countries such as
Lebanon.

141. My delegation has made clear on many occasions and in many forums the requirements,
as we
see them, for a just and lasting settlement. These
are: Israeli withdrawal from tetiitories
occupied in
1967; the respect for the rights of all States, including
Israel, to live in peace within secure and recognized
borders; and the right of the Palestinian people to the
expression of it national identity.
My Government
has declared its willingness to do anything which it
can to promote negotiations towards a settlement on

146. As I said, the draft resolution that was defeated
may not have given us full satisfaction. It could perhaps have given us some moral or political solace.
But certainly, had the Council adopted the draft resolution, it would not have deterred Israel from repeating
its. acts of aggression against Lebanon and the Arab
countries.
17

147. The Council has on several occasions adopted
various resolutions. As a matter of fact;:we are here
for the thirteenth time. Perhaps it is a bad omen.
The Council has adopted resolutions containing condemnation and warnings: condemnation
of Israel ard
warning the Government of Israel against a repetition
of its acts against Lebanon. Those resolutions were
only met by contempt and challenged by further acts
of aggression.

ful settlement of the Middle East problem on the basis
of Israel’s withdrawal from the Arab territories
occupied in the war of June 1967, namely, Sinai,
the Golan Heights, the West Bank and the Arab
sector of Jerusalem. Israel has stubbornly refused to
abide by those resolutions and to respect international
public opinion. It procrastinates now, as it has always
done, in the search for a peaceful solution.
152. It is our firm belief that the solution of the
Palestinian problem is of paramount importance
to
Lebanon. Since this problem arose in 1947 and until
now, Lebanon has opened its doors to the Palestinians
who were evicted from their homes and homelands by
the Israeli invaders. Over 400.000 of them, in a country
of only 2500.000 people, were condemned to live in the
misery of the refugee camps for 28 years. Does the
international
community
wish to perpetuate
their
misery and, at the same time, to perpetuate the
existence of the belts of misery around our major
cities?

148. We fail to understand why on every occasion,
particularly
on this occasion, an attempt is always
made to tag on to a Lebanese complaint
some
extraneous matters. Israel is a Member of the United
Nations. It has every prerogative to use the United
Nations if it has any complaint.
The doors of the
Council are open to it. They are open to those delegations which support Israel. They can come at any
time and to bring action against Lebanon, if Lebanon
really is at fault. But to go and speak about other
acts of violence in the area and equate them with
premeditated
acts of aggression, conceived, planned
and executed by the Government of a State Member
of the United Nations, in violation of the provisions
of the Charter, is an injustice committed
against
Lebanon. Equation and balance should be sought for
the sake of justice and not for injustice.

153. We must remember also that the Israeli attacks
on southern Lebanon have created for my country
another refugee problem, that of the Lebanese refugees
who had to abandon their homes and their villages
in southern Lebanon as a result of repeated Israeli
attacks against that area. ‘They also have to seek
refuge in the vicinity of and around Beirut and other
cities and towns. Such a situation was bound to have
serious social and economic consequences for a small
country which found itself unprepared to deal with
such consequences.

149. Now we are facing a very difficult situation.
As I said, even had the Security Council adopted the
draft resolution, perhaps our troubles with Israel would
not have ended. For in our opinion there are only two
ways .to relieve Lebanon
from these repeated
onslaughts a,nd the consequences of the Middle East
problem. The first is to take specific measures under
the Charter to prevent Israel from perpetrating further
acts of aggression. The Council has never been able or
enabled to do so, and tonight it was not even enabled
to ,adopt a simple resolution of condemnation
and
warning. The second, and naturally the more desir-:
able, course, to follow is to bring about a lasting
peace in the Middle East through a just settlement of
all aspects of the Middle Eastern and Palestinian
problems.. The Council, and particularly those States
active in the search for peace and a peaceful solution,
must overcome the obstacles and obstructions that
Israel constantly sets up on the road to peace.

154. Lebanon has never wavered in its total and loyal
support of the cause of the Palestinian people and the
Arab people. Its solidarity with them is ,unshaken.
Its belief that the cause of the Palestinians is a just
one has remained ever firm. There has never been
a division in Lebanon, and there is none now-and
I stress this point-regarding
the rights of the Palestinians to nationhood in their homeland of Palestine
The Lebanese people, whether Christians or Moslems
-and I stress that too-are
one in this belief and
feel that the time has come to do justice to the Palestinians 28 years after their expulsion from their homeland of Palestine.
155. You, Mr. President, and members of the Council around this table witnessed one of the finest
expressions of support of Lebanon for the cause of the
Palestinians last year, for the President of Lebanon
himself, Mr. Suleiman Franjieh, was entrusted by the
Arab Summit
Conference
with the mission
of
defending
the Palestinian
cause at the United
Nations*. That trust was in keeping with the role that
Lebanon has always played, is playing and will
continue to play in the United Nations in defence
of their cause, as well as that of the Arabs in general.

150. Lebanon has undergone and is now going
through one of the most tragic episodes in its history.
Some aspects~ of our problem are internal and it
remains for our Government and our people to solve
them, but lest we forget, I must state here that the
basic causes of our troubles in Lebanon fall within
the context of the conflict of the Middle East.
151. From this angle we can determine that Israel
was and remains the principal obstacle to the solution
of the Palestinian problem and to peace. Since 1948
the United Nations has adopted scores of resolutions
affirming the rights of the Palestinians to return to
their homeland and many others advocating the peace-

156. For the record I should like to repeat what I
said here on 4 December:
18

.,.

“Lebanon
has always maintained
and reaffirms now that the problem of the Palestinian people constitutes the core of the problem of the
Middle East, and that no solution to this problem
can be effective and durable unless the Palestinian
people exercise its inalienable
rights, already
recognized by the United Nations and, chief among
them, their right to self-determination
and nationhood. This aspect of the Middle East problem
has been sidetracked for many years... The question
is the restoration to the Palestinians of their basic
rights in order that they may live in dignity and
build their own future in a national homeland of
their own and on their national soil. The international community must face this question fairly and
squarely and swiftly and find the proper solution
for it at the same time that it is seeking to find
solutions to the other aspects of the Middle East
problem. To leave this aspect unattended to is to
invite the infliction of more tragedies on the peoples
and countries of the Middle East, and to allow the
situation to fester indefinitely.”
[1859th meeting.
pcrur. 106.1

157. I should like to add that it is our firm conviction that the international
community,
and particularly the great Powers responsible for the creation
of Israel on Arab land and for the calamity that
befell the Palestinian people as a consequence, should
assume a special responsibility
not only towards the
Palestinian
people but also towards Lebanon. We
believe that justice rendered to the Palestinians is
justice rendered also to Lebanon and to the Lebanese
people.
158. We have warned so often in the past of the
grave dangers of the lack of a solution to the Palestinian problem for stability and peace in the Middle
East. We shall not fail to emphasize, as strongly
as we can, the importance of solving the Palestinian
problem arising from the war of 1948. The Palestinians are entitled to have their long suffering and
their dispersion terminated. They are entitled to enjoy,
like any other people, a better life in their own State
and on their own national soil of Paiestine. The Arab
States, mainly Egypt and Syria, which have made
untold sacrifices, are equally entitled to live in peace
and to devote their resources and their energies to
building a better future for their peoples. They must
not be subjected to the squandering of their resources
indefinitely on defence spending. As far as my country
is concerned, it also is entitled to live, to progress
and to prosper in peace.
159. The nightmare of the Middle East problem,
which has lasted too long, has projected itself on the
Lebanese scene in all its dimensions. All of its repercussions have been focused and centred in Lebanon
and have shaken its fragile institutions.
Lebanon,
which has constantly steered a moderate course,
is caught in the web of the complexities
and contradictions of the problem of the Middle East.

.j,

160. We have become the victims of circumstances,
reaping the consequences of events not of our own
making. The tragedy of Lebanon is an extension, an
off-shoot, of tragedies long suffered by the Palestinians and the Arab ‘States because of Israel’s continued wars of aggression and her many attacks on
Lebanon in particular.
161. We in Lebanon revolt against the fact that we
have to pay a heavy price because of a lack of will
and determination
to solve the problem of the Middle
East swiftly in all.its aspects, however complex they
may be. And our revolt is justified because our people
are dying, our cities are being destroyed, our economic
and social institutions turned to shambles, and because.
Lebanon’s image as a land of moderation,
peaceful
coexistence, amity, culture, stability, security and
peace, has been .shattered.
162. Is this the fate to which my country-a
country
which has always been loyal to the United Nationshas’ been condemned?
Because of the non-action
of the United Nations, ,because of the unwillingness of the Security Council to act decisively to put
an end to the tragedies of the Palestinian
people
and the Arab people, by delaying a solution to the
problems of the Middle East, by failing to deal with
the essential aspects of the entire conflict, we are
condemning the Middle East and Lebanon to perpetual
upheavals.
163. The PRESIDENT:
.tative of Egypt.

I now call on the represen-

164. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): I should like
to. express Egypt’s deepest regret -that --the Security
Council was not able to pass a resolution condemning
Israeli barbaric attacks against a sovereign country,
Member of the United Nations, and against innocent
Palestinian civilians in refugee camps. This is because
of the American veto cast today. It is most unfortunate.
165. When Egypt, together with Lebanon, asked
for an emergency meeting of the Security Council
with the participation
of the victims-the
PLOit did so with the certain belief that the highest
organ of the United Nations, responsible for international peace and security,’ would not let this opportunity pass without -letting the aggressor’ be cleariy
told that his acts of aggression cannot be condoned,
or be allowed to pass ‘without the strongest con:
demnation:
.,,
,:
166. We believe that no one could but condemn this
barbaric act which resulted in the tragic loss of dozens
of human beings, including women and children. This
is especially so because even Israel admitted that its
air attacks were not in retaliation for any:other acts,
but rather a premeditated
act of State terrorism.
Israel may. believe now that the Council condones
‘its acts, and this could lead it to commit further
acts of aggression. Even Htr’trwtz,
one of the Israeli

daily newspapers, expressed criticism of Israel’s air
strikes which, it said, were carried out ,with excessive force, and thereby increased the danger of
inflicting
casualties among civilians. Ha’aretz
contended that there was no need to escalate action to
a point where Israel is charged with responsibility
for a massacre of civilians, and said that the price
Israel will have to pay in terms of adverse reaction
in the Western news media bears no relation to the
border security achieved by the air strikes. Who
ever planned the operation intended it against armed
enemies, but the Government which approved it failed
to calculate the other aspects and repercussions,
according to Hu’uretz.
167. In my statement before the Council on 4 December [/859th meeting], I solemnly warned Israel that
her acts could endanger the prospects of a just and
durable peace in the Middle East. I hope that Israel
will wisely heed this warning in the future. At the
same time, it is a matter for satisfaction that the
majority of our Council condemned this Israeli aggression in the most severe terms.
168. I should like to express my deepest satisfaction
and appreciation
to the majority of Member States
in the Council who supported Egypt’s request that
the PLO take part in our deliberations,
like any
other Member State of the United Nations. By this
wise act, the Council--despite
all its shortcomings
today-has
shown that the true representatives of the
Palestinian people will not be denied any opportunity to participate fully in any debate concerning
the Palestinian question, and through this historic
act, there will be no difficulty in the future for the
PLO to take part in all Council deliberations concerning
the Palestinian question and the Middle East problem.
Despite the veto cast today, the whole world is witness
to the breakthrough
achieved by the PLO in the
Council, the principal organ of the United Nations.
By this action, a very important step was taken to
show the whole world that the Security Council, after
the General Assembly, recognized the PLO as the sole
representative of the Palestinian people.

of the Council approved the clear and specific condemnation of the brutal and barbarous Israeli attack
on Lebanon and the Palestinian people. This draft
resolution does not propose any practical measures.
It condemns and warns. That has been achieved.
The 13 members representing a broad majority of
the Members of the United Nations and the world
have in fact condemned Israel for its aggression and
have warned Israel that a repetition of that aggression would entail serious action against that aggressor by the Security Council and by the world
international community.
172. With the condemnation
of the Israeli aggression, the bias of the United States of America has
also been condemned because that great Power, which
has special responsibilities
as a permanent member
of the Council under the Charter of the United
Nations, has once more failed to fulfil that serious
and special responsibility
and has sided with an
aggressor in spite of the overwhelming condemnation
by both Member States and by world public opinion
-and I dare to say even by some opinion inside
the occupied territories themselves.
173. During the last six days the United States has
tried to dilute the issue ,and to manmuvre in order
to weaken the condemnation
of this flagrant Israeli
aggression, by introducing a reference to other acts
which, in this case, have never been committed.
Even the Israelis themselves did not claim that their
action was in retaliation for an attack or any previous
action undertaken by any Arab, Palestinian,
Lebanese or otherwise.
174. At the beginning,
the Israeli Zionist aggressors were very frank and they stated through their
military spokesmen, and then later ever through their
responsible leaders, that their aggression was an
answer to Security Council resolution 381 (1975).
Their military spokesman said, as I quoted in my
previous intervention,
that they had done that to
emphasize that Israel “would meet the Palestinian
guerrillas only on the battlefield”
[ihid., paru4 14/l.
So Israel, when it committed
that act of aggression, was not responding to any so-called “provocation” and was not even claiming to practise, justly
or unjustly, a retaliatory action against the Palestinians or against Lebanon.

169. Let me conclude with a few words addressed
to my distinguished brother and colleague, Mr. Ghorra
of Lebanon. He can be sure that the vast majority
of the Council is whole-heartedly
with Lebanon, and
with the Lebanese people and their Palestinian brothers
who were brutally attacked by Israel. The day will
certainly come when no aggressor will be able to get
away with his aggression. Always, in the end, right
and justice will prevail.

175. The efforts and attempts during the past six
days by the delegation of the United States to introduce amendments
to the draft resolution presented
to the Council by the non-aligned members would
have carried paragraphs adopted word for word
from previous Council resolutions.
The American
representative
asked why we could not transmit
these whole paragraphs to this new resolution; what
had happened since the Council agreed 18 months
ago to those same paragraphs? And why was it difficult for the Security Council to accept them again?
It is as if those paragraphs were c/i&&s to be
. used

170. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
171. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): We believe
that Israel has been condemned. The overwhelming
majority of the members of the Council have voted
in favour of the draft resolution. Thirteen members
20
:.

whenever necessary. It is as if the Se.curity Council, as a responsible organ of the United Nations,
is not supposed to study the circumstances of each
case, the wrongs and the- rights which have been
committed
by this or that parry at the time of the
case, and then take responsible action. The logic
of the United States delegation is that we should
print prepared and prefabricated
resolutions so that
whenever needed we could take them from the shelves
of the United Nations archives and use them whenever there is a-complaint made to the Council.

they do not recognize that the PLO is the representative of the Palestinian people. We have said previously, here, and in the Genera! Assembty, and
everywhere, that it is up to the Palestinian people
itself to decide who is the spokesman and who is the
representative of the Palestinian people. But, leaving
this aside for a moment, we discuss now the question
of allowing or not allowing a third State to be between
the States of Israel and Jordan, as,,tt was stated in
the words of Mr. Rabin.
) _’
179. I think this declaration by the Israeli leaders,
should be condemned in its turn. Because this is the
first time that I remember a country:.proclaiming
for
itself an extraterritorial
sovereignty,.,ti country which
says, “I do not like to see any other State outside and
beyond my borders”. This is very strange, because
if it is going to be applied, we think that the whole
map of the world would be put in doubt, and all
countries can say, “We do not like to see this country
as our neighbour or that country as our’ neighbour”.
At the same time, if Israel really does not want to see
other States beside its own, then Israe:! would be
denying the very birth certificate that gave it existence.
The United Nations created Israel, justly or unjustly,
according to a resolution. According to that resolution, there was mention of two States. The first of
these two States was the State of Palestine. If Israel
now denies the right of the Palestinians
to have
their own homeland,
then it will be denying itself
the very resolution on which its State was established
and according to which a!! the injustice was done
against the people of Palestine.

176. Even at the time those paragraphs were introduced because of the pressure of the United States
-paragraphs
such as those introduced in resolution
347 (1974)-the United States delegation used pressure
in order to minimize the condemnation
of the Israeli
aggression at that time. But many countries then,
including the victims of that aggression, wanted to
give a chance to what was stated-as
it is stated
today-by
saying that if one had a little more balance,
then Israel would cease its aggression. But we have
seen the results. Despite that reference imposed in the
previous resolutions to the so-called “other acts”,
Israel continued its aggression and did not fee! it had
a responsibility
not to repeat the aggression, nor did
it obey the warning at that time as given to it by the
Security Council,
177. I believe that the only reason Israel has not
heeded the resolutions, instructions and orders of the
Security Council. at any time is because each time it
finds a country, a super-Power like the United States,
to support it. If they know there is somebody to
defend them even though the overwhelming
majority
of the members ofthe Security Council condemn them,
then why do they have to care? That is the grave
responsibility
which, once again, the United States
will bear in the future because our conviction
is
that Israel, which since its implantation,
since its
creation in the Middle East region, has not obeyed
a single resolution of the Genera! Assembly or the
Security Council, will still continue its acts of aggression, but this time as in other times, it wants to continue that aggression with the protection of superPowers like the United States.

180. The United States delegation in using, or rather,
abusing, the right of veto, has stated that they are
doing this because they are mediators in the Middle
East and they do not want to accept any resulution
which is not balanced. We have never been convinced that-the United States is really a mediator, or a
neutral mediator, in the area. On our side we have
been convinced of that fact long ago. But by their
veto today we are sure that the United States representatives have proven also to those who have a certain
amount of confidence in them that they do not deserve
that confidence, because they were, as usual, alone
and isolated in supporting
the Israeli aggression.
If they really care about negotiations
and if they
know the Israeli stand concerning negotiations, they
should, on the contrary, use their influence in order
to oblige Israel and to .persuade Israel to accept the
real negotiations. And not, as we have seen from the
declarations of the military and political leaders of
Israel, and from the’declaration
of the Prime Minister
of Israel, that Israel is not prepared to negotiate with
the party mainly concerned in the Middle
East
conflict.

178. The Israelis were very clear. They said, “We
have’ attacked, we have committed that act of aggression because we do not recognize the Palestinians
and we do not want to negotiate with them”. And
here we answer a!! those delegations which have
expressed concern that by passing this resolution
maybe the process of negotiation would become more
difficult.
I have in front of me a cable by the
United.Press
International
dated S December, a few
days ago, in which it.is. stated: “Israel said today it
would not negotiate
with any Palestinian
group
because such talks would imply willingness to allow
a separate Palestinian: State to be established on its
eastern frontier”.
The Israeli ieaders used to say
they do not want to negotiate with the PLO because

181. To those countries which want to see the process of negotiation
progressing freeIy, we say that
everything has to be-undertaken with the Palestinians,
because it was made clear by a!! the Arab parties
21

in the Middle Ea$V that without the Palestinians
there will be no peace in the Middle East region.
I
182. The American representative said that, after
the agreement on Siiiai, this resolution might endanger
a similar agreement on the Golan Heights pith Syria.
As a Syrian representative I answer officially by
quoting the decIaration of the President of the Syrian
Arab Republic, Mf. Hafez Al-Assad, on 6 October
1975,when he affirmed that there would be no progress
on the Golan front without similar progress on the
Palestinian front;‘+md Syr$ would never undertake
or accept any tio’Jement on the Syrian front without
a similar moveme’nt on the Palestinian front. Within
that understanding and spirit, the Syrian Arab Republic requested a few days ago that the Security Council
be reconvened on 12 January 1976, in order to have
a full debate on the Middle East problem, including
the Palestinian question, with the participation of the
PLO, because they s\re the first and mainly concerned party in that q/uestion.

only place where he will confront the PLO or any:
Palestinian group is on the battlefield. The air raids
and bombardments which he authorizes, bringing
untold death and destruction to Palestinians as well
as Lebanese, are fully intended to bring about our
capitulation and that of the Arab States. He should
have learnt that our resolve is unshaken, and that
his brute force strengthens our determination to
confront his forces on all fronzs.
188. His arrogant use of brute force, which is
totally dependent on massive supplies of sophisticated
instruments of war by the United States Govern*
ment, has brought Israel and heaped on it, more than
any other political entity in the history of the United.
Nations, the fury and disgust of the internationa1.
community.
189. Since 1967, Israel’s brutal actions have been
condemned 11times by the Security Council, censured
once and deplored six times; whiIe in the General
Assembly, Israel has had 11 condemnations and six
deplorations bestowed on it since 1967. This disgraceful record does not merit any further eIaboration.

183. We have seen the answer of Israel to resolution 381 (1975), which was the barbarous aggression
against Lebanon and against the Palestinian people.
But we are confident, as I have stated, that despite
the yeto of the United States, the Israeli aggression
has in fact been condemned. And also we are sure
that when the Security Council is reconvened on
12 January next year, the Palestinian representatives
will be sitting, as they are now, beside us; and the
debate on the Middle East and the Palestinian
questions will be undertaken by the Security Council
seriously if there is B real desire to have peace
established in the region.

190. However, my delegation ‘was not surprised
that the representative of the United States Government chose to dissociate himself from the consequences of the lethal war instruments which his
Government has so generously been putting at the
disposal of the ruling military junta in Israel. This
position is doubly clear an-d understandable. In the
absence,of his Israeli counterpart, Israel’s views had
to be voiced by proxy; and he carried out the mis-.
sion entrusted to him with the stylistic eloquence of a
Harvard intellectual.

184. All we hope is that at that time the United
States will be more resljonsible in its actions and policies and that it will really participate constructively
and positively in that debate in order to find a solution
to the state of aggression which now and for so many
years has prevailed in the Middle East, and that at
the end the Security Council may undertake some
serious and practical measures in. order to put an
end to Israeli aggression and to establish a real, just
and lasting peace in the region.

191. Whether the draft resolution cbndemning
Israel was adopted or not, it was amply clear that
Israel’s savage attack was condemned by 13 member
States of the Security Council, leaving the United
States Government. isolated from the international
communities together with its-Israeli ally. The United
States Government should ta& pride in. the fact that
it is protecting aggressive Israel, which is being
condemned day in and day out by the different
organs of the United Nations which reflect the will of
the internationai community.

185. The PRESIDENT: The final speaker is therepresentative of the Palestine Liberation Oi-ganization, on whom I now cdl.

192. My delegation has also tried to note with
seriousness.the statement by the representative of the
United States which.purported to say that his Government did not condone and indeed:deplored the Israe!i
raidsi but wanted them set in conte.xt with all other
violence in the Middle East. Is he trying to. con4
vince us that his Government really clings to the socalled, much publicized policy of even-handedness?

186, Mr. AQL (Palestine Liberation Organization):
On behalf of the PLO I should like once again to
express our deep appreciation and gratitude to ail those
members of the Council ‘who have deemed it necessary to condemn unreservedly Israel’s latest savage
attack on innocent Palestinians and Lebanese. Their
condemnation of the attack is simply a reflection of
their deep belief in the: Charter and principles of the
United Nations.

193. If his Government had honestly, nenuinelv
and sincerely followed an even-handed.p&f,
deriveh
from Abraham Lincoln’s belief in-equality which he so
unflinchingly upheld and symbolized~, the whole

187. Geheral Rabin may continue to insist, faithful
as he is to the premises of his racist Zionism, that the
22

political. and geographical spectrum in our region
and in many ofhe-r__parts of the world would
_. have
been completely different. But acting according to the
excessive manipulationsa lobbying and back-stage
manmuvring of a small but powerful Zionist minority, the United States Government proceeded to
emate Israel, to support it, to finance it, to sustain
it, to arm it and even to consolidate its grip on
occupied Arab territories. The result was misery,
anguish, disaster, bloodshed, tension, turmoil and
violence which the United States Government, we
are told, tries to deal with in an even-handed manner.
If one-sidedness is defined as even-handedness, we
must certainly be wit.nessing an era of semantic
acrobatics in American diplomacy.

substitute for the relation between the Palestinian
Arabs in exile and those under Israeli occupation?
Is it fair and realistic that the so%aIled return of the
Jews to Palestine be predicated.0.n a 2.000-year-old
myth, while the return of the indigenous Palestinian
Arab population forcibly expelled 28 years ago is still
,I 1
categorically denied?
:,,.197. On page 149, Golda Meir refers to the- people
of Palestine in the following terms;!, .
?i!. (
“And let me add, there was no’time during the
thirties that I did not hope that eventually the Arabs
of Palestine would live with us inp,eace and equality
as citizens of a Jewish homeland.+‘:

194. It behoves the United States Government to
embark on a drastic and soulsearching revision of
the totality of its policy towards the people of Palestine. Since it bears the lion’s share in the injustices
inflicted upon us, the United States Governnient
must bear the lion’s share in redressing these wrongs
and grievances. In his testimony before the Intemational Relations Committee of the United States
Senate, Mr. Saunders concedes rather implicitly and
peripatetically certain Palestinian realities which have
long been denied by. his Government; His difficulty,
he.admits, is not what buthow,Difftcult as his question
may seem to him, we believe, as a!! the peoples who
have supported us do, that the answer to his question
has already been provided by resolutions 3236 (XXIX)
and 3376 (XXX) of the General Assembly which
seriously, methodically, realistically and wisely
endeavour to bring about a just and durable peace
to the region on the basis of the implementation
of the national rights of the Palestinians on their
national soil.

During the thirties, when Mrs. Meir admitted she
wanted us as citizens of a Jewish homelands, we,
the people of Palestine, both Moslems and Christians, constituted more than 75 per cent of the population, and we had almost total aland ownership.
Later on, when the whole of Palestine was occupied,
it was the same Golda Meir who declared in 1969:
“Who are the Palestinians? They never existed”.

195. When we fervently speak and point. out. the
dangers which Zionism poses to our national existence,
we are not, as some people would like to see us,
indulging in a practice of polemics. I have here
with me Golda Meir’s memoirs, entitled My Li&,’
published this year in New York. Instead of drawing
on Herzl’s or Weizmann’s sayings, we thought Golda
Meir would be more up to date. After all, she is a
former Israeli representative to the United Nations,
a former Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Prime
Minister of israel until. two years ago. Listen to what
she had to say on Zionism, the Palestinians and the
future. On page 23, Golda Meir defines Zionism as
meaning:
“that the so-called Jewish problem (of course, it
was really a Christian problem) was basically the
result of Jewish homelessness, and that it could not,
and would not, be solved unless and until the Jews
had a land of their own again. Obviously, this
land could only be Zion, the land from which the
Jews had been exiled 2.000 years before.”
196. Could the relation-forged
as it may bebetween. ancient Hebrews and modern Jews be the
I 23

198. Thus our metamorphosis in Zionist eyes had
gone through the following stages: Bedouins, nonJewish communities, non-existent, and, finally, terrorists. Thanks to Chairman Yasser Arafat, our nonexistence has been transformed into freedom-fighters,
whom the Israelis still insist upon considering as
terrorists.
199. As for Golda Meir’s vision of the future, she
wrote the following on page 460 of her book: “My
vision of the future? A Jewish State in which masses
of Jews from all over the world will continuelto settle
and to build”. According. to the Israeli- Lcllr 6-f
Return,
any Jew, be he an American or a European
national, is automatically entitled to settle inoccupied
Palestine and to have Israeli citizenship, while a
Palestinian Arab is still being denied the right to
return to his homeland, where he was born-the !and
of his father and forefathers.
200. These are merely samples of the thoughts and
writings of a leading Zionist and contemporary Israeli
politician. They are a mirror replica of the writings
of Herzl70 years ago and those of Weizmann 40 years
ago. The one unchanging common denominator among
them is racial exclusiveness and racist Zionism. And
so, when our existence impinged on their ambition to
conquer our soil, the Zionists denied our national entity
and proceeded. with their deliberate attempts to
denigrate us and destroy us. But neither attempt can
succeed.
201. It was Golda Meir’s bad fortune that her political career was brought to an end following the
October 1973 war which shattered the myth of
Israel’s invincibility. This is what she had to say
about the war, on page 427:

I‘... The shock wasn’t only over the way in which
the war started, but also the fact that a number of
our basic assumptions were proved wrong: the low
probability of an attack in October, the certainty
that we would get sufficient warning before any
attack took place and the belief that we would
be able to prevent the Egyptians from crossing the
Canal. The circumstances could not possibly have
been worse .”
She goes on to say, on page 429:
“The Canal had been crossed by the Egyptians,
and our forces in the Sinai had been battered. The
Syrians had penetrated. in depth on the Golan
Heights. .. . One burning question was whether
at this point we should tell the nation how bad the
situation really was, and I felt very strongly that
we should wait for a while. The very least we could
do for our soldiers, and for their families, was to
keep the truth to ourselves for a few more days.”
Those are the confessions of the Prime Minister of
Israel during the October war of 1973.
202. Thus the Israelis have already got the message conveyed to them in October 1973: you cannot
always have the upper hand. We can confront you
and tight you.
203. With our people’s national rights anchored in
international legitimacy, the struggle of the people
of Palestine has been recognized as the struggle of
a colonized people entitled to national sovereignty
and national independence; and we have been allowed
to use all means for the restoration of these intemationally sanctioned rights. Armed struggle is no innovation of ours: some of the representatives sitting
in this ha!!, and many others sitting in the Genera!
Assembly, could not have been among us had it not
been for their armed struggle.

204. Nevertheless, we want peace. We are ready
for peace, and we are fighting for peace. But Palestine
cannot be the State of an exclusive group. We realize
that a new Jewish generation has been born in
occupied Palestine; and in conformity with our
tolerant nature, we are willing to live with this fact
because in ourdepths we believe in diversity, creativity
and productivity.
205. However, what we want is peace, and not capitulation. We want peace that does not detract from
our inalienable rights already recognized and reaffirmed by the Genera! Assembly this year and last
year. We want peace that does not forfeit our right
to national independence in Palestine and to repatriation. We want peace that acknowledges the Pa!estinian reality, the Palestinian presence and the legitimate
Palestinian leadership already recognized by the
Genera! Assembly.
206. Meanwhile, let me make it categorically clear:
we cannot, under any circumstances, uffer to accede
to our national extinction as a political community in
Palestine. To put it in the. words of.Chairman Yasser
Arafat: “We are fighting in order to exchange our
tents for our national soil; and we will stick to our
guns until the exchange is effected”. For the sake of
emphasis and clarity, we reiterate ‘what we have
already said here in New York: “The ball is not in our
court”.
The meeting

Notes
I Charles W. Yost, The Conduct
and Miscunduct
of Foreign
Affuirs.
New York. Random House. 1972. DD. 40 and 41.
Vi See’ OJ7cial
Records
uf the Ge~eral”%embty,
Twenty-Ninth
Session,
Ptenary
Meetings,
2284th meeting.
J Golda Meir. My Life. New York, G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 197%

24
..

rose at 9.50 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

UNiTED

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

LE.5 PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente darts les librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. fnformez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

~3AaHHU
JHH~X
sameM
HaqwR.

‘,pl-aHlI3aqHH
06-beAWHeHHbIS
Hasnic
MOx”O
Ky”HTb
H aren~c~aax
BO BC~X paHoHax
Mwpa.
HasoAHTe
cnpamn
KHA~~I(HOM r.iaramwe
mm ~WYHT~
no anpecy:
Oprannsawm
C~KUHR
no nponawtte
mAam&,
Hbw-Fiopn
wnw Xeneaa.

COMO

CONSEGUtR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

B K(HHiK”LIX
Idal-a06 WSAaHHRX
B
O~S~AHH~XH~IX

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Nacioncs Unidas estAn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidotas
en
todas partes del mundo. Consuhe a su librero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas, !Seccion de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00400

82-61202-December

1983-2

?Qo
