General As..embly- 1-'ortieth Session
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ' - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -----------------------

146

through the territory of transit States by all means of transport, in accordance with article 125 of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea;
2. Appeals to all States, international organizations and
financial institutions to implement, as a matter of urgency
and priority, the specific actions related to the particular
needs and problems of land-locked developing countries
envisaged in resolutions 63 (III), 98 (IV), 123 (V) and 137
(VI) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, in the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, in the
Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for
the Least Developed Countries 42 and in other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
3. Urges all concerned countries, as well as international organizations, to provide land-locked developing
countries with appropriate financial and technical assistance in the form of grants or concessional loans for the
construction, maintenance and improvement of their
transport and transit infrastructures and facilities;
4. Urges also the international community and multilateral and bilateral financial institutions to intensify
efforts in raising the net flow of resources to all land-locked
developing countries to help offset the adverse effects of
their disadvantageous geographical situation on their economic development efforts, in keeping with the overall
development needs of each land-locked developing country;
5. Invites transit countries and the land-locked developing countries to co-operate effectively in harmonizing
transport planning and in promoting other joint ventures
in the field of transport at the regional, subregional and
bilateral levels;
6. Further invites the international community to give
financial, technical and other support to interested transit
and land-locked developing countries in the construction
of alternative routes to the sea;
7. Commends the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and other United Nations agencies for their
work and the assistance they have provided to the landlocked developing countries, and invites them to continue
to take appropriate and effective measures to respond to
the specific needs of those countries;
8. Recommends continued and intensified activities
relating to the conducting of necessary studies and the
implementation of special actions and specific measures
for the land-locked developing countries, including those
in the area of economic co-operation among developing
countries, as well as those that have been envisaged in the
programme of work of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the regional commissions and
other programmes and activities at the regional and subregional levels;
9. Once again requests Member States to transmit to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development their views and comments on
the report of the Ad Hoe Group of Experts to Study Ways
and Means of Improving Transit-transport Infrastructures
and Services for Land-locked Developing Countries:
I 0. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of
the Pnited Nations Conference on Trade and Development on progress in the implementation of specific action
related to the particular needs and problems of landlocked developing countries, 4 ' submitted pursuant to resol.ution 39 '20Q, and requests him to prepare another such
42 Report

of the l'rw,,d !liat,ons Confereme on the Leas/ Developed

Countne.<. Pam. i-14 Seprnnber 1981 (United Nations publication. Sales

No. E.82.1 81, part, 11e. st'CL A.

report for submission to the General Assembly at its fortysecond session.
119th plenary meeting
17 December I 985

40/184.

International code of conduct on the transfer
of technology

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/ I 53 of 19 December 1983,
Taking note of the decision adopted on 5 June 1985 by
the United Nations Conference on an International Code
of Conduct on the Transfer of Technology, at its sixth session, 44 in which it requested the General Assembly to take
the measures necessary for further action, including the
possible reconvening of negotiations on an international
code of conduct on the transfer of technology,
I. Notes that progress has been made in the negotiations on an international code of conduct on the transfer of
technology but that there are still important problems outstanding;
2. Further notes that at the sixth session of the United
Nations Conference on an International Code of Conduct
on the Transfer of Technology, progress was made in identifying common ground, as well as divergences, in respect
of the issues outstanding in chapter 4 of the draft code, on
restrictive practices, and in chapter 9, on applicable law
and settlement of disputes;
3. Believes that further work, continuing the genuine
efforts made by all parties concerned, is required in the
search for possible solutions to the outstanding issues in
order to complete successfully the negotiations on a code
of conduct;
4. Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the President
of the United Nations Conference on an International
Code of Conduct on the Transfer of Technology to consult,
as appropriate, with regional groups and Governments,
taking into account the need for balanced geographical
representation, with a view to identifying appropriate solutions to the issues outstanding in the code of conduct;
5. Further invites the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to report
to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the
progress made in the consultations referred to in paragraph
4 above and decides to take, at that session, further action
on the negotiations on an international code of conduct on
the transfer of technology.
I 19th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/185. Economic measures as a means of political
and economic coercion against developing
countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant principles set forth in the Charter
of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolutions 2625 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, containing the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, 3201 (S-VJ) and 3202 (S-VI) of I May
1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of
43 A/40/815. annex
44TD/C'ODE TOT14<l. sect. IV.
