S/PV.8535

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8535th meeting

Tuesday, 28 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Fiallo Billini Portorreal
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Vershinin
Ms. Goolab
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-15283 (E)
*1915283*

S/PV.8535

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

World Health Organization, including on 22 health
facilities, with some having been hit more than once. All
of those attacks occurred in north-western Syria. About
25 schools are reported to have also been impacted by
the violence, as have markets and at least three sites for
displaced people.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: All Security Council members know
the statistics of this conflict. Members know that more
than half of the Syrian population has either fled the
country or faced repeated internal displacement. They
know that hundreds of thousands of Syrians have been
killed and millions injured. And members know that,
currently, an estimated 3 million people in Idlib are
caught up in the crossfire, with some living under trees
or plastic sheeting on bare patches of land. There are no
safe schools or clinics, no way to earn a living — eight
years of air strikes and shelling, of deadly terrorist
attacks and the constant fear of sending one’s child to a
school that may be bombed later that day.
Fighting in Idlib has continued over recent days,
despite the announcement of a temporary ceasefire on
17 May. So far this month, heavy shelling and aerial
bombardment have resulted in the confirmed deaths
of more than 160 civilians and the displacement of
approximately 270,000 people. As recently stated by
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR),
“both pro-Government forces and non-State
armed groups fighting in northern Syria appear
to have failed to respect the principles of
distinction and proportionality under international
humanitarian law”.
Since 28 April, in the past four weeks, a total of
25 attacks on health care have been reported by the
2/22

28/05/2019

The humanitarian community is responding in
accordance with its contingency and readiness plans. For
example, so far in May, more than 170,000 ready-to-eat
meals have been handed out to those who fled the latest
round of violence. Shelter support has been provided
to 25,000 newly displaced people, while an additional
60,000 civilians are to be assisted in the coming days
and weeks. That is in addition to the 1.2 million people
whom we already reach on a monthly basis.
However, despite our best efforts, the response is
stretched. Further military operations will overwhelm
all ability to respond. Many of our humanitarian
partners are part of the affected population and have
themselves been displaced. As a result, in many areas
of active hostilities, humanitarian operations have been
suspended. That includes the suspension of health,
nutrition and protection services previously supporting
some 600,000 people, including 21 immunization
centres that have ceased operations, and at least 49
health facilities that have partially or totally suspended
activities, out of fear of being attacked.
As all members know, this year marks the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions as well as
the twentieth anniversary of the Security Council’s
adoption of the protection of civilians as an item on its
agenda. And yet, as stated by the Secretary-General last
week during the Council’s open debate on the protection
of civilians (see S/PV.8534), respect for international
humanitarian law today is, at best, questionable. In
Syria, for example, the World Health Organization
has confirmed 33 attacks on health care since the
beginning of the year, and some health care facilities
have been impacted repeatedly. As Member States, all
Council members are aware that all parties to armed
conflict are legally bound to comply with international
humanitarian law. Sparing hospitals and schools is not
optional; it is a fundamental legal obligation.
While the fighting in Idlib is perhaps the most
distressing front in the conflict at present, it is not
the only place where humanitarian needs continue to
increase. We remain gravely concerned, for example,
about reports of deteriorating conditions inside Rukban.
19-15283

28/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8535

As members might know, over 13,100 people left Rukban
during the past two months. Typically, those who leave
Rukban spend around 24 hours at five shelters around
Homs city, where children are vaccinated and families
receive humanitarian and medical assistance, before
most of them continue on to their areas of choice. The
United Nations now has access to people who left
Rukban, having visited the shelters on 22 April and
13 May, and humanitarian assistance is being provided
to all of them. That is a welcome development.

with their families, and, in the meantime, ensuring
their access to specialised support, including protection
services, translation where necessary, and mental health
and education services. Solutions for foreign nationals
need to be urgently found to avoid their protracted
encampment. We call, yet again, on all Member States
to take all the measures necessary to ensure that
their nationals are repatriated for rehabilitation and
reintegration, or prosecution, as appropriate, in line
with international law and standards.

Sustained assistance for the 29,000 people who
remain in Rukban, however, is just as necessary. They
are perhaps the most vulnerable of all. The food, basic
medicines and other life-saving supplies delivered in
February have run out inside the camp. Fuel is scarce,
and prices are skyrocketing. People are exhausted. The
deployment of a third humanitarian convoy to Rukban
therefore remains critical in order to avoid further
suffering. We strongly urge the Syrian authorities to
reverse their refusal and facilitate access for a third
humanitarian convoy, as first requested in March, and
again on 9 May. Access at all stages — in the camp,
as they pass through the shelters and in their areas
of origin — is important to provide support to this
vulnerable population.

We understand that more people may yet arrive to
Al Hol in the coming period. Conditions are already
difficult with the current population. The summer
months and the risk of new arrivals might complicate
the situation even further. Solutions for residents of
the camp, including voluntary returns to their areas of
origin or choice and/or repatriation, as relevant, must
be found urgently.

We have frequently reported to the Council about
the plight of some 74,000 civilians at the Al Hol
camp — 92 per cent of whom are women and children.
Most have been exposed to extreme violence and
trauma under the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
They are now living in extremely difficult conditions,
under which they face a range of protection challenges
and an uncertain and disconcerting fate. Many of
them are foreigners, and face the risk of being denied
repatriation, rehabilitation, re-integration, a fair trial,
or even of becoming stateless. They also face the risk
of family separation and not knowing the whereabouts
of family members, given the notable absence of
adult males and adolescent boys over the age of 12 in
the camp.
All children, including those suspected of being
associated with armed groups and/or designated
terrorist organizations, are entitled to special care
and protection under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Those children
must be treated, first and foremost, as victims. The focus
must be on their prompt rehabilitation, reintegration
and repatriation, where applicable, while remaining

Our concerns extend to the situation in the south
of the country, which has been under the control of the
Government since the summer of 2018. As described
by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, active hostilities have ceased yet the levels of
violence continue to be unacceptably high. Moreover,
OHCHR has received reports of at least 380 people
having been arrested or detained in recent months,
230 of whom have been forcibly disappeared. At least
two have died in detention Many families continue to
have limited or no information about their missing or
detained relatives.
The Council has been briefed in great detail — month
after month — on the scale of the suffering of the
Syrian people. Sixty-one reports have been submitted
by the Secretary-General. Hundreds of Council
meetings have taken place. There is no question today
about whether the members of the Council are aware of
the tragic humanitarian situation in Syria; they clearly
are. The question today is what they will do to protect
civilians in Idlib — the latest example of an entirely
known, predictable and preventable humanitarian
disaster unfolding before our eyes. Can the Council
take no concrete action when attacks on schools and
hospitals have become a war tactic that no longer
sparks outrage? Is there nothing to be said or done when
barrel bombs are dropped indiscriminately in civilian
areas, in clear breach of international humanitarian law
and of resolution 2139 (2014)? Millions of battered and
beleaguered children, women and men cannot wait for

19-152833/22

S/PV.8535

The situation in the Middle East

28/05/2019

another Geneva round to succeed. They need protection
and Council action now.

any military action. This use of force is incredibly cruel
and completely unacceptable.

The President: I think Ms. Mueller for her briefing.

As we mentioned last week, we acknowledge the
considerable presence of members of United Nationsdesignated terrorist groups in Idlib and condemn their
violent attacks. But the fight against terrorism cannot
justify indiscriminate attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Counter-terrorism operations do not
override the responsibility of parties to protect civilians
or their obligations under international humanitarian
law, as well as resolutions 2286 (2016) and 2427 (2018).
We have also learned of reports of an attack on a press
crew last week, and we wish to recall that resolution
2222 (2015) condemns all violations and abuses
committed against journalists, media professionals and
associated personnel in situations of armed conflict,
and calls upon all parties to armed conflict to bring an
end to such practices.

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I deliver
this statement on behalf of the three co-penholders,
Germany, Kuwait and Belgium. I would like first to
thank Ms. Ursula Mueller for her valuable briefing. We
would also like to thank the humanitarian workers in the
field for their tireless efforts to alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people, in particular in the currently very
challenging environment around Idlib.
We, the penholders, have five asks today.
First, all parties should abide by their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilians and civilian objects.
Secondly, the parties should recommit fully to
the ceasefire arrangements of the Russian-Turkish
memorandum signed on 17 September 2018.
Thirdly, the United Nations and its partners should
have safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian
access to people in need, be it in Idlib, Al-Hol, Rukban
or anywhere else, including through the use of the
cross-border mechanism as mandated by resolution
2449 (2018).
Fourthly, any return of refugees must be safe,
voluntary and dignified, and continued monitoring of
returnees should take place to ensure their protection.
Fifthly, those who have committed violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law must
be held accountable.
The humanitarian co-penholders have called for two
meetings on Idlib in the past three weeks. Once again,
we cannot but start this intervention by expressing
our deep concern about the situation in north-western
Syria, where a military campaign continues through
indiscriminate and relentless aerial bombardment and
shelling, including the use of barrel bombs. This has
caused the deaths of innocent civilians, destruction
through targeted attacks on numerous de-conflicted
hospitals and schools, the displacement of 270,000
civilians, and despair. One million children live in this
area. Many of those fleeing have been displaced several
times before. These people are the most vulnerable to
4/22

We urge the parties to recommit fully to the
ceasefire arrangements of the Russian-Turkish
memorandum, signed on 17 September 2018, and urge
the Astana guarantors to ensure that de-escalation takes
place. We consider the Turkish-Russian working group
to be a tool that can swiftly de-escalate the situation.
Finally, we reiterate our call for a nation-wide cessation
of hostilities, in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).
Our concern also regards the situation in Al-Hol
camp. While humanitarian partners have been able
to scale up the camp’s infrastructure, it remains
overcrowded, with a population of more than 73,000
persons, of whom over 90 per cent are women and
children who face particular protection challenges.
The United Nations and its partners must be able to
provide needs-based humanitarian assistance to all its
inhabitants without delay.
The situation of over 28,000 people in Rukban
remains dramatic. While a lasting solution is needed,
we continue to advocate for a much-needed third
humanitarian convoy. Camp inhabitants should be able
to make the choice whether or not to leave the camp in
a voluntary, safe, dignified and well-informed manner.
The United Nations should have regular and continued
access to the internally displaced persons and returnees
at every stage, including at their final destination.
No lasting peace in Syria will be possible
without justice and accountability. The International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
19-15283

28/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 has become a central repository of information and
evidence of the crimes committed in Syria and therefore
has a crucial role to play in achieving accountability
and justice. Several countries have brought criminal
cases to their national courts, making use of the proof
gathered by the Mechanism.
Lastly, we support Mr. Pedersen, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, in his efforts to reach
a political solution in Syria on the basis of resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué of 2012
(S/2012/522, annex).
Mr. Vershinin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am very pleased to be here in the Council
today to participate in this regular but nonetheless
very important discussion of the current situation in
Syria, particularly on the humanitarian front. I think
that today’s exchange will help us to better understand
all aspects of the situation and to consider it in the
way it should be considered by the Security Council
and the United Nations, objectively and impartially. I
would like to thank Ms. Mueller, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, for her briefing on
the situation in Syria.
First of all, I want to say that we share the concerns
about the situation in and around Idlib. In November,
the influence of the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham militias had
spread across 60 per cent of the Idlib de-escalation
zone, and they now control 99 per cent. Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham’s aggressive actions and its shelling of towns
and Syrian Government positions are a threat to the
civilian population and have resulted in the deaths of
civilians, including women and children. In April and
May, Russia identified 398 violations of the ceasefire
by the militias in the Idlib de-escalation zone. During
that time, the terrorists’ shelling killed 76 Syrian
military personnel and wounded 194, while 19 civilians
were killed and 42 injured. I am purposely citing these
statistics, and I will cite more, to make it clear that we
are not talking about statements but about real people
who are dying at the hands of terrorists.
The attacks on Russian military facilities in Syria
using of multiple rocket launch systems and combat
drones continue, representing a direct threat to the
security of Russian military personnel who are in Syria
entirely legitimately. In the last month alone terrorists
shelled the Khmeimim base seven times. On 19 May,

S/PV. 8535

the anti-aircraft system at the base shot down six
rockets and destroyed two combat drones. On 21 May,
militias from illegal armed groups shelled Khmeimim
four times with rocket-launchers, firing 17 rockets.
The most recent attack was on 22 May, when four
rockets were launched. Terrorists are continuing their
aggressive activity from southern areas of the Idlib
de-escalation zone, with three attacks taking place in
April and another 18 already this month, in May. The
Council can judge for itself.
The Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham militias are terrorizing
the local population and using civilian infrastructure
for military purposes. They are also using civilians as
human shields. They are not bothered about verifying
their targets. On 12 May, as a result of a terrorist attack
on a preschool education centre in Al-Suqaylabiyah, a
Christian town in north-western Hama governorate, four
children and one woman died, and around 10 children
were injured. Yesterday, that same town and the village
of Muhradah were attacked twice, injuring residents
and doing significant damage to civilian infrastructure.
In response to this kind of aggressive action, the
Russian Aerospace Forces are providing the necessary
support to the Syrian Government forces to drive the
terrorists out of the areas being used to shell Russian
bases and Syrian armed forces’ positions in order to
crush the hotbeds of terrorist activity in the southern
areas of the Idlib de-escalation zone. According to
intelligence data, in all of the areas where there is
fighting, the Syrian armed forces are clashing with
illegal armed groups from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. As we
know, that means terrorists. The strikes by the Syrian
armed forces and the Russian Aerospace Forces are
directed exclusively at terrorist targets that have been
verified by intelligence. Russia is committed to the
agreements on stabilizing Idlib and to our memorandum
of understanding with Turkey of 17 September 2018. I
want to remind the Council that it affirms the parties’
determination to continue fighting the terrorists.
We are particularly concerned about the terrorist
leadership’s efforts to exacerbate the situation using
fabricated evidence, including with regard to the
alleged use of chemical weapons by Government
forces. According to our information, a separate
structure, known as the chemical branch, has been
created within Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham for the purposes
of staging chemical attacks. It is headed by Abu Basir
Al-Britani of the Haras Al-Din group affiliated with
Al-Qaida. The chemical branch’s head office, which

19-152835/22

S/PV.8535

The situation in the Middle East

plans and coordinates the staging for filming fake
attacks, is in Idlib. The Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham militias
make fake announcements for mass information outlets
that are then picked up by the Western media. Thus
on 19 May announced that Damascus was alleged to
have used chlorine near Kabani, in the hills in Latakia
governorate. We want to once again draw the attention
of the Secretariat, the specialized United Nations
agencies and all of our colleagues to the importance of
carefully checking any information received.
Against a backdrop of newly alarmist statements
about Idlib the Security Council should be sure to
keep the worrying situation on the eastern bank of the
Euphrates, which is not under the control of the Syrian
Government, on its agenda. We are seeing a rise in
tensions there, and in our view the only way to avert a
large-scale escalation and establish a reliable process of
national reconciliation is by ending the illegal United
States-led international occupation and establishing a
dialogue between the local ethnic communities and the
Syrian authorities.
We should pay very close attention to the situation
in Raqqa, Hajin, Baghouz, and every town that is still
in ruins and not in a fit state for civilians to live in.
We must continue to focus our joint efforts on what is
happening in the Al-Hol camp, where the situation is
disastrous. As has been said today, more than 73,000
people are living there in terrible conditions, more than
47,000 of whom are children under the age of 18. There
is a severe shortage of water, food, medical personnel,
medicines and medical services in Al-Hol, and thanks
to the impossibility of ensuring basic personal hygiene,
infectious diseases are spreading in the camp. The
standards for sheltering people have been significantly
exceeded and more than 15,000 people have been
obliged to live in dugouts.
We also think it is important to complete people’s
voluntary departure from Rukban camp as quickly as
possible. Obstructing that process is simply immoral.
States with an influence on the Maghawir Al-Thawra
militias should put pressure on them to stop terrorizing
the temporarily displaced and allow them to leave
the camp. More than 13,000 people have left Rukban
since the end of March. The majority have also left
the temporary settlements in Homs and have returned
to their homes in areas under Syrian Government
control. Incidentally, the settlements were visited
by representatives of United Nations specialized
agencies, specifically the Office of the United Nations
6/22

28/05/2019

High Commissioner for Refugees, at the beginning of
May, when they were able to verify that the necessary
conditions for receiving refugees were in place.
The international community should support
the stabilization processes in Syria that will enable
progress on a political settlement and the improvement
of the humanitarian situation. Russia will do its part,
and we have no intention of politicizing humanitarian
issues. Since 18 July 2018 Russian assistance in Syria
has helped to restore 856 education and 168 medical
institutions, to repair of five road bridges and more
than 1,000 kilometres of road, to lay more than 968
kilometres of power lines, and return to functioning
143 water supply plants, 196 bakeries, 645 electrical
sub-stations and 14,305 industrial enterprises. We are
also deploying humanitarian and demining efforts.
Listening to statistics is dull work, but I would
like to hear similar dull statistics from our friends
and partners too, because everything being done is in
the interests of improving the humanitarian situation
in Syria. We urge all interested parties to unite their
efforts, because together we can eradicate terrorism,
accelerate post-conflict reconstruction and assist in
the voluntary return home of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
I would like to thank the Council for its attention.
I have listened very attentively to everything that has
been said here. We take note of our partners’ concerns.
I want to say that what Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller said is important to us. The simple questions
that she asked at the end of her statement about what
must be done to protect civilians clearly require our
consideration and direct action. I too have some simple
questions about that, such as what can and should the
Security Council do to ensure that the millions of
people in Idlib we are talking about today are no longer
held hostage by terrorists? I do not think anyone here
has any doubts that they are terrorists. I also listened
carefully to the representative of Belgium, speaking on
behalf of the humanitarian troika of Germany, Kuwait
and Belgium, who expressed some interesting thoughts
that we should unquestionably all consider together.
I have some questions, too. When people talk about
how all the parties in Idlib should absolutely comply
with and abide by international humanitarian law,
needless to say I would like to know exactly what parties
they are referring to. If they mean the Government and
the opposition, I understand that. But are they also
19-15283

28/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

talking about the 99 per cent of Idlib territory that, as I
said, is currently controlled by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham,
which is on the Council’s list of terrorist organizations?
I have questions about that. Is it even possible for us to
say that terrorists have an obligation to do something
under international humanitarian law? Should they or
can they have such obligations?
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for
her important briefing today.
The Al-Assad regime, with the help of its military
allies in the air and on the ground, has carried out a
punishing campaign against the Syrian people over
the past eight years. The regime’s assaults have led
to one of the greatest humanitarian crises since the
Second World War, sending millions of people fleeing
chemical-weapon attacks, air strikes, heavy artillery
shelling, arbitrary arrests and starvation. During
some of the most deadly moments of the conflict, the
Al-Assad regime gave the people of eastern Aleppo,
eastern Ghouta, Madaya, Moadamiya and Homs a bleak
choice — surrender to regime forces or starve. That
siege tactic is an unmistakable part of the Al-Assad
strategy to seek a military solution to the conflict rather
than negotiate a political solution through the good
offices of the United Nations.
Unfortunately, for millions of people inside Syria,
Al-Assad’s use of starvation as a tactic continues.
There is no clearer example of the regime’s starve-andsurrender strategy than in Rukban. Humanitarian
conditions are deplorable as a result of the regime’s
refusal to allow the United Nations to deliver aid on
a regular basis to the thousands of people living there.
Many of those people went to Rukban to escape the
regime’s attacks on civilians in their home villages and
towns. It has been 111 days since the last delivery of
humanitarian assistance arrived in Rukban, in early
February — 111 days. The last United Nations-Syrian
Arab Red Crescent aid delivery in February was meant
to last 30 days. In addition to denying United Nations
aid convoys access to Rukban, the Al-Assad regime,
with military support from Russia, has imposed a
blockade around the camp that is also preventing regular
commercial deliveries of much-needed supplies.
The people of Rukban have few options for survival.
We know that from the messages that we hear from the
residents themselves. They do not have enough food.
Children are dying of malnutrition. Medicines, medical

S/PV. 8535

facilities and health-care providers in the encampment
are scarce. Since 22 April, the Al-Assad regime has
denied requests from the United Nations for a third
humanitarian-assistance convoy. The regime could
easily approve the convoy tomorrow. The United States
stands ready to facilitate any deliveries. We know that
the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
can provide the necessary assistance, because they have
done so twice before.
Today the United States renews its calls to the
Al-Assad regime to approve a third convoy to Rukban
immediately. We are deeply concerned about the fact
that the regime’s continued refusal to allow aid into
Rukban has forced people to leave the camp under the
threat of starvation. Creating humanitarian conditions
so dire that families are forced to choose between
remaining relatively safe inside the camp or feeding
their starving children is not a humane choice to force
on innocent civilians, nor an acceptable way to generate
departures from the camp. I expect that those defending
the regime will cite the fight against terrorists as a
blanket justification for such severe measures. The
Council is united on the need to fight terrorism, but
that is not a licence to starve civilians or depopulate
a civilian safe haven. Any return process should be
carried out with full United Nations visibility and
access in order to ensure that departures from the camp
are safe, dignified, voluntary and informed. Coercing
people to depart the area by not allowing food in cannot
be described as anything other than starving people
into submission in order to further a false narrative that
the war is over, or that it is safe to return home. For
many that could not be further from the truth.
The United Nations has reported to the Security
Council that the recent military escalation in Idlib
and northern Hama by the regime and Russian forces
has resulted in additional displacements and reduced
the ability of the United Nations and its partners to
provide humanitarian aid. The United States wants to
underscore once again that the full implementation of
the September 2018 Sochi agreement is essential to
protecting civilian lives and preventing further forced
displacement. Russia and the regime must recommit to
implementing the 2018 Sochi ceasefire and restoring a
full de-escalation of the fighting in Idlib immediately.
Moreover, the parties on the ground must ensure that
the United Nations cross-border humanitarian aid
deliveries authorized by resolution 2449 (2018) reach
populations in Idlib, including in the demilitarized zone.

19-152837/22

S/PV.8535

The situation in the Middle East

The United States remains alarmed by the
continued air strikes against health-care facilities
and health workers in north-western Syria. Attacks
directed at protected medical facilities are prohibited
by international law and are in defiance of many
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
2165 (2014), 2268 (2016) and 2449 (2018). There must be
accountability for the forces and leaders who planned
and conducted any such strikes.
Finally, the United States remains gravely
concerned about the impact that any further use of
chemical weapons, including chlorine gas, would have
on the humanitarian situation in north-west Syria,
where conditions are increasingly dire. The United
States and its allies are closely watching the situation
in north-west Syria and will respond quickly and
appropriately to any further use of chemical weapons
by the Al-Assad regime.
As the Security Council marks the twentieth
anniversary of adding the protection of civilians in
armed conflict to its agenda, the conflict in Syria is one
of the starkest examples of a failure to protect civilians.
We have to do more to ensure the full implementation
of international humanitarian law that the Council has
called for again and again. The people of Syria are
depending on it.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Ursula Mueller for her
very useful briefing, which once again shows that the
humanitarian situation in Syria is steadily deteriorating
and that we are witnessing another humanitarian
disaster in the north-west of the country. I would also
like to welcome the presence of Mr. Vershinin, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia.
We must focus our efforts on three priorities — the
need to preserve the ceasefire in Idlib, respect for
international humanitarian law, which is non-negotiable,
and the need for a lasting political solution, which is the
only possible solution to the Syrian crisis.
First, preserving the ceasefire in Idlib must be an
absolute priority for us all. Today’s top priority is to
prevent Idlib from becoming a new Aleppo. The lives
of more than 3 million civilians, including 1 million
children, are at stake. A large-scale offensive would
not only result in tragic humanitarian consequences
but also represent a security threat and a migration risk
for us all. We call on the signatories of the ceasefire
agreement to honour their commitments to maintaining
8/22

28/05/2019

it. I recall that those commitments were reiterated
by the Astana guarantors on 26 April. Russia, in
particular, must exert all pressure necessary on the
regime. Iran must also contribute by translating into
action in Syria the commitment it made to the Council
in a recent letter concerning its assistance on the issue
of regional stability.
Despite all the positive rhetoric, the offensive
against Idlib is taking place right before our eyes.
Behind the pretext of combating terrorism, the new
offensive of the regime and its allies are part of a desire
to forcibly reclaim areas that remain outside of their
control, as was the case for Aleppo and Ghouta. The
threat of terrorism could become even greater due to
the spread of elements that the regime is claiming to
fight. With more than 40 civilian infrastructure sites
hit, the targets and objectives of the offensive leave no
room for doubt that the fight against terrorism can never
justify such actions. Furthermore, I repeat, France will
be extremely firm if chemical weapons are used again
and stands ready to act.
Secondly, respect for international humanitarian
law is binding on all and non-negotiable. I am thinking
here of two absolute priorities. The first is the need to
protect civilians, including humanitarian and medical
personnel. It is completely unacceptable for hospitals,
including those that have been deconflicted, and schools
to remain the target of attacks in the north-west of the
country. The Council’s silence on the issue, for reasons
we all know, is as deafening as it is intolerable. I would
like to firmly reiterate that attacks on hospitals and
health workers constitute war crimes and perpetrators
will be held accountable.
The second priority is to guarantee immediate,
safe, comprehensive, sustainable and unhindered
humanitarian access to all Syrian territory, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and international humanitarian law. A new
aid convoy must be urgently deployed to the Rukban
camp. That is an immediate and vital priority. It is
also essential that the United Nations have access to
people who have left the camp. We call on those who
have the means to exert the pressure necessary on the
regime to ensure that it complies with its obligations
under international humanitarian law by authorizing
the deployment of the convoy and, more broadly, by
guaranteeing unimpeded humanitarian access to all
areas under its control, in particular in the territories it
has recently reclaimed in the south-west and in eastern
19-15283

28/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8535

Ghouta. Lastly, I am thinking of Al-Hol camp, where
it is crucial that the United Nations have sustainable
access, through the most direct and effective channels,
to provide assistance to the more than 70,000 people in
the camp.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We welcome Mr. Sergey Vasilyevich
Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation, to New York and wish him a
pleasant stay with us.

Lastly, only a lasting political solution can end the
Syrian tragedy. That is our third major priority and
inextricably linked to the first two. Only a political
solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522,annex) can end the suffering
of Syrians and lead to the stabilization of Syria and
the region in the long term. The Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Geir Pedersen, has our
full support in implementing all aspects of resolution
2254 (2015). The Special Envoy has made many efforts
and it appears that a new agreement may now be within
reach. It is the responsibility of the regime’s sponsors
to encourage it to engage in good faith in the process.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting and Ms. Ursula Mueller for her
insightful briefing.

However, the political solution cannot be reduced
to the constitutional committee alone. It must
include three elements: a nationwide ceasefire, the
implementation of confidence-building measures
to create a secure and neutral environment and the
organization of free and transparent elections in which
all Syrians can participate. Only concrete progress in
the areas I have just mentioned will enable refugees
and displaced persons to consider returning home. At
the moment, the political and security conditions are
not in place to allow a voluntary return in safe and
dignified conditions under the auspices of the United
Nations. That is reflected in the voluntary return flows
documented by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, which remain very low
to date.
Lastly, it is unimaginable to consider financing the
reconstruction of the country, normalizing relations
with the Damascus regime or lifting sanctions until
irreversible and credible progress towards a political
solution has been made. It would be not only a grave
error in judgment but also a serious political mistake
to believe that the Syrian tragedy is behind us. Given
the new tragedy looming in Idlib — according to a very
familiar script — no one will be able to claim to have
been surprised. We call on each member of the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities in order to
prevent such a tragedy and allow for the establishment
of a credible political process, under the supervision of
the United Nations, to enable the country to embark on
the path to stabilization and peace.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea remains
extremely concerned about the escalation of tensions
in north-western Syria, in particular in the provinces
of Idlib and Hama. Although it is true that there has
been some reduction in the level of violence, aerial
bombardments and attacks on the ground continue in
various parts of those two governorates. Despite the
announcement on 18 May of another unilateral 72hour ceasefire by the Government of Damascus in the
demilitarized zone, various reports echo the imminent
start of an operation by Government forces and their
allies against Al-Nusra Front jihadists entrenched in
Idlib and surrounding areas, who, since last week,
have been attacking positions occupied by the Syrian
forces and the civilian population with artillery fire
and rockets. In addition, the situation remains volatile
and the possibility of new hostilities is strong, which
complicates the future for some 3 million civilians
caught in the crossfire.
As Mr. Mark Lowcock said at the most recent
briefing (see S/PV.8527) to illustrate the gravity of
the humanitarian situation, since the recent military
escalation began in late April at least 160 civilians
have been killed and nearly 200,000 people have fled
the country’s hostilities in southern Idlib and northern
Hama. In addition, attacks on camps for internally
displaced persons have resulted in a number of civilian
deaths and injuries, while health centres and schools
have been damaged or destroyed, leaving 400,000
students out of school. In that regard, we express our
concern about the fate of people who remain in Al-Hol
camp, in the north-east of the country, which hosts
more than 70,000 people living in extreme conditions.
Against that backdrop, we cannot completely rule
out the possibility that the parties or at least one of them
is using chemical substances as a weapon of war, as is
being reported, or that an attack with chemical weapons
may be staged to justify further offensives.
In such a context, Equatorial Guinea can only call
for restraint and for the parties to ensure full respect

19-152839/22

S/PV.8535

The situation in the Middle East

28/05/2019

for international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We reiterate the need for RussianTurkish cooperation to make it possible for ways to
be found to reduce tensions in the de-escalation zone
within the framework of the Sochi agreement.

the Syrian Government, threatening the security and
stability of Syria and the region. It will not be possible
for the Syrian people to enjoy peace or to fully resolve
the humanitarian problems faced by those in Idlib until
the threat of terrorist organizations is eliminated.

I do not know if some members of the Council saw
the well-known series Game of Thrones, produced by
the Home Box Office television network. That medieval
drama and fantasy series describes some aristocratic
families who are fighting for power to conquer the
Iron Throne and rule over the seven kingdoms that
make up a vast territory called Westeros. In the last
episode of the television drama, we saw how the
mother of dragons uses the burning fire of her dragon
to conquer the capital of the seven kingdoms — the
King’s Landing — by burning to ashes with horrifying
violence thousands of innocent people and all the
existing social and economic structures. In Syria, there
is no need for dragons to destroy a city.

China supports the continued efforts of Russia
and Turkey to implement the memorandum of
understanding and to seek a comprehensive long-term
solution through dialogue and consultations. China also
supports the United Nations and other relevant actors
in their humanitarian relief operations for displaced
civilians and their efforts to improve the humanitarian
situation in the north-western part of the country. Since
the beginning of the year, there has been a massive
influx to the Al-Hol camp of civilians fleeing conflict
in north-eastern Syria. The population of the camp has
rapidly increased and the situation is very complex.
The humanitarian response should be strengthened
in the light of the camp’s demographics and proper
arrangements should be made for the resettlement of
those in the camp.

In Game of Thrones, death and destruction are only
fiction but in many Syrian cities, air and ground strikes
have caused very real damage, wiping out thousands
of innocent families, their cultural identities and the
social and economic structures. That metaphor should
give food for thought to the parties and countries that
can exert influence in order to prevent more victims
being added to the nearly 400,000 people who have lost
their lives since the beginning of the conflict.
I conclude my statement by reiterating the call on
the parties to renounce violence and armed provocation
and to decisively commit to the peaceful resolution of
the crisis in the context of resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller for her briefing. I also welcome His
Excellency Mr. Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, to New York and his
presence here among us at this meeting.
We are paying close attention to the humanitarian
situation in Syria and support the tireless efforts of the
United Nations and the parties concerned to improve
it. The problem in Idlib is due to terrorist forces that
still have a grip on the region. We should therefore
use common criteria in our fight against all terrorist
organizations listed by the Council. The local terrorist
groups not only violate the rights of civilians and
humanitarian workers but also launch frequent attacks
on Russian military bases and areas controlled by
10/22

With regard to the Rukban camp the international
community has proposed various solutions. Dialogue
and consultations should be enhanced in order to reach
an agreed solution as soon as possible. China supports
the Syrian Government in actively taking steps to
ensure the proper living conditions for those who leave
the camps and to end displacement.
In areas where the security situation is relatively
stable, the international community should support
the Syrian Government in demining, rebuilding
infrastructure, restoring health care, education and
other social services, launching industrial projects,
promoting development and improving people’s
livelihoods so that an increasing number of people will
step out of the shadow of war and gradually live a stable
and ordered life.
To fundamentally alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Syria, we must persist in advancing a
political settlement. The international community
should stand resolutely behind the United Nations
as it plays its role as mediator and pushes the Syrian
parties to seek a solution that addresses the concerns of
all parties, while respecting the principle of a Syrianled, Syrian-owned process and adhering to resolution
2254 (2015). The Syrian parties should put the future
of the country and the well-being of their people first
and continue to overcome their differences through
19-15283

28/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

dialogue and consultations towards a political solution.
China supports the constructive role played by Special
Envoy Pedersen in seeking a political settlement of the
Syrian issue.
Since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis, China has
provided many batches of emergency food aid and
donated medical equipment. Through the International
Committee of the Red Cross, we have provided water,
food, temporary shelter and medical services to
displaced persons and returnees. China will continue
to contribute to alleviating the humanitarian situation
in Syria to the best of its ability. The international
community must continue to increase its humanitarian
relief to Syria and to fulfil its assistance commitments.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for her briefing on the latest
developments in the humanitarian situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Since the end of April the north-western part of
Syria, in particular Idlib, has been the site of a new
military escalation, which, in addition to causing
many casualties and thousands of wounded, has led
to the displacement of 239,000 people, according
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
Regrettably, that new outbreak of violence, like
previous ones, did not spare hospitals or schools, as
Ms. Mueller informed us. The displaced persons camps
were also not spared. Unfortunately, each incidence
of violence further aggravates an already worrying
humanitarian crisis, as evidenced by the situation in the
Al-Hol camp. Initially planned to accommodate 10,000
people, according to the Human Rights Council, the
camp now hosts 73,000 displaced persons, including
about 6,500 foreign children, 240 of whom died from
malnutrition or poorly treated or untreated injuries.
In addition to the humanitarian consequences,
such armed confrontation undermines the efforts of the
international community to achieve a lasting peaceful
solution to the Syrian crisis.
The determination of the international community
to achieve the immediate cessation of hostilities
throughout Syrian territory must be as firm as its call
on all parties to promote dialogue in order to give
the protracted peace process a chance to succeed. To

S/PV. 8535

that end, Côte d’Ivoire calls for compliance with the
Russian-Turkish agreement on the demilitarized zone,
reached in September. The agreement should allow for
the separation of insurgent territories from Government
zones and ensure a cessation of hostilities in that region.
My country also calls on the parties to the Syrian
crisis to respect the obligations to protect civilians
under international law and international humanitarian
law. They must therefore remove all obstacles to the
provision of humanitarian assistance to refugees and
displaced persons, including women and children,
and to refrain from taking hostile action against
humanitarian personnel, which is an obligation under
international humanitarian law and a moral imperative
that the belligerent parties cannot ignore.
I would like to affirm my country’s conviction that
peace in Syria is still possible, but only if the parties to
the conflict want it and give themselves the means, in
good faith, to achieve it. The prospect of peace indeed
depends on constant internal efforts and the strong
support of the Security Council, which, as we have
underscored, must once again find its unified voice
in order to contribute to the peaceful coexistence and
long-term stability of Syria.
Finally, Côte d’Ivoire will continue to support the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in all of his
initiatives aimed at a peaceful resolution to the crisis,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First, let me thank Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for another very
useful and comprehensive briefing. The picture painted
by Ms. Mueller is bleak. It is very regrettable that we are
meeting again to discuss the worsening humanitarian
situation in Syria.
The Ambassador of Equatorial Guinea referred
to the Westeros world of A Game Of Thrones. I must
say that there is one huge difference between the
world of Westeros and our real world. In the world of
A Game of Thrones, there are no rules for the conduct
of war, whereas in our world there are such rules. I
am referring to international humanitarian law and
human rights law. This year we celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva Conventions
and the twentieth anniversary of the placement of the
protection of civilians on the agenda of the Security
Council. Additionally, the Council has adopted a
number of resolutions on the protection of civilians,
which constitute a part of international law. That means

19-1528311/22

S/PV.8535

The situation in the Middle East

that all actors, State and non-State actors alike, are
obliged to follow those rules, including in Syria.
We meet again to discuss an extremely worrying
humanitarian situation in Syria, especially in the
north-west part of the country. The military escalation
continues as we speak and hundreds of civilians are
being killed and injured. Military operations, which
have already brought enormous suffering to the civilian
population of Syria, have again started to advance.
Attacks on densely populated areas, homes,
medical facilities and settlements for internally
displaced persons are unacceptable and must stop. All
parties must, as a matter of the highest priority, protect
civilians. Any military operation should be fully in line
with the international humanitarian and human rights
law to prevent harm to thousands of civilians trapped
in the middle of fighting. The protection of civilians
and unhindered access to humanitarian assistance are
not a choice, as highlighted by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller, but a legal obligation of all sides to
the conflict — State and non-State actors alike. Those
who do not comply should be held accountable.
In that context, let me echo the Ambassador of
Belgium, speaking on behalf of the humanitarian
troika, that the fight against terrorism cannot justify
indiscriminate attacks against civilians and the fight
against terrorists cannot justify violations and abuses of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In addition, I want to stress our concern about the
dramatic state of health facilities in Syria, as raised
earlier by the United States delegation. Most of them
are not functional and those still operating are too
poorly equipped to provide care to patients with injuries
and further support to persons with disabilities. That
limited access to medical care turns many injuries into
life-long impairments that otherwise could have been
prevented with proper and timely care. We are also
deeply concerned about reported attacks and shelling
in north-west Syria, damaging 23 health facilities that
serve almost 240,000 people.
In our opinion, the international community, and
especially the Security Council, should vigorously
advocate for the health and protection of civilians,
especially the most vulnerable — women, children and
persons with disabilities. The situation is extremely
worrying in north-eastern and north-western Syria,
just to mention the Al-Hol and Rukban camps. In
that context, Poland calls on all sides to the conflict
12/22

28/05/2019

to respect international humanitarian law and human
rights law. Appropriate mechanisms must be in place to
ensure that perpetrators are held to account, including
those accused of serious violations and abuses against
children. That is essential, especially in the Al-Hol
area, where children constitute a majority of the
population. Schools, hospitals and other vital civilian
infrastructure must be protected from attacks. Children
are particularly vulnerable to the impact of explosive
weapons, and warring parties should make a special
effort to protect them.
Let me turn to the issue of humanitarian access in
Syria, especially in Rukban camp, where the situation is
increasingly dire due to the limited movement of goods
and practically no access. As recalled in Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller’s briefing, a second
humanitarian convoy to Rukban delivered life-saving
aid to 40,000 people living in the camp at the beginning
of February. Nonetheless, it was only a temporary
measure, sufficient for merely a month. As we approach
the end of May, no progress has been reached on a third
convoy. We were made hopeful by the positive steps
taken by the Syrian authorities in February with regard
to enabling the access of international humanitarian
assistance. We urge them to swiftly authorize the next
inter-agency convoy to Rukban, where approximately
24,000 people still need humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, let me also underline the significance
of ensuring that the de-escalation zone in Idlib, as
agreed in the autumn between Russia and Turkey, is
again in place. All parties to the conflict should do
their utmost to ensure the full implementation of that
agreement on the ground.
Last but not least, let me also acknowledge the
presence of the Deputy Foreign Minister of Russia,
Mr. Sergey Vershinin.
Ms. Goolab (South Africa): I would like to thank
Ms. Ursula Mueller for her briefing to the Security
Council this morning, and join others in welcoming
Deputy Foreign Minister Vershinin of the Russian
Federation to the Council Chamber.
South Africa remains deeply concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Syria. We appeal to all
parties to cease bombings of infrastructure in Idlib and
elsewhere in the country and ensure that the civilians
in those areas are not used by non-State actors as
human shields.
19-15283

28/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

As we have previously stated, South Africa is
concerned that a number of aid agencies have suspended
their operations in the north-west of the country owing
to the increase in violence. The large numbers of people
fleeing the area are adding to the already overburdened
humanitarian response. In that regard, we call on all
parties to cease hostilities. We hope that they are able
to take the necessary actions to allow for agencies to
resume their important work. Additionally, we urge
all parties to fully engage in the political processes
currently under way, as the situation in Syria cannot be
solved through military means.
South Africa urges all parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law for the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure. It is also important
that the signatories of the September 2018 ceasefire
memorandum adhere to its provisions. Attacks
on education and health facilities are particularly
disturbing, as they significantly impact the lives of
the most vulnerable sectors of society, namely, women
and children.
While we acknowledge the threat and violence
committed by terrorist organizations, it is also necessary
to state that actions taken to counter terrorism activities
cannot be undertaken at the expense of innocent civilian
lives, and any such action should be taken only within
the parameters of international law. The situation and
conditions in Al-Hol camp, in north-east Syria, is
particularly distressing. The camp has expanded from a
population of 10,000 in December 2018 to over 73,000
currently, of whom approximately 50,000 are children.
All possible efforts must be made to assist all those
who wish to return home, be they Syrian, Iraqi or thirdparty nationals.
Turning to Rukban, South Africa welcomes the
reports of increasing numbers of people leaving the
camp, aided by the Syrian Government with the
oversight of United Nations agencies and based on
the principles of voluntary, safe, dignified and wellinformed returns. However, my delegation also notes
that so long as people remain in Rukban there is a
need for humanitarian and medical assistance, which
is quickly diminishing. We reiterate our call for the
necessary approvals to allow additional and essential
humanitarian assistance to be delivered to Rukban.
It is important to note that presence of any foreign
military forces operating in the country without the

S/PV. 8535

permission of the Government of Syria undermines and
violates Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We urge all States Members of the United Nations
to identify their nationals through relevant United
Nations agencies and repatriate them to their countries
of origins and utilize their domestic law to deal with
such individuals.
In conclusion, South Africa is deeply concerned
by the reports of the spread of Islamic State affiliates
from Syria onto the African continent as the group
seeks new areas of operation and recruitment following
its territorial defeat in Syria. All possible action must
be taken to ensure that those individuals are detained
before they are able to incite further violence and terror.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for her briefing.
Like others, we continue to be extremely concerned
by the Syrian offensive in north-west Syria. I want to
put on record how much we welcome Turkey’s ongoing
efforts to reinstate the ceasefire, de-escalate the
violence and set up a working group on Idlib. As the
French representative said, 3 million lives are at risk,
and we do not want to see another Aleppo.
One of the things that has worried us is that there
was a declaration of a unilateral ceasefire by the proregime forces, but violence went on to increase the very
next day — and has increased further in recent days. I
therefore join others in calling for the ceasefire to be
respected and calling on all parties to adhere to the
Sochi ceasefire, respect international law and protect
civilians and aid workers. The international community
will not let up on the pressure until those stipulations
are met.
There was a report in the press this morning that
doctors at a maternity hospital in Al-Atarib, in the
countryside around Aleppo, have reported multiple
attacks in the area and have started to evacuate the
hospital. I wonder if the representative of Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
could say whether she knows that this report is correct
or not, and if the hospital’s location has been included
in the deconfliction mechanism. One of the things we
discussed last time was that deconfliction mechanism
(see S/PV.8527). It is inexcusable that hospitals, schools
and other infrastructure have been attacked despite
OCHA’s deconfliction mechanism. I want to join
other colleagues in calling on all parties to distinguish

19-1528313/22

S/PV.8535

The situation in the Middle East

28/05/2019

between civilians and civilian infrastructure, on the
one hand, and military targets, on the other.

had the safety and interests of its citizens at heart would
be able to give them.

In that context, I want to be clear that we condemn
breaches of the ceasefire by the Hayat Tahrir al-Sham
terrorist group. All combatants in a conflict — be
they non-State actors or State actors — are bound by
international humanitarian law. There is therefore no
excuse at all for attacks on hospitals and other civilian
targets. It is very important that we stress that the fight
against terrorists is not carte blanche for conducting
any attacks indiscriminately and that the fight must
take place in a civilian-free zone. I therefore join
others in again calling for the principles of distinction,
proportionality and necessity.

Finally, I would like to conclude by echoing what
the French representative said about the peace process.
It goes much further than just the constitutional
committee — there cannot be any reconstruction
assistance from our side until there is a sustainable and
irreversible political process.

The other thing that has deeply concerned us is the
reports of journalists in Idlib being targeted last week.
The latest was a Sky news crew on 23 May. I recall
that in February a United States district court found the
Syrian authorities responsible for killing The Sunday
Times journalist Marie Colvin in 2012. Journalists
are another group of people who urgently requires the
interest and protection of the Security Council.
I want to say a word about humanitarian access in
Rukban and Al-Hol. We need to see United Nations
access to Al-Hol. We are also very concerned that the
situation in Rukban is deteriorating. The humanitarian
conditions are dire and are a direct result of humanitarian
access having been blocked. As the representative of the
United States said, that means that residents are forced
to leave or face continued peril inside the camp. A third
aid convoy must be allowed to reach the camp via the
United Nations in Damascus. This is now becoming a
desperate situation.
Several colleagues and I asked some questions
of the Syrian authorities at the previous meeting. We
did not get any answers. I do not want to repeat those
questions. I want to make it a big easier. I would like
to ask today for four commitments from the Syrian
representative on behalf of his Government. First,
I would like to receive a commitment not to target
journalists. Secondly, I would like to see a commitment
to abide by international humanitarian law. Thirdly, I
would like to see a commitment to abide by Security
Council resolutions on the protection of civilians.
Fourthly, I would like to receive a commitment to let the
third United Nations convoy into the camp in Rukban,
as called for by a number of us. Those commitments are
not difficult to give. I think any Government that truly
14/22

I would also like to end by repeating what the
French and United States representatives said about
chemical weapons. We are ready to respond robustly
if needed. With regard to the issue as to whether there
have been chemical attacks or not, the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons has fact-finding
missions that can go and ascertain the answer to that
important question.
Mr. Fiallo Billini Portorreal (Dominican
Republic) (spoke in Spanish): The Dominican
Republic is grateful for the convening of this meeting
and thanks Ms. Muller for her valuable briefing. We
welcome the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation.
We are meeting once again to discuss the
humanitarian crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic. The
challenges remain enormous: the situation in Al-Hol
camp, where more than 73,000 people — the vast
majority of whom are women and children — remains
precarious; and the fact that tens of thousands of
people are still in Rukban camp awaiting humanitarian
assistance is worrisome, especially when we are
informed that permission for the entry of a new convoy
has been denied. The remaining needs in the south
of the country and the considerable challenges facing
the political process confirm that the Council has a
responsibility now more than ever to make tangible
progress if it really wants to bring an end to the crisis
in Syria.
The Dominican Republic remains deeply concerned
about the increasing military escalation in recent weeks
in north-western Syria, and in particular the impact it
has had on civilians. The details that Ms. Muller shared
with us today confirm that there is every reason for us
to be absolutely concerned and for us to collectively
seek solutions to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, the protection of civilians and
access to assistance for people who are already facing
extremely precarious conditions. According to reports,
between February and May of this year, it is estimated
19-15283

28/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

that 300,000 people have been internally displaced by
this new wave of violence. Of those people, 239,000
have been displaced in the past three weeks alone, of
whom an estimated 70,000 are children.
Many humanitarian responders make up part of
that alarming number of internally displaced persons.
The need to protect all of them is urgent and requires
our utmost effort and determination. With such a
massive influx of people, camps for displaced persons
and refugees are already overcrowded, and many have
no choice but to take shelter in open camps without any
type of protection. We must ask ourselves: how much
more are those people expected to endure? For many
of them, this is not the first time they have had to flee
violence, and once again, they find themselves in the
same situation of uncertainty and desperation.
Some reports refer to over 20 attacks on health
facilities, including hospitals and ambulances, claiming
the lives of medical workers. The situation has forced
the interruption of medical services to hundreds of
thousands of people, mainly women and children. In the
same area, an estimated 250,000 school-age children
have been affected. If that is not a catastrophe, what is?
We reiterate once again that, if a large-scale
confrontation were to occur, we would be faced with the
most serious humanitarian crisis in the entire history of
the conflict in Syria. Mr Lowcock said so just a few
weeks ago (see S/PV.8527) when he forced us to put
ourselves in the shoes of parents faced with the terrible
decision of whether or not to take their children for
medical care, because if they did, their children might
lose their lives in an attack.
As long as the norms of international humanitarian
law are not respected and attacks on civilian
infrastructure, in particular health facilities, continue
and humanitarian access is at risk, the fate of the
3 million people living in the affected areas is simply
uncertain. It is therefore essential that the renewed
ceasefire commitment reached between the Republic of
Turkey and the Russian Federation be maintained and
tangible steps be taken to facilitate access to the most
vulnerable. The protection of displaced people who
still have not found refuge must be a priority, as well
as that of the millions who decide to stay in the area,
primarily because they do not have the means to move
to safer places.
It would be very shameful if we were to return to
the Council next month to deliver statements on the

S/PV. 8535

importance of respecting international humanitarian
law when statistics and reports continue to pile up on
attacks on civilian areas and civilian infrastructure.
We must uphold our urgent responsibility to protect the
most vulnerable and avoid greater suffering for them at
all costs.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
and Ms. Ursula Mueller for her comprehensive briefing.
We express gratitude for the important work done by
her Office to alleviate human suffering in Syria. We
also welcome the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation.
Peru is following with concern the humanitarian
crisis that is still looming over large areas of the Syrian
territory and that is setting the stage for extremism. In
the current situation, we are alarmed by the persistent
violence in north-western Syria and its impact on the
people, which is exacerbated by ongoing extensive
damage to civilian infrastructure, including hospitals
and schools.
We deplore the new reports of fatalities in the south
of Idlib, including of women and children, and the fact
that this is a breach of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, as well as mandates
specific to the Council on the Syrian conflict. That
must cease, as it undermines the trust required to build
sustainable peace in the country.
We also note with regret the consequences of this
escalation in terms of thousands of new internally
displaced persons, who require urgent assistance to
survive. We commend the professionalism and sense of
duty demonstrated by the United Nations personnel and
other agencies deployed in Syria to meet their needs.
We also underscore the moral and legal imperative of
guaranteeing their safety and providing them with the
facilities and access required for their work.
In that vein, we hope that the necessary permits will
be granted to the United Nations for further provision
of assistance to the inhabitants of Rukban camp as a
palliative measure until the countries directly involved
in this situation can reach a definitive solution that will
enable those people to return to their homes safely and
with dignity, especially given that 95 per cent of them
have expressed their desire to leave the camp and return
to their places of origin.

19-1528315/22

S/PV.8535

The situation in the Middle East

We also underscore the huge challenge of meeting
the critical needs of over 73,000 people in Al-Hol
camp, and the importance of continuing to mobilize the
international community to support them. To that end,
we deem it essential to continue to work on measures to
provide a better climate of understanding, in particular
with regard to the sensitive issues of identifying
missing persons, the recovery of their remains, the
release of detainees and the identification of missing
persons. We hope that new and better developments
in those crucial matters will help in the coming weeks
and months to promote the required de-escalation to
overcome the humanitarian disaster that continues to
affect the country.
Given the intensification of violence in recent
weeks and its devastating consequences on civilians,
we must remember the urgency of moving towards a
political solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). In
that sense, we hope that the constitutional committee
can soon be established and that all Syrian parties,
especially the Government, will constructively commit
to its objectives.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Indonesia.
First of all, I wish to welcome the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
Mr. Sergey Vershinin, to the Chamber. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for her
briefing — indeed, another grim and worrying briefing
on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
With today’s meeting, I would like to highlight the
fact that the Council has held three meetings related
to the humanitarian situation in Syria, of which two
specifically discussed the humanitarian impact in the
north-west. With tomorrow’s briefing by Special Envoy
Pedersen, we will have had five meetings on Syria this
month. That is quite a large number. While Indonesia
prefers to conduct all Council meetings appropriately
and as necessary, my delegation wishes to highlight the
fact that the most important approach for the Council is
to be united in addressing humanitarian issues in Syria.
Indonesia is following very closely the situation in
north-western Syria, where the ongoing violence and
hostilities continue to take a heavy toll on civilians and
key infrastructure. Hundreds of people have been killed
and injured, while almost 240,000 have been displaced
in north-western Syria. The increasing number is
16/22

28/05/2019

alarming, and I think everybody in the Chamber is
fully aware of that.
When we say that there are 3 million people in
the de-escalation area of Idlib, including 1.3 million
internally displaced, we are also talking about a majority
of individuals who have already been displaced multiple
times. How do we think those displaced individuals
should cope with their situation while heavy fighting
and violence are going on near them? The ceasefire is
very important and needs to be addressed, along with
the restrictions on freedom of movement due to safety
and security concerns, and the absence of basic services
in key infrastructure, such as hospitals that have been
damaged or destroyed. As Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller mentioned just now, more than 45 health
facilities have ceased to operate, depriving civilians of
immunization and health services. That is not only sad
but in contravention of human rights.
While we have focused on the situation in northwestern Syria in recent weeks, the Council also needs
reminding of how things stand in the Rukban and Al-Hol
camps. More than 13,000 people have left Rukban, but
the situation in the camp, where there around 28,500
residents, remains dire. As for Al-Hol, 92 per cent of
whose population is made up of women and children,
some issues remain of concern and urgently need to be
addressed. Many residents have limited access to basic
services, such as health-care facilities. Food assistance,
nutrition and education are also sources of concern. In
the light of all of that, I would like to highlight three
points.
First, the increase in humanitarian needs must be
met with concrete actions. We urge all parties to fully
respect international humanitarian law and protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure, including by
providing unlimited access for humanitarian activities
throughout areas where people need safety and
protection. The humanitarian responses from the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners must be supported
in order to ensure the rapid and full implementation
of humanitarian assistance to those who are really in
need. This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions and the twentieth of the adoption
of resolution 1265 (1999) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We held an open debate on the issue
just last week (see S/PV.8534). People will be asking us
all about what comes next. We need to have an answer.
19-15283

28/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, I would like to highlight the need to
ensure sustained humanitarian responses. Sadly, the
humanitarian situation in Syria will not be resolved
overnight. The international community must make
every effort to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people and prevent another humanitarian tragedy.
And this brings me to my third point, on the
urgent need for a humanitarian preparedness plan,
adjusted to current priorities, especially as many
humanitarian partners have suspended their operations
due to heavy fighting in the north-west. Earlier, I urged
the upholding of the ceasefire. That would give the
United Nations and humanitarian actors the ability to
quickly respond and provide life-saving humanitarian
responses to the affected population. In this regard, I
want to request additional information from Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller on the update of the 2019
humanitarian response plan and how it could assist
meeting humanitarian needs on the ground. Are there
any new ideas for alleviating the suffering of the people
of Syria?
In conclusion, we once again urge all parties to
fully cooperate in ensuring the protection of millions
of people in Syria, with particular attention to the
north-west and north-east of the country. Indonesia
fully believes that the humanitarian situation in Syria
can be resolved only if all the relevant parties come
to the negotiating table and together advance the
political process in Syria, based on respect for Syrian
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, as
well as resolution 2254 (2015). The people of Syria
are exhausted, as Assistant Secretary-General Mueller
mentioned. People are tired of hoping for peace. It is
our solemn responsibility here in the Council to not
only bring hope back to the people of Syria, but also
the reality of peace on the ground.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Vershinin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have indeed asked to speak again and beg
the Council’s indulgence for just a few minutes more.
First of all, I am very moved by the serious discussion
today and with my welcome, which is truly very
important to me. We are dealing seriously with every
issue related to the evolution of the situation in Syria
on the humanitarian, military and political settlement

S/PV. 8535

fronts. I therefore want to say a few words, and partly
to respond to what has been said.
Clearly I cannot continue analysing or comparing
the situation in Syria to the Game of Thrones television
series, which I have not seen, but needless to say what
has been going on in Syria for a very long time is no
game. The reality is that a sovereign country and its
people are not playing at anything. They are trying to
survive and build a future for themselves.
In my statement I said that according to our estimate,
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, an organization that the Council
has recognized as terrorist, now controls 99 per cent of
the Idlib de-escalation zone. I was expecting someone
to at least attempt to correct that number, but no one
did. I therefore want to ask once again exactly what
the sides in question here are. I was pleased to hear
condemnations of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham’s violations of
the ceasefire. But what I want to say is that there have
been no violations, because Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham is not
a party that has any obligation under anything to do with
the ceasefire. The ceasefire was established between the
Government and the armed opposition, and the Astana
format played a role in that. Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, the
Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida are all organizations that
we have all designated as terrorist and that we must
therefore repudiate. That is why I was surprised by the
references to the Government’s relaunching or renewal
of the fight against the Al-Nusra Front. That is not some
whim, it is the duty of the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic to us, the international community, to
combat that terrorist group.
The hope was expressed here several times that
Idlib might not become a second Aleppo. I kept waiting
for somebody to say that they hoped Idlib would not
become a second Raqqa. I can assert that Idlib will not
become a second Raqqa, that dead city that the United
States-led international coalition bombed into the
ground. The Idlib operation is not about the large-scale
use of force. I want the Council to know that Russia
is very committed to all of its obligations under the
memorandum with Turkey, which has been frequently
cited today. That is therefore not going to happen , but at
the same time the fight against terrorism is necessary.
I have also wondered, in answer to questions that
have been asked today, what sort of message we are
sending, after today’s discussion and those during
previous meetings, to the 3 million civilians in Idlib
who, as we have all acknowledged, are hostage to

19-1528317/22

S/PV.8535

The situation in the Middle East

organizations that we all call terrorist. As I understand
it, the message that many are trying to send is that
they will have to continue to put up with the situation
for now. I think that is wrong and creates terrible
disappointment among the civilians who are hearing
that message from the international community.
With regard to the remarks by a number of
representatives that, in the case of reports of the use of
chlorine, they will respond quickly and appropriately,
I would only urge that, rather than acting quickly, they
act intelligently and based on verified data, which
should unquestionably precede any action, especially if
such action could have seriously destabilizing effects.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to welcome my dear
friend the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation and thank him for his presence
at this meeting and for the valuable clarifications he
just provided.
As the English saying goes,
(spoke in English)
“words may lie, but actions will always tell
the truth”.
(spoke in Arabic)
The truth known to everyone is that the suffering of
the Syrian people is the result of the crimes of various
terrorist groups, going by different names and having
varying loyalties, and including foreign terrorist
fighters among their ranks. Their suffering is also the
result of the aggression and war crimes and crimes
against humanity perpetrated by the United States-led
coalition, its agents and its proxy militias, including its
barbaric actions involving economic terrorism.
The truth everyone knows is that, from the
beginning, the humanitarian issue has been exploited
by Governments of certain members and non-members
of the Security Council to target my country and
ruin Syrian State institutions, while distorting their
image and turning public opinion against them.
How can anyone believe that the claims made by the
Governments of those countries in their reprehensible
statements are born of their concern for the safety of
the Syrian people? How long will the Council be unable
to uphold the principles of the Charter of the United
18/22

28/05/2019

Nations and international law, or be unable to compel
those aggressor States to end their aggressive practices
against my country, as well as hold them responsible?
Some colleagues mentioned the situation in Idlib.
In my statement before the Council on 17 May (see
S/PV.8527) I clarified the reality on the ground given
that the terrorist group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham — which,
by the way, is the Al-Nusra Front, which itself is part
of Al-Qaida in the Levant, which in turn is part of
Al-Qaida in Iraq, which in turn is part of Al-Qaida
in Afghanistan. Therefore, we are all talking about
Al-Qaida, regardless of its different names; all are
designated by the Council as terrorist entities. Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham, along with its associates, control large
parts of Idlib and also carry out terrorist attacks on
neighbouring safe areas and on positions of Russian
and Syrian forces, as detailed by my Russian colleague.
I continue to await a response to the questions I
raised previously, including how members would
react when facing similar circumstances whereby
terrorist groups take control of one of their cities and
use it to target other cities and undermine their safety
and security.
The Ambassador of Belgium, speaking on behalf
of the co-penholders, asked five questions; we have just
one question, which I have just asked. When will it be
recognized that the right we are exercising is the same
right others have exercised in confronting terrorist
attacks against the Bataclan theatre and the offices
of Charlie Hebdo in Paris, as well as terrorist acts in
Niece, London, Boston and other cities? The terrorists
that members have confronted in their own countries
were not equipped with Turkish rocket launchers and
tanks, or modern United States military supplies and
communication technologies. They were not supported
by media mercenaries such as the American Bilal Abdul
Karim, who is the Al-Nusra Front terrorist group’s
correspondent working with British Sky News and the
American CNN. They did not have Western experts on
chemical weapons at their disposal, as is the case with
the terrorists holding civilians hostage in Idlib.
The meeting held two days ago by the Turkish
intelligence service with members of the Al-Nusra
Front and other terrorist groups — including Jaysh
Al-Izza, Ahrar Al-Sham, Suqour Al-Sham and Jaysh
Al-Ahrar — serves to refute everything put forward in
previous years with regard to the so-called “moderate
Syrian opposition”. It also proves undoubtedly that
19-15283

28/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Governments of States sponsoring terrorism are
providing support to those armed terrorist groups.
Allow me to show the Council photographic evidence.
This is a photograph of the leaders of the terrorist groups
that held a meeting in Idlib two days ago sponsored by
Turkish intelligence and some members represented in
the Security Council. Leading the meeting was the head
of the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Julani the terrorist. What is
important is that some people in the photograph sitting
down with the Al-Nusra Front, which controls 99 per
cent of Idlib, were part of the Astana process — meaning
that they are obligated not to fight alongside these
terrorist groups against the Syrian Government. They
are bound to honour the agreements reached at Astana,
including the establishment of the de-escalation zone.
Therefore, this is a photograph of the “moderates” who
were meeting in Idlib.
How long will the Council ignore the suffering of
tens of thousands of Syrian civilians in areas where
militias of illegitimate foreign forces are present?
Ignoring the suffering of those civilians yet again proves
the scale of the lies and hypocrisy of some in dealing
with humanitarian issues. Allow me to highlight some
aspects of that suffering.
First, the United States and its agent the terrorist
group of Maghaweer Al-Thawra continue to detain
thousands of civilians in Rukban camp, in the occupied
Al-Tanf area. They are preventing civilians from
leaving the camp and returning home. They refuse to
dismantle the camp. We call on the Security Council
to compel the United States to cease its obstruction of
joint Russian and Syrian efforts to end the suffering
of the residents of that camp. Those efforts resulted in
making it possible for more than 12,000 people to leave
the camp.
Allow me to express my reservations about
remarks made by Ms. Mueller in her briefing. She
urged the Syrian authorities to allow the entry of
a third humanitarian convoy into Rukban camp, in
Al-Tanf. She gave the impression that it is the Syrian
Government that is obstructing the entry of the convoy
into the area, and I would like to correct that. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), Ms. Mueller, the Secretary-General, the
Security Council and, in fact, the entire world all know
that the Syrian Government approved the first convoy.
It was the occupying United States forces that refused
the entry of the convoy for 40 days. Ms. Mueller,
OCHA, the Council and the Secretary-General know

S/PV. 8535

that the Syrian Government also approved the second
convoy. The United States of America — the occupying
Power — refused the entry of the convoy into Al-Tanf
for four months. Ms. Mueller, OCHA, the Council
and the Secretary-General know that, by virtue of the
1949 Geneva Conventions, the occupying Power is
responsible for the protection of civilians. The United
States occupying forces in Al-Tanf are, by virtue of the
Geneva Conventions, responsible for providing medical
and food assistance to those under its occupation.
Please correct me if I am mistaken. Why is the United
States occupying such a wide expanse of my country?
What is the position of OCHA and the Council? What
is the United States doing in Syria?
Secondly, the situation in Al-Hol camp, in the
north-east of the country, is just as desperate as the
situation in Rukban camp. Al-Hol camp is under the
control of United States proxy militias known as the
Syrian Democratic Forces. They are militias that grew
with the support of the United States-led coalition,
supplemented by elements of the Da’esh terrorist
group. They have perpetrated many massacres, carried
out brutal practices and detained and tortured Syrians
who have called for their rights and the return of
Syrian State institutions so that they can carry out their
role. I would recall that the United States and gangs
of the Syrian Democratic Forces are plundering and
smuggling oil, historical artefacts and Syrian national
resources. They are undermining the Syrian economy
and fabricating crises that impact the day-to-day lives
of the Syrian people.
Thirdly, we must put an end to the suffering of
our people in the areas under the illegal control of the
invading forces of the Turkish regime. We call on the
Security Council to take decisive and immediate action
to put an end to the practices of the Turkish regime and
its attempts to change the identity and demographic
character of those Syrian areas, put an end to the
Erdoğan regime’s attempts to undermine the unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and
end his delusions of bringing back the Ottoman Empire.
Those days are gone for ever. I say that because I heard
my colleague the Ambassador of Britain thanking the
Turkish authorities for their humanitarian assistance
in Idlib.
The Syrian Arab Republic would like to stress
that the presence of any foreign military forces on its
territories without its approval is an act of aggression
and occupation and will be dealt with accordingly. Our

19-1528319/22

S/PV.8535

The situation in the Middle East

perspective is clear. We will spare no effort to rid our
citizens in Idlib of the control of the terrorist groups
that have taken them as human shields and to put an
end to the repeated acts of aggression of those terrorist
groups against innocent civilians in neighbouring
towns and cities. We call on all countries concerned
to withdraw their nationals who are foreign terrorist
fighters, whose number is estimated in the tens of
thousands. We call on them to withdraw those fighters
from my country immediately, hold them accountable
for their crimes, make sure that they do not commit
future crimes and not recycle those terrorists, thereby
allowing them to pursue their terrorism in countries in
Africa and elsewhere.
I would like to ask the representatives of Western
States in the Council: How can elements of terrorist
groups and foreign terrorist fighters move to Libya,
Afghanistan, Central Asia and the borders of the Niger
with Algeria, and others, without the support and
sponsorship of Governments with influence? We have
warned against this time and again. We have said that
those countries are investing in terrorism to undermine
the security and stability of other countries and serve
their own political agendas.
Our second question is the following: Why has the
Secretariat, with the partnership of 38 international
counter-terrorism institutions, been unable to identify
the Governments of States sponsoring terrorism that
has been targeting my country for the last eight years?
It is not that complicated, really. It is not as if we are
trying to identify the gender of angels.
We will liberate all of our national territory. We
will rid it of any illegal presence of foreign troops. That
is a sovereign right in accordance with the principles
of international law, the provisions of the Charter, the
Council’s resolutions and the Astana agreements, which
have reaffirmed the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. We call on OCHA
to shoulder its responsibilities and inform the United
Nations about the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian
people as a result of the unilateral economic measures
imposed by the United States, the European Union and
other States against my country, Syria. Those measures
have had a negative impact on the day-to-day lives of the
Syrian people. The Ministry of Health in Syria cannot
even access material and equipment used in surgeries.
That is a form of economic terrorism that complements
terrorism by terrorist groups and their supporters. This
is unacceptable and should not go on. Again, we call
20/22

28/05/2019

on OCHA to stop including in its reports claims that
are baseless and fabricated by hostile parties in the
United Nations Office in Gaziantep and in OCHA in
order to implement the agendas of the United States and
its allies.
In conclusion, some Council members — by which I
mean the United States, Britain and France — continue
to use deceit and misinformation to implement their
hegemonic policies so that the world goes back to
the era of colonialism, mandate and trusteeship.
Those countries continue to use the Security Council
to protect terrorists and undermine the advances of
the Syrian army when confronting terrorist groups
supported by those countries, including by instructing
the White Helmets terrorist group, which is a branch
of the Al-Nusra Front, to fabricate so-called use of
toxic chemical materials and to accuse the Syrian
Government of the act. It would not be the first time
that two of those countries have fabricated the lie of the
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
Similar to what happened when the Syrian army
made advances in eastern Ghouta, Aleppo and other
areas, we hear senior officials from those countries
and their Ambassadors in the Security Council making
threats in the event of the use of chemical materials.
Those senior officials and Ambassadors tell armed
terrorist groups in Idlib that they will be saved only if
chemical weapons are used. They ask them to use toxic
chemical weapons against civilians in Idlib, fabricate
evidence, bring forward false witnesses, as usual, and
manipulate the crime scene as they have done before,
and then those countries are ready with their political
and media capabilities to accuse the Syrian Government
and to come to their aid. That has happened before, and
we should prevent its recurrence.
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I am sorry for
taking the floor again; I will be brief. I have been quite
alarmed by what we have just heard in the last closing
interventions. I would therefore like to be very clear
about a number of things.
First, I would like the record to show that I did not
get the commitments that I was seeking. I want to be
very clear that the Sky News crew is not a legitimate
target. The targeting of journalists is not permissible,
and I again call on the Syrian representative to pass
19-15283

28/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

that message on to his Government and give us a
commitment that they will not be targeted, unlike the
late Marie Colvin.
Secondly, I want to repudiate the slander against the
White Helmets. I have said many times in this Chamber
that it is a humanitarian organization doing good work
to help the suffering civilians in Syria.
Thirdly, I want to say that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
does not do the bidding of the United Kingdom and
the United States in the manner in which the Syrian
representative implied. OCHA, like all the United
Nations, is impartial. It does the best job that it can,
in terrible circumstances, for the people of Syria, and
it would be better if the Syrian authorities supported
OCHA in that work, rather than attack it.
Lastly, there are more babies in Idlib than there are
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham fighters. Rather than talk about
responding to Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham provocations — no
one is taking issue with the question of whether to
respond to those provocations — the question is: How
they are responded to? How do Russia and the Syrian
regime respond to Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham? They say
that they want to protect the 3 million civilians in Idlib,
but massive aerial bombardments of civilian areas
and the bombing of hospitals, schools and civilian
infrastructure are not necessary and are certainly not
proportionate. That is the absolutely critical thing about
international humanitarian law. There needs to be a
distinction between civilian and military targets, and
there needs to be proportionality. That is what we are
not seeing, and that is why the Council is so worried
about that.
The President: The representative of Germany has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I am speaking on behalf
of the penholders, including Belgium and Kuwait.
My statement is warranted given the Deputy Foreign
Minister of Russia asked about what message should
come out of our meeting. I would like to respond to
that. I regret that he left the Chamber, but I understand
that he left while the Syrian Ambassador was speaking.
The point I wanted to make is the following.
I repeat what our British colleague just said, and
the message that we expect to come out of our meeting
is that everybody around the table supports and
subscribes to respect for international humanitarian

S/PV. 8535

law. While fighting terrorism, there is no excuse for
violating international humanitarian law by using
chemical weapons, barrel bombs or indiscriminately
bombing populations, thereby wreaking havoc upon so
many civilians, as we have unfortunately witnessed not
only in Idlib but also during the fighting in Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to make a
further statement.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor once again. I
would like to respond to the comments made by my
colleague the Ambassador of the United Kingdom.
Asking questions is not one sided. It is her right to do
so, and I will answer them. But I asked many questions
that went unanswered. Those were key questions, which
could have reduced the length of this discussion and
could have stopped at number 62, rather than getting
up to 100 reports. That would have happened if I had
received genuine responses to the many unanswered
questions that I have raised on numerous occasions.
First, the Syrian authorities were asked to support
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), whose representative is present in
the Chamber. OCHA is working in Syria pursuant
to resolution 2139 (2014). After its adoption, we, as
the Government of Syria, started to implement the
humanitarian response agreement, together with
OCHA. We renew that agreement every six months.
Thus, OCHA, which talks about supplying aid to
millions of Syrians, could have offered nothing if it were
not for the support of the Syrian Government, which
endorsed the humanitarian operation. OCHA, then, is
not acting alone on Syrian territory, but rather with the
agreement and assistance of the Syrian Government,
which gratefully allowed it to provide assistance to
millions of Syrians. That operation has been ongoing
since 2014. It is nothing new.
Secondly, I would like to turn to the White Helmets.
There are many Western media and political reports
that elucidate the truth about the establishment of that
organization, led by a British intelligence officer whose
name we shared with the Council. If that organization
were truly a humanitarian one, its workers would not
have been smuggled through Israel into Canada, the
United States and certain European countries. Why do
those humanitarian White Helmet workers have to be
smuggled through the Golan and then Israel? If they

19-1528321/22

S/PV.8535

The situation in the Middle East

28/05/2019

were truly White Helmet humanitarian workers, why
did they go to Israel and the Syrian occupied Golan?
Four hundred terrorists have been smuggled through
Israel to Western countries.

again put its own security forces and army in jeopardy
to protect United Nations personnel and accredited
journalists in Syria. Those who wish to behave like
Hollywood actors will pay the price.

Thirdly, resolution 2133 (2014) prohibits the payment
of ransoms to terrorists and rejects negotiations with
them. Those who say today that the Syrian Government
must implement a ceasefire with the terrorists in Idlib
are speaking in contradiction to the provisions of
that resolution, in which the Council decided not to
negotiate with or pay ransoms to terrorists. However,
the regime in Qatar has paid ransoms scores of times
to the Al-Nusra Front in the Golan, Aleppo and Idlib.
Those present know the old stories, but in the Golan,
when the Al-Nusra Front took members of the Fijian
and Philippine units hostage, Qatar openly paid
them ransoms of €35 million with the knowledge of
the Secretariat.

The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller
to respond to comments and questions.

My colleague the Ambassador of Germany
said that everybody here must uphold international
humanitarian law. Yes, we too believe in upholding it.
However, I call on the Ambassador of Germany and
my other colleagues to first uphold international law
and the provisions of the Charter before upholding
international humanitarian law because the former
prohibit interference in the domestic affairs of a State
Member of the Organization. Respect for the law cannot
be selective.
We respect international law, the provisions of the
Charter, international humanitarian law and human
rights law. We also respect the law on the protection
of journalists so as not to annoy my British colleague.
We respect a journalist who upholds his profession and
its rules and who wishes to visit a country to cover
events. Such a journalist must request a visa from the
authorities of the country he or she wishes to visit. He
or she must go to the country’s Embassy and obtain a
visa and authorization, rather than illegally entering
the country through its borders with neighbouring
countries to cover terrorist activities then getting killed
by a terrorist missile. Everyone knows that. The French
authorities are well aware of that.
The safety of our armed forces was compromised
in order to recover the journalist’s body that my British
colleague spoke about and hand it over to the authorities
of her country in Beirut. The French authorities know
that. They know the identity of those who brought the
journalist’s body to them. The Syrian Government

22/22

Ms. Mueller: Let me first state the facts regarding
the inter-agency convoys to Rukban. After the second
convoy delivered assistance to the people in Rukban
in February, we requested a third convoy because
that assistance was supposed to last only 30 days. We
requested a third convoy in March and again on 9 May.
Those requests were not approved. Today, I have heard
Council members calling for the approval of the request
for a third convoy to Rukban to provide life-saving
assistance to people while they are still there.
With regard to the question posed by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, attacks
against medical care are verified by the World Health
Organization by checking against multiple sources.
We will review the press article mentioned by the
Permanent Representative and inform the Council
whether or not such attacks have been confirmed by
the United Nations. As the Permanent Representative
reiterated, medical facilities enjoy special protection
under international humanitarian law, whether or not
they are located in deconflicted zones. I again call for
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure,
in particular medical facilities.
Concerning the question posed by yourself,
Mr. President, in your capacity as the Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, with respect to the
humanitarian response plan, the 2019 Humanitarian
Needs Overview was published on 1 March. The 2019
humanitarian response plan asks for $3.3 billion to
support 11.7 million people in need. The most recent
update is that the plan has been financed approximately
16 per cent, which is $544 million. I thank those
Member States that have contributed to the plan. The
plan itself is nearly finalized. A few details remain
to be discussed and will be finalized and published
soon. Overall, we believe that the plan is critical to
our response. Support for it is necessary for the United
Nations and its partners. The humanitarian community
stands ready to respond based on the humanitarian
principles of impartiality, neutrality and independence
and on needs.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

19-15283
