A /73/PV.102

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

102nd plenary meeting

Thursday, 1 August 2019, 11.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Béji
Caïd Essebsi, President of the Republic of Tunisia
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before we
proceed to the item on our agenda this morning, it is
my sad duty to pay tribute to the memory of the late
President of the Republic of Tunisia, His Excellency
Mr. Béji Caïd Essebsi, who passed away on 25 July. We
were deeply saddened to hear of his death.
On behalf of all Members of the United Nations,
I extend our most heartfelt condolences to his family
and to the Government and the people of Tunisia. On
behalf of the General Assembly and all gathered here, I
convey our deepest condolences for the passing away of
President Béji Caïd Essebsi.
President Essebsi was a great statesman, a man
who peacefully and successfully led the democratic
transition in Tunisia, one of the greatest and most
complex moments for the country and its future. His
values and ideals in support of the independence of
Tunisia were long-held and led him to choose politics as
the instrument to serve his fellow citizens. In his various
political posts, he was recognized for his fortitude and
commitment to his country and region. He was also a
staunch defender of the purposes and principles of our
Organization, the United Nations, and the multilateral
system. His legacy to strengthen democracy, achieve
sustainable development and promote the human rights
of the Tunisian people must continue. I trust that the
Tunisian authorities will responsibly lead the country’s

subseqeunt steps until the next presidential elections
are held.
I stand by his family and friends in these times of
grief and I ask the representative of Tunisia to convey
this message and this sincere tribute from the General
Assembly to a person of great stature for his country,
the region and the world.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Mr. Béji Caïd Essebsi.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Secretary-General
António Guterres.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): It is
a privilege to be here at the General Assembly today
to remember and honour the legacy of His Excellency
President Béji Caïd Essebsi.
At the outset, I extend my sincere condolences to
President Essebsi’s family and friends and to the people
and the Government of the Republic of Tunisia on the loss
of the country’s first democratically elected President.
I met President Essebsi many times, most recently
in Tunis early this year. He was a great statesman, and
his passing is a significant loss for the entire region.
The outpouring of grief in Tunisia and beyond is a
testament to the critical role he played in shaping his

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-23972 (E)

*1923972*

A/73/PV.102

country’s history since independence, and particularly
in recent years.
President Essebsi will be remembered as an
Arab and African trailblazer who steered his country
towards democracy and the path of full respect for the
fundamental rights and liberties of all its citizens. He
showed great wisdom and moral leadership by choosing
dialogue and consensus at critical junctures in Tunisia’s
democratic transition. He remained true to the ideals
of democracy, freedom and human rights throughout
Tunisia’s peaceful revolution. Across the region,
President Essebsi drew admiration for expanding
women’s rights and for his strong advocacy for equality.
(spoke in English)
While Tunisia mourns the passing away of this
pioneering leader, Tunisians should be proud of the
rich legacy that President Essebsi leaves behind. I
applaud the Tunisian Government and people for the
many successes they achieved under the leadership
of President Essebsi. Tunisians have demonstrated
the power of inclusive national dialogue. President
Essebsi was a genuine and reliable partner of the United
Nations, and our relationship grew deeper and stronger
during his tenure. He was a key ally in the search for
solutions to conflicts in the region, as well a steadfast
supporter of the efforts of the United Nations in Libya.
He enjoyed the confidence of his peers as an honest
broker motivated only by a vision of peace and stability
across the region.
I send the Tunisian people my best wishes and hopes
that they will succeed in preserving and furthering the
progress they achieved over the past eight years under
President Essebsi.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I stand
before the General Assembly to deliver this statement
on behalf of the Group of African States about the
late President Essebsi, one of the African continent’s
greatest Heads of State, who worked in the service of
African development, unity and peace.
From his birth on 29 November 1926 until his
death on 25 July 2019, President Essebsi dedicated his
life to Tunisia in particular, and to Africa in general.
He was a savvy politician, a diplomat and ambassador,
a productive minister, a presidential adviser, a Prime
2/9

01/08/2019

Minister and then an elected President in December
2014. He was the first Tunisian President since
independence to be elected directly through general
elections, following a glorious Tunisian revolution
unique in Africa and the Arab region. He took up the
presidency at a most difficult and turbulent time in the
history of Tunisia, given the challenges of the political
transition towards democracy, pluralism and freedom.
Nevertheless, President Essebsi was up to the
task, relied on his wisdom and acted as a father to all
Tunisians, while at the same time safeguarding the gains
of Tunisia’s ground-breaking revolution among modern
revolutions in Africa. He brought together all the great
Tunisian people and coexisted with various ideologies
and opposing ideas for the sake of establishing stability
and development in Tunisia. President Essebsi was
therefore a great African and national leader, who was
selfless and dedicated himself to the unity, coherence
and stability of Tunisia. He also was an advocate for the
rights of women in his country.
We pay tribute today to Tunisian President Essebsi,
whose wisdom will be missed in all Africa. We would
like to stress the principles that he instilled in Tunisia,
namely, tolerance, wisdom and the love of one’s country.
In his youth he was part of the new liberal constitutional
party. Moreover, he was an advocate of women and
their pioneering role in society and the State. He also
defended a consensus-based policy and moderation
based on political pragmatism, realpolitik and the
rule of law. He called for the State to be respected by
safeguarding State institutions and pursuing a balanced
foreign policy. He was an example to all Africa.
In calling for peace, coexistence, stability and
rising above differences for the sake of the country,
President Essebsi will remain a symbol for Tunisian
generations to come and an inspiration for African
leaders. On behalf of the Group of African States at the
United Nations, I express my deepest condolences to
the people and the Government of Tunisia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uzbekistan, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Asia-Pacific States.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of AsiaPacific States and to join others in paying tribute to the
late President Mohamed Béji Caïd Essebsi of Tunisia
and celebrating his life and legacy.
19-23972

01/08/2019

At the outset, I would like to convey the deepest
condolences of the Group of Asia-Pacific States to the
family of President Essebsi and to the people and the
Government of Tunisia. President Essebsi occupies a
pivotal place in the history of Tunisia, having served as
President, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of the
country, including during challenging times.
President Essebsi was a tall, intellectual figure.
He was the author of a number of critically acclaimed
books. He was bestowed with numerous academic and
civilian awards during his six decades-long public
service, both in Tunisia and abroad. President Essebsi
was a visionary leader who contributed immensely
to Tunisia’s development. He recognized the value of
preventing conflict and of stability in bringing about
development, and launched a number of programmes
designed to counter terrorism.
On the social front, he was the votary of a
modern, secular, inclusive and equal society who
led by example. His famous words on assuming the
presidency bear testimony to his belief. He said that
he would be President of all Tunisian men and women
without exclusion, while also stressing the importance
of consensus among all parties and social movements.
His commitment to gender equality was a
remarkable inspiration to many in the region and
beyond. He was the force behind the amendments to
Tunisia’s inheritance law to ensure equal rights for men
and women. That served to strengthen inclusivity in
Tunisia’s laws.
President Essebsi inspired the confidence of people
in the rule of law and played an instrumental role in
steering Tunisia peacefully during its historic transition
to democracy. He carried everyone along, emphasizing
reconciliation and patriotism above party politics.
The death of President Mohamed Béji Caïd Essebsi
is indeed a huge loss for the people of Tunisia. The AsiaPacific Group of States stands in solidarity with the
people and the Government of Tunisia as the country
prepares for another round of the peaceful political
transition through the presidential elections scheduled
for next month. We hope that the life and legacy of
Mr. Essebsi will continue to guide and lead Tunisia on
the path of peace, prosperity and coexistence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia, who will speak
on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States.

A/73/PV.102

Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): I take the floor on behalf
of the Group of Eastern European States. It is with great
sadness that we received the news about the passing
away of His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Béji Caïd
Essebsi, the fifth President of the Republic of Tunisia.
President Essebsi played a pivotal role in Tunisian
political life, notably after the 2011 revolution and
Tunisia’s transition Tunisia to democracy. Prior to
his presidency, he served as Minister for Foreign
Affairs from 1981 to 1986 and as Prime Minister from
February 2011 to December 2011, as well as in other
leadership roles.
As the first freely elected President, he vowed to
be “President of all Tunisian men and women without
exclusion” and stressed the importance of “consensus
among all parties and social movements”. His efforts
and determination in upholding democracy and
promoting and protecting the rights of all people in
Tunisia, as well as promoting peace and stability across
the region, will be remembered.
President Essebsi dedicated his professional life to
the service of the people of Tunisia, and his long and
rich political career spanned more than six decades.
On behalf of the members of the Group of Eastern
European States, I would like to express our deepest
condolences to the family, friends and colleagues
of President Essebsi, as well as to the people and the
Government of Tunisia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States.
Mr. Jaime Calderón (El Salvador): On behalf of
the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States
(GRULAC), I address the General Assembly to
express our profound sorrow at the passing away of
His Excellency Mr. Béji Caïd Essebsi, President of the
Republic of Tunisia.
President Essebsi had an outstanding career in
Government in the service of his country. From a
very young age, he identified with the causes that
would lead to achieving a better future for Tunisia.
Following the independence of his country and starting
in the 1970s, he held several positions in his country’s
Government: among his most important positions, he
was Secretary of State, Interior Minister, Minister of
Defence, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ambassador to

19-239723/9

A/73/PV.102

France, the United States and Germany, President of
the Chamber of Deputies and Prime Minister.
President Essebsi was a key figure in Tunisian
politics and, more recently, in the democratic transition
that began in that country in 2011. He also became the
guarantor of Tunisia’s entry into the path of democracy
after becoming president in December 2014, winning
the second round of elections in a free and democratic
electoral process.
While lamenting the physical absence of President
Essebsi and recalling his important contributions to his
country and region, the Member States of GRULAC
take this opportunity to pay tribute to him. His passing
is not only a loss for Tunisia but also for the entire
world, which is losing a great leader. Our deepest
feelings of solidarity go to his family, to the people and
to the Government of the Tunisian Republic.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of Andorra, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and
other States.
Mrs. Vives Balmaña (Andorra) (spoke in French):
It is an honour and a privilege to be able to pay tribute
and salute the memory of His Excellency President
Béji Caïd Essebsi on behalf of the Group of Western
European and other States.
It was with great sadness that we learned on
25 July, National Republic Day in Tunisia, of the death
of President Essebsi. On behalf of the Group of Western
European and other States, I would like to express our
deepest condolences to his family, the people of Tunisia
and the Government of Tunisia.
Having been a minister three times, Prime
Minister, twice ambassador, three times deputy and
President of the Chamber of Deputies, President Essebsi
always defended the universal ideals that supported
the Tunisian people in building a stable and strong
republic. Mr. Essebsi was convinced that democracy,
the defence of human rights and the rule of law are the
essential pillars of a modern country, and he defended
those values with great vigour during the transitional
process following the revolution in 2011, a complicated
period for Tunisia and the Arab world as a whole.
During his last term as first President of the
Second Republic, he was particularly involved in the
struggle to achieve gender equality. He was convinced
that women are the cornerstone of a more just, open
4/9

01/08/2019

and free society. He also defended multilingualism, in
particular through the International Organization of la
Francophonie, whose next summit he offered to host
in Tunisia. He was also committed to the promotion of
intercultural dialogue and multilateral cooperation as
tools for peace and international stability.
His perseverance, vision for the future and
unwavering commitment to freedom and tolerance have
been key to Tunisia’s recent history. The rallying of the
nation and the peaceful and constitutional transfer of
power in the country are proof that Mr. Essebsi was
a very exceptional statesman. This is the end of an
era, and today, with emotion, we salute the memory of
President Essebsi in the General Assembly.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the host country.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
On behalf of the United States, as host country to the
United Nations, I too offer our condolences to the
Tunisian people and join many around the world in
mourning the passing of President Béji Caïd Essebsi.
We commend his leadership and honour his legacy as
the first democratically elected president of Tunisia
after its 2011 revolution.
President Essebsi was an unwavering advocate for
the values of freedom and equality for the Tunisian
people, upholding peace and stability across the region.
Throughout his distinguished career of public service
to the Republic of Tunisia, President Essebsi remained
a close friend and strong partner of the United States,
something Secretary Pompeo himself noted, working
alongside us to strengthen Tunisia’s democratic
institutions and guarantee the security of its citizens.
The prayers of the President, the First Lady and the
United States are with President Essebsi’s family — his
spouse, Chadlia Saïda Farhat, and their four children,
Amel, Salwa, Mohamed Hafedh and Khélil — as well as
with the Tunisian people — during this time of sorrow.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Bougacha (Tunisia): Due to the period
of national mourning in Tunisia, His Excellency
Mr. Khemais Jhinaoui, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
could not be with us today. He has asked me to deliver
the following message on his behalf.
19-23972

01/08/2019

“We are immensely grateful to all of you for
sharing our grief, for honouring the memory of
the departed President Béji Caïd Essebsi and for
celebrating his lifelong achievements. During this
time of loss, your support and the outpouring of
sympathy from across the globe have been a great
comfort and solace for all Tunisians. Tunisia mourns
the father figure who helped shape the nation’s new
destiny, alleviate the turmoil of the democratic
transition and inspire faith in a peaceful, free and
inclusive Tunisia.
“President Caïd Essebsi dedicated his life to
the cause of Tunisia. At the age of 15, he joined the
national movement in its fight for independence.
Then, under the leadership of his mentor, Mr. Habib
Bourguiba, the father of modern Tunisia, and
the Republic’s first President, he had the great
distinction of serving as Interior Minister, Minister
of Defence and Foreign Minister. Essebsi’s
admiration for, and loyalty to, Bourguiba and full
embrace of his mentor’s modern agenda did not
prevent the him in the 1970s, when he deemed
the country ready for a democratic opening, from
parting ways with Bourguiba.
“Known for his sharp memory, sparkling
wit and humour, clarity of thought and grasp of
issues, he was always guided by a sense of duty
towards his country and by his strong belief
in the potential of Tunisia to serve as a land of
moderation, enlightenment and peace. He always
showed an unwavering attachment to the values
of peace, justice, international cooperation
and multilateralism, a resolute adherence to
international legality and to the ideals of the Charter
of the United Nations and a relentless pursuit of
a zero-enemy foreign policy. He addressed the
Assembly many times. He valued its role and
cherished the many friendships that he had with
United Nations leaders, notably His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres, whom he was
delighted to welcome in Tunis last April.
“He was looking forward to Tunisia’s term as
a non-permanent member of the Security Council
and urged me time and again to prepare for
constructive and active participation in advocating
Africa’s agenda for stability and prosperity,
promoting peaceful alternatives and supporting
just causes, chief among which was the Palestinian
right for a free and sovereign State.

A/73/PV.102

“In our region, he maintained a stubborn quest
for stability and peace. His chairmanship of the
Arab League summit held in Tunis last March
succeeded in showing unity despite the turbulent
times in the whole region. Bringing together Arab
Heads of State, the Tunis gathering illustrated
Tunisia’s diplomatic standing and the appreciation
of President Essebsi’s endeavours to promote the
settlement of conflicts prevailing in the region,
particularly that witnessed by neighbouring Libya.
“The late Caïd Essebsi’s regional and
international appeal is matched by unequalled
service to his country. In 2011, when Tunisia was
prey to confusion and uncertainty and when many
were shunning the call of duty, he re-entered the
political arena after years of retirement to steer
Tunisia through its first free and fair elections. True
to his democratic ideals, he handed over power to
the winning parties in a historic, unprecedented
peaceful transfer of power.
“At the height of tension in 2012 and 2013 and
confronted with the polarization of society and
politics along ideological demarcation lines, the late
Caïd Essebsi stepped in again, using democratic
tools to make a difference. With the support of
a vibrant civil society, he contributed greatly to
the transformation of conflicting postures into a
consensus-based paradigm. That process led the
Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet to win the
2015 Nobel Peace Prize.
“As the first freely elected President of the
Republic in 2014, he continued to promote consensus
and opted for an inclusive approach by associating
political rivals into a coalition. At the same time, he
worked hard to heal the wounds inherited from the
authoritarian era and to reconcile Tunisians with
their history. He restored hope and pride to young
people, advanced the cause of gender equality and
reasserted the commitment to individual freedoms
and fundamental rights.
“Confident, humble and a master of humour,
he accepted the fair game of criticism and derision.
He came out always greater and more worthy
of respect. In his death as in his life, he upheld
a message of unity. He left behind a young, but
confident democracy with functioning and resilient
institutions. He may rest in peace in the certitude

19-239725/9

A/73/PV.102

that Tunisia has charted an irreversible course of
progress, freedom and democracy.
“It is said that the great use of life is to spend
it for something that will outlast it. President Caïd
Essebsi outlived his life. He will be greatly missed,
but his journey does not end here and his legacy
will live on. May his soul rest in eternal peace.
“In the name of God, the Most Gracious, the
Most Merciful ‘O soul, in rest and satisfaction!
Come back thou to thy Lord, well pleased and wellpleasing unto Him! Enter thou, then, among My
devotees! Yea, enter thou My Heaven! (The Holy
Qur’an, LXXXIX:27-30)”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We reiterate
our consternation and condolences to the family, to the
Government of Tunisia and to all those who will always
continue to remember the legacy of President Essebsi.
I would now like to thank the Secretary-General
for his participation and to inform members that he
will need to leave at this time to attend other equally
urgent engagements.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
Draft resolution (A/73/L.104)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nauru to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.104.
Ms. Moses (Nauru): In Nauru’s capacity as Chair
of the Pacific Islands Forum and on behalf of the more
than 60 sponsors, I am privileged to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.104, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum”.
The draft resolution went through a transparent
process, with a total of four readings of the draft text.
We thank all delegations that constructively engaged in
the negotiations.
The United Nations-Pacific Islands Forum
cooperation resolution was first adopted in 2004
(resolution 59/20) after the United Nations granted
observer status to the Pacific Islands Forum, formerly
known as the South Pacific Forum, in 1994. From
6/9

01/08/2019

then on, the resolution has been negotiated on a
biannual basis. I would like to highlight a few notable
updates in this year’s draft resolution.
In the preambular part, the draft resolution
highlights the importance that the Forum members,
as big ocean States, attach to the designation of the
International Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable
Development. In paragraph 2, we express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for visiting our
region in May and for meeting with our leaders at the
Pacific Islands Forum headquarters. In paragraphs 5
and 6, we reflect on the mid-term review of the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,
which led all small island developing States to gather
in Apia, Samoa, last year and which will culminate on
27 September of this year in New York. In paragraph 7,
we look forward to the convening of the 2020 United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development in Lisbon.
Finally, in paragraphs 15 to 17, we touch on the
United Nations development system reform. In that
regard, the members of the Pacific Islands Forum
look forward to the establishment of a dedicated
multi-country office in the North Pacific, serving
the Micronesia region, and to the dialogue of the five
countries concerned with the Secretary-General on the
details. We offer our support.
The sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.104 look
forward to its adoption. We are disappointed that a
recorded vote has been called on the draft resolution
for the first time in its history. We respectfully request
all delegations to vote in favour.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/73/L.104.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Cheng Lie (China) (spoke in Chinese): Pacific
island countries face special difficulties and challenges,
including climate change response and social and
economic development. The Pacific Islands Forum is a
major regional intergovernmental organization and has
played an important role over the years in promoting
sustainable development, addressing climate change
19-23972

01/08/2019

and maintaining regional peace and stability for Pacific
island countries.
China has always attached importance to relations
with the Pacific Islands Forum and its members. We
actively participated in the consultations on draft
resolution A/73/L.104, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum” and
proposed justified changes. However, the coordinator
refused to accommodate the legitimate concerns of
China. After China broke the silence, the coordinator
failed to consult with China, and instead arbitrarily
submitted the controversial draft resolution for action
by the General Assembly.
China would like to express its strong dissatisfaction
with the coordinator’s approach and its reservations on
the content of the draft resolution. We requested that
it be put to a vote in the General Assembly. In view of
the concerns of a majority of countries of the region
and China’s cooperation with friendly Pacific islands,
China will abstain in the voting. We hope that, going
forward, the coordinator will take the legitimate
concerns of Member States seriously.
China and Pacific island countries are developing
countries in the Asia-Pacific region. We are ready to
develop relations with those countries based on the
principles of mutual respect and equality, underpinned
by respect for each other’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference in each other’s internal
affairs. On that basis, China is willing to strengthen
friendly exchanges, deepen mutually beneficial
cooperation and promote economic trade relations and
cultural exchanges with Pacific Island countries.
China-Pacific Tourism Year 2019 kicked off in
Samoa in April. Thanks to the efforts of both countries,
a number of activities are being carried out. This year,
China and Pacific Island countries will jointly host
the third China-Pacific Island Countries Economic
Development and Cooperation Forum. China will
continue to make tireless efforts to promote stability,
development and prosperity in the region of Pacific
Island countries.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
The United States commends Nauru in its role as
facilitator of draft resolution A/73/L.104. We deeply
respect Nauru’s flexibility, transparency and creativity
despite the difficult and complex negotiations that led
to the final text. We are happy to vote in favour of this
draft resolution.

A/73/PV.102

As evidenced by the visit of Secretary-General
Guterres to the Pacific Islands Forum in Fiji this year,
it is vital for the United Nations to support the countries
most in need of assistance as they address specific
economic development and security challenges due
to their unique geographic location, limited resources
and small populations. We recognize the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to date and urge him to continue to
focus on expanding cooperation in the region. The
United States sees the security and prosperity of the
Pacific Islands as an essential part of a free and open
Indo-Pacific region. We commend the Pacific Islands
for their robust subregional and regional multilateral
processes. We support those efforts and the close
coordination of the Pacific Islands Forum and the
United Nations, and call on the United Nations to
continue to expand those ties.
The United States stands as a partner with the
Pacific Islands to promote regional security and
stability, advance sustainable growth and prosperity
and address environmental challenges. We look forward
to continuing to work with these vital partners at both
the Pacific Islands Forum and at the United Nations to
accomplish those goals. The international community
as a whole must come together to support the Pacific
Islands to achieve those goals.
Finally, regarding references to the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,
the Paris Agreement and climate change, we addressed
our concerns in our general statement delivered on
8 November 2018, and we refer the Assembly to those.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.104,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum.”
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.104: Albania,
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Barbados, Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cyprus, Eswatini, Germany,
Haiti, Hungary, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,

19-239727/9

A/73/PV.102

the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Ukraine and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The President (spoke in Spanish): A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Eswatini, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen

01/08/2019

Republic, Myanmar, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Senegal, Syrian Arab Republic, Uganda, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/73/L.104 was adopted by 137
votes to none, with 12 abstentions (resolution
73/332).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote on the
resolution just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the
voting on resolution 73/332, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands
Forum”. We are disappointed that the coordinators of
the negotiations during the consultations refused to
consider amendments or take into account the justified
concerns of certain Member States. We advocate
striving for consensus, in particular when discussing
sensitive issues.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): My delegation asked for
the floor to explain its vote on resolution 73/332,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Pacific Islands Forum”. Indonesia engaged
constructively in the process of drafting the resolution,
which was presented by the delegation of Nauru.
We continue to emphasize the need to strengthen
consultations between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The Charter of the United Nations
highlights the importance of regional arrangements in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

Against
None

In that context, Indonesia supports resolutions to
enhance cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, including the Pacific Islands
Forum. In fact, we sponsored the resolution on the same
item back in 2017 (resolution 71/316). Nonetheless,
we regret that the present resolution incorporates a
significant new reference that was introduced very late
during the informal negotiations. The communiqué of
the forty-ninth Pacific Islands Forum includes elements
that interfere with the domestic affairs of a country,
which were not the subject of consultations beforehand.
We would therefore like to place on the record of this
meeting our concerns about the breach of that principle.

Abstaining
Cambodia, China, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Indonesia, Lao People’s Democratic

We deeply regret that one member of the Pacific
Islands Forum continues to interfere with the domestic
affairs of Indonesia, which is clearly contrary to

8/9

19-23972

01/08/2019

the spirit of the resolutions as stated in the second
preambular paragraph. Furthermore, respect for the
sovereign right of States in conducting their national
affairs free from external interference is also part of the
Boe Declaration, which is annexed to the communiqué
of the forty-ninth Pacific Islands Forum. Evidently, that
one member of the Pacific Islands Forum has always
breached the principle I mentioned.
As a country that co-sponsored the resolution two
years ago, unfortunately and for the reasons I have
explained, we had to decide to abstain in the voting on
this year’s resolution. We call upon the States members
of the Pacific Islands Forum to uphold the spirit of

A/73/PV.102

the resolutions and continue constructive engagement
to strengthen cooperation between the Forum and the
United Nations for the benefit of the countries in the
Pacific region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (p)
of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

19-239729/9
