V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Nations system, regional and international organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial
institutions, to provide assistance bilaterally and multilaterally, as appropriate, to Djibouti in order to enable it to
cope with its difficult economic situation and to implement its development strategies, including the programme
of assistance that was presented at the round-table of
development partners convened by the Government of
Djibouti in November 1983;
5. Appeals to the international community to provide
financial, material and technical assistance, as a matter of
urgency, to alleviate the sufferings of the population affected by drought and for the implementation of the droughtrelated projects and programmes;
6. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to maintain and increase their current and future programmes of
assistance to Djibouti, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on
the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to help that country;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Djibouti;
(b) To keep the situation in Djibouti under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions
concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1985, of the current status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Djibouti;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation of Djibouti and in organizing and implementing the
special programme of economic assistance for that country
in time for the matter to be considered by the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/201. Assistance to the drought-stricken areas of
Ethiopia
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
5 of 17 May 1984 on emergency assistance to the drought
victims in Ethiopia,
Noting with appreciation the appeals made by the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General
for emergency assistance to Ethiopia,
Having heard the statement made by the Commissioner
for Relief and Rehabilitation of Ethiopia on 2 November
1984 115 concerning the critical food situation and the sad
state of affairs that prevails in the disaster-stricken areas of
Ethiopia,
Alarmed by the catastrophic effects of the serious and
persistent drought that poses imminent danger to the survival of millions of drought victims,
115 See Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thlr/1•-ninth Sesswn,
Second Commillee, 32nd meeting, paras. 39-42
•
116 A/39/572.
117
See Official Records of 1he General A 1semhl1. l'hlr/v-mnth Sfssum. Plenary Meetings. 21 st meeting, paras 48-104
•

153

Deeply disturbed by the grave food situation and the
widespread and deadly famine that prevails in the disasterstricken areas,
Convinced that long-term solutions are imperative in
order to avoid the recurrence of a tragic human drama
such as the one which is currently unfolding in the disaster-stricken areas,
I. Commends the generous response of the international community to the tragic situation in Ethiopia;
2. Expresses its deep gratitude to all States, governmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals that have provided emergency humanitarian assistance to Ethiopia;
3. Urges all Member States, organs and organizations
of the United Nations system, specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations to assist the Government
of Ethiopia in its efforts to provide for the emergency
needs of the drought victims and to deal with the problem
of medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts:
(a) To mobilize resources for relief and rehabilitation,
including assistance for the victims of drought who wish to
resettle in areas less prone to drought;
(b) To apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its
first regular session of 1985, of the situation of the drought
victims and the response- of the international community
to their plight.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December I 984

39/202. Economic and financial assistance to Guinea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to Guinea, 116
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
59 of 26 July 1984, in which the Council confirmed the
urgent need for international action to assist the Government of Guinea in its efforts to bring about national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development,
Noting the statement made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guinea on 4 October I 984, 117 in which he described his country's serious socio-economic and financial
problems,
Noting with concern the grave balance-of-payments
problems facing Guinea,
Deeply concerned by the weakness and underdevelopment of Guinea's economic and social infrastructure,
which constitutes a major obstacle to the country's economic development and to raising the living standard of its
population,
Taking note, in this context, of the results of the United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, in
particular the Substantial New Programme of Action for
the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, 118
Recalling that Guinea is one of the least developed
countries,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General:
118 Report of the Unued Natwns Conference on the Least D1•1·eloped
Counrrw,. Pans, 1-14 S1•ptemher 19/i/ (llnited Nations publication. Sales
No. E 82 I 8). pan one. secl. A

General Assembly - J'hirty-ninth Session

154

-----------------------2. Expresses its gratitude for the support which Member States, specialized agencies and other United Nations
bodies and regional organizations have provided to assist
the people of Guinea in their reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts;
3. Appeals urgently to all Member States, specialized
agencies and other United Nations bodies, as well as to
international economic and financial institutions and other
aid donors, to contribute generously, through bilateral or
multilateral channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development of Guinea;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts and to mobilize financial, technical and economic
assistance from the international community for Guinea.
so as to enable it to meet its short-term and long-term
needs within the framework of its development programme;
5. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the World Health Organization, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Bank. the International Fund for
Agricultural Development, the United Nations Children's
Fund and the World Food Programme to bring to the
attention of their governing bodies, for priority consideration, the special needs of Guinea, and to keep the Secretary-General informed of decisions taken in that regard:
6. Requests the Secretary-General to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of
1985, and the General Assembly, at its fortieth session, of
the results achieved in the implementation of the present
resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/203.

Assistance to the Gambia

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 381212 of 20 December 1983, in
which it, inter alia, noted that the Gambia is a least
developed country with acute economic and social problems arising from its weak economic infrastructure and
that it also suffers from many of the serious problems
common to countries of the Sahelian region. notahl)
drought and desertification,
Having considered the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 1 19 in which the recent economic situation in the
Gambia is described,
Concerned that the Garn bia continues to encounter serious balance-of-payments and budgetary problems and
noting that the lack of domestic resources is the most
important constraint on development, since the Government lacks the funds to meet the counterpart costs of
donor-assisted projects,
Noting that external assistance is still required to enable
the Government of the Gambia to implement the six projects recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report, 120
Aware that a round-table conference of donors was held
in the Gambia in November 1984, with the assistance of
the United Nations Development Programme, to discuss
the country's development needs and to consider ways and
means of helping the Government in its efforts to meet
those needs,
I l'l Ad9;:l92, sect. VII

I. Takes norc <1f the summary report of the SecretaryGeneraL
1
Expresses us apprcnat1on to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobili1e assistanre for the
Gambia;
3. Expresses ils appreciation also to those States and
organizations that have provided assistance to the
Gambia;
4. Draws the uttcnt1011 of the international community
to the need for assistanre for the projects and programmes
identified hy the Secretary-General in his report
5. Renews its 11rgcnr appeal to Member States. specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system, regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, as well as international development and
financial institutions, to give generous assistance to the
Gambia, through bilateral or multilateral channels, and to
provide financial, technical and material assistance for the
implementation of the projects and programmes recommended by the Secretary-General in his report;
6. {lrges donors, as appropriate, to provide financial
assistance to the Ciambia to help meet the local counterpart costs of externally-assisted projects, bearing in mind
that the Gambia 1s classified as a least developed droughtstricken country·;
7. l'rgcs Member States, organizations and programmes of the llnited Nations system, regional and interregional bodies, financial and development institutions, as
well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organi1.ations, to respond generously to the needs of the Gambia
at the round-tahk conference of donors held in November
1984:
8. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the l lnited Nations system - in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Fund for
Population Activities, the World Food Programme, the
World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the International
Fund for Agricultural Development - to increase their
rnrrent and future programmes of assistance to the
(jambia, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General
111 organizing an effective international programme of
assistance and tc1 report periodically to him on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made available to assist that country:
9. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme. the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their
governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs
of the Gambia and to report the decisions of those bodies
to the Secretary-General by the end of June I 985:
10. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To contmue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to the Gambia:
(/,) To keep the situation in the Gambia under constant
review. to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialiled agencies. regional and other intergovernmental
