UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/20
16 April 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND
RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3766th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 April 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Afghanistan", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the situation in Afghanistan of 16 March 1997
(S/1997/240). It has also considered the views expressed at its 3765th
meeting on 14-15 April 1997 on the subject.
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the continued
fighting in Afghanistan and its intensification in recent months. It
reiterates that the continuation of the conflict threatens to destabilize
the region and prevents steps towards the formation of a fully
representative and broad-based government able to address effectively
Afghanistan's acute social and economic problems.
"The Security Council calls upon the Afghan parties to cease
immediately all hostile actions and to enter into sustained negotiations.
The Council strongly believes that a negotiated settlement is the only
solution to the long-standing conflict in this country.
"The Security Council fully supports the United Nations efforts to
facilitate national reconciliation in Afghanistan. It is convinced that
the United Nations must continue to play the central role in assisting the
warring Afghan factions to engage in a fully-fledged negotiating process on
the basis of Security Council resolution 1076 (1996) and General Assembly
resolution 51/195. The Council welcomes the activities of the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA) and supports further efforts
by the Secretary-General to give a new impetus to its work. In this
context it welcomes the holding by UNSMA of intra-Afghan working group
meetings in Islamabad but regrets that these efforts have not yet achieved
positive results.
"The Security Council deeply regrets that many important provisions of
Security Council resolution 1076 (1996) and General Assembly resolution
51/195 remain unimplemented. It calls upon all Afghan parties, in
97-10276 (E)

160497

/...

S/PRST/1997/20
English
Page 2

particular the Taliban, to abide by these resolutions, to cooperate fully
with UNSMA and to participate in serious and honest negotiations through
the good offices of the Special Mission. The Council urges interested
countries to coordinate their activities with those of UNSMA and to refrain
from supporting one Afghan party against another.
"The Security Council welcomes the convening by the Secretary-General
of a meeting of concerned countries on 16 April 1997, following the earlier
meeting held in New York on 18 November 1996.
"The Security Council takes note of the intention of the SecretaryGeneral to consult the Afghan parties and all those concerned on the
advisability of an intra-Afghan meeting at some stage and requests him to
put forward a concrete plan if and when he decides that it will contribute
to the peace process.
"The Security Council again calls upon all States to end immediately
the supply of arms and ammunition to all parties to the conflict in
Afghanistan.
"The Security Council reiterates its concern that the continuation of
the conflict in Afghanistan provides a fertile ground for terrorism and
drug trafficking which destabilize the region and beyond, and calls upon
the leaders of the Afghan parties to halt such activities.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the worsening of the
humanitarian situation including the displacement of the civilian
population. It is also deeply concerned at the discrimination against
women and other violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law in Afghanistan. The Council deplores the mistreatment of
personnel of international humanitarian organizations, which inhibits the
international community's ability to respond to Afghanistan's pressing
humanitarian needs.
"The Security Council welcomes the convening of an International Forum
on Assistance to Afghanistan on 21-22 January 1997 at Ashgabat and the
forthcoming meeting of the Afghanistan Support Group on 21 April 1997 in
Geneva. It encourages all States and international organizations to
continue to extend all possible humanitarian assistance which should be
distributed equitably throughout the country.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter and requests
the Secretary-General to continue to keep it regularly informed of the
situation in Afghanistan."

-----
