S/PV.9188

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9188th meeting

Thursday, 10 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Botchwey/Mr. Akufo-Addo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Immongault
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Al Nahyan
Dame Barbara Woodward
Ms. Sherwood-Randall

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Counter-terrorism in Africa: an imperative for peace, security and development
Letter dated 1 November 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Ghana to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/822)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-68329 (E)
*2268329*

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

10/11/2022

to suffer from the broader impact of terrorism on their
lives and livelihoods.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda.

Women and girls in particular bear the brunt of
insecurity and inequality. Some terrorist groups have
a misogynistic worldview that denies women and girls
their fundamental rights.

The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Counter-terrorism in Africa: an imperative for
peace, security and development
Letter dated 1 November 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of Ghana
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/822)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in the meeting: His
Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission; Ms. Benedikta
von Seherr-Thoss, Managing Director for Common
Security and Defence Policy and Crisis Response of the
European External Action Service; and Ms. Comfort
Ero, President and Chief Executive Officer of the
International Crisis Group.

The situation in the Sahel and West Africa is
particularly urgent, with some of the most violent
affiliates of Da’esh operating in the region. In the
past two years, those groups have expanded across
large areas of the Sahel, increasing their presence in
Mali while penetrating further into Burkina Faso
and the Niger. They have also expanded southward
into countries of the Gulf of Guinea, which have so
far largely avoided terrorist attacks or have recently
emerged from armed conflict.

its

Terrorist and violent extremist groups aggravate
instability and human suffering. They can plunge a
country emerging from war back into the depths of
conflict. Climate disruptions make matters worse,
inducing intercommunal tensions and food insecurity,
which are exploited by terrorists and other criminal
groups. And digital tools make spreading hate and
disinformation easier than ever.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/822, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 November 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Ghana to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

In many instances, it can be difficult to differentiate
between terrorists, non-State armed groups and
criminal networks. Those groups often pursue different
agendas and strategies, fuelled by smuggling, human
trafficking and other methods of illicit financing. Some
have morphed into insurgencies, occupying territories
and posing as alternatives to State authority.

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

I warmly welcome Her Excellency Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: Let me begin by
conveying greetings from Secretary-General António
Guterres, on whose behalf I deliver these remarks
today. I would like to thank the Ghanian presidency for
convening this debate on such an urgent issue.
Terrorism is a major threat to international
peace and security. Nowhere has that threat been felt
more keenly than in Africa. Terrorists and violent
extremists — including Da’esh, Al-Qaida and their
affiliates — have exploited instability and conflict to
increase their activities and intensify attacks across the
continent. Their senseless, terror-fuelled violence has
killed and wounded thousands. Many more continue
2/27

In today’s hyper-connected world, the spread
of terrorism in Africa is not a concern for African
Member States alone. The challenge belongs to us
all. Countering international terrorism requires
effective multilateral responses. Such responses need
to address terrorism together with concurrent and
converging threats, including the worsening climate
emergency, armed conflict, poverty and inequality,
lawless cyberspace and the uneven recovery from the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
The New Agenda for Peace, envisaged as part of
the Secretary-General’s report on Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), will embrace that holistic, comprehensive
approach. In a context of increasing polarization, with
divisions heightened by the war in Ukraine, the New
Agenda for Peace will propose ways to address new
and emerging risks and revitalize our collective peace
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

and security system. Allow me to suggest a few ideas
for the Council’s consideration on advancing counterterrorism efforts in Africa.
First, prevention remains our best response to
terrorism, violent extremism and other threats to peace
and security. We must address the instability and
conflict that can lead to terrorism in the first place, as
well as the conditions exploited by terrorists in pursuit
of their agendas. If terrorist and extremist views too
often find a welcoming home with deeply dissatisfied,
marginalized and desperate people, it is up to us to
help formulate responses that address those conditions.
Fostering conflict-sensitive approaches and integrating
relevant policies across United Nations entities is
essential. Time and again, purely military and lawenforcement responses have not only proved their
limits, but they have also been counterproductive. We
must strike a better balance and ensure coherence and
complementarity between preventive and militarized
responses. There can be no sustainable development
without peace, and there will certainly be no peace
without sustainable development. The 2030 Agenda
and the Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU) are
therefore crucial preventive tools.
Secondly, everyone needs to be included.
Addressing the many drivers of terrorism requires
whole-of-society approaches that are community-based
and gender-sensitive. Counter-terrorism strategies have
a better chance of addressing the needs and concerns
of society as a whole when they capture and reflect a
wide array of voices, including those of civil society,
minorities, young people and the private sector. There
are complex links between terrorism, patriarchy and
gender-based violence. Counter-terrorism policies
are therefore often strengthened by the meaningful
participation and leadership of women and girls.
Engaging all sectors of society requires sustained
political commitment across Government departments,
and partnerships with civil society, local communities,
the private sector and much more.
Thirdly, countering terrorism can never be an
excuse for violating human rights or international
law. Abuse committed under the guise of countering
terrorism and violent extremism can only set us back.
Successful counter-terrorism policies, like all policies,
must uphold the rule of law and respect international
law, including human rights law. The SecretaryGeneral’s Call to Action for Human Rights places
human rights at the centre of our work at the United

S/PV.9188

Nations, from humanitarian action to peace and security
to sustainable development. That is why, in the face of
the deteriorating security and humanitarian situations
in the Sahel region, the Secretary-General has called
for renewed efforts to promote State institutions and
constitutional order. I would like to reiterate his call
as we welcome President Nana Akufo-Addo. We look
forward to the recommendations of the Independent
High-level Panel on Security and Development in the
Sahel for strengthening international coordination in
order to effectively address the multidimensional crisis
in the region.
Fourthly, regional organizations have a critical role
to play. The challenges posed by terrorist and violent
extremist groups can be met only through approaches
that are adapted to local contexts. There are numerous
regional initiatives countering terrorism in Africa, from
the Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad
basin to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel, the Accra Initiative and the Nouakchott Process.
Those regional arrangements require full support and a
durable commitment from the international community.
I welcome the United Nations-AU technical working
group on preventing violent extremism and countering
terrorism, which aims to increase coordination and
synergies between our two organizations. I also
reiterate our appeal to the Security Council to ensure
predictable funding for African Union operations that
the Council has authorized, including for countering
terrorism. As requested by the Council, we are
preparing a joint progress report on the financing
of AU peace operations, which is due in April 2023.
We must put in place an innovative architecture that
supports African peace operations in an effective and
sustainable manner.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the Economic Community of West African
States, the current and past Chairs, for their efforts to
tackle farmer-herders’ conflicts through protocols on
transhumance and the free movement of people and
goods. The only lasting solution to the underlying
drivers of conflict is through sustainable development
that leaves no one behind.
That leads to my fifth and final point, which is
that preventing and countering terrorism and violent
extremism requires resources. The magnitude of the
problem calls for bold investment. Addressing those
interlinked obstacles — from economic deprivation to

22-683293/27

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9188

organized crime and governance challenges — requires
sustained and predictable funding at scale.
In conclusion, I welcome the summit scheduled for
October 2023 on counter-terrorism in Africa, organized
jointly by the Office of Counter-Terrorism and Nigeria.
It will be an opportunity to consider ways to strengthen
United Nations support to counter-terrorism efforts
across the continent. I am confident that today’s debate
will offer useful insights for the summit, bringing us
closer to the solutions we need to address the threat of
terrorism in Africa and help to build peaceful, stable
communities and societies across the continent.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her briefing.
I now give the
Mr. Faki Mahamat.

floor

to

His

Excellency

Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting us to
this important meeting devoted to the issues of peace,
security and counter-terrorism in Africa. I hope that
new ideas and initiatives will emerge from the meeting,
and I wish the Ghanaian presidency of the Council
every success for the current month. I would like to
focus on two areas, the first relating to our ongoing
quest for peace and the second on countering terrorism
and violent extremism in particular.
From Mali to Mozambique, from Somalia to the
Gulf of Guinea, from Libya to the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and including the Lake Chad
basin, problems of peace and security are tormenting,
agitating and mobilizing African minds and African
attention. Even Europe, thought to be definitively
immunized to such issues through its tragic previous
experiences and continuing prosperity, has been once
again embroiled in a devastating war, this one between
Russia and Ukraine, the consequences of which could
plunge humankind into a new tragedy for our planet.
In Africa, terrorism and the increasingly frequent use
of violence as a means of gaining and maintaining
power are fragmenting societies and causing dozens
of deaths and significant physical and psychological
damage every day, with incalculable consequences
for the vital sectors of health, education and food for
entire populations.
The Security Council, a major and central organ in
this area, is being called on to examine, as it does every
day, but with greater conviction and firmness, the
unspeakable violence that is ravaging our planet and
4/27

10/11/2022

the heartbreaking misery that it creates. The failure of
our systems and the vanity of our values are behind the
birth and the spread of terrorism, that monster of our
times. And that scourge has spread to Africa. Somalia,
Libya, Mali, Burkina Faso, the Lake Chad basin,
Mozambique and the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo are all theatres and preferred areas for the
proliferation of deadly terrorist activities today.
What has the international community, whose
linchpin the Security Council, done on issues of peace
and security and on the fight against terrorism in
particular? What specific answers have we given to the
African countries that are victims of this aggression?
Africa, let us say it, is tired of hearing promises and
getting only disappointment. In the face of terrorism,
whose devastation of the continent is well known,
Africa deserves to benefit from the same prompt
solicitude that its partners show in other places and
under other circumstances.
However, Africa has not been lacking in initiatives
to counter the phenomenon, in particular through
the Accra Initiative, which is intended as an ideal
framework for the fight and whose objective is to
promote information exchange and conduct joint
cross-border military operations between its member
States — Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and Togo.
There is also the formation of the Group of Five for
the Sahel Joint Force, the Multinational Joint Task
Force in the Lake Chad region, the Southern Africa
Development Community Force in Mozambique,
the Nouakchott Process, and more recently the
establishment of a regional force in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition,
the African Union has set up a peace fund to work on
prevention and support the efforts of countries that are
victims of terrorist violence.
It is clear that Africa is capable of mobilizing
its resources, its men and women, in this existential
struggle against terrorism. However, it has a pressing
need for solidarity and, above all, for sustainable
financial resources and technical and logistical support
to sustain its efforts to fight the scourge. We call upon the
Security Council, which is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, in this regard.
In recent times, such dangerous responses as
non-constitutional changes, which not only represent
a real setback for democracy, but are also a deceptive
illusion of salvation for the African nations that are the
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

victims of them, have become widespread. The result
is practices and models of governance that are highly
detrimental to the health of States already weakened by
many other negative exogenous and endogenous factors.
I would like at this point to commend President
Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo’s commitment to
democracy, which has been vividly demonstrated by his
opposition to anti-constitutional Government changes,
particularly when he was the current Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States.
Solidarity with Africa in its heroic struggle
against terrorism, unconstitutional changes and food,
education and health insecurity is an imperative duty
of the international community. Terrorism has no
homeland. Its defeat in Africa is necessary to cut its
chances of metastasizing elsewhere. This solidarity
would be futile if it were not based on a new conception
of peacemaking and peacekeeping that defines a new,
more dynamic, less bureaucratized and above all
more aggressive model. At doctrinal and operational
levels, the concept in this regard reflects a foundation
of shared values articulated around the principle that
African problems must be solved by Africans, with the
support of the international community.
As I have said many times before, traditional
mechanisms for responding to threats to peace,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping are no longer entirely
consistent with the new circumstances or the new
threats. Terrorism in all its forms and illegal trafficking
of all kinds are able to elude the old models. The costs,
the bureaucratic red tape, the modes of operation and
operational and tactical redeployment of these models
make them — let us be frank — unsuitable, ineffective
and obsolete. The mandates of United Nations missions
need urgently to be revised to make them real actors
in the fight against terrorist groups and other harmful
armed groups.
As far as the African Union is concerned, we are
ready to work with the United Nations, the United
Nations Secretariat and the Security Council to bring
about an innovative approach at the doctrinal and
operational levels. Our excellent relationship with the
Secretary-General and the equally fruitful relationship
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council give reason to be optimistic
about the future of our partnership for peace and the
effective fight against terrorism. We urge collective
action against this scourge and its direct and indirect
causes. Our expectations for an urgent and determined

S/PV.9188

response are high, and I must admit that we are
very impatient.
The President: I thank Mr. Faki Mahamat for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Von Seherr-Thoss.
Ms. Von Seherr-Thoss: Let me first express our
appreciation to Ghana for convening today’s debate
and for the opportunity to participate in this important
discussion. This is a topic of great importance to the
European Union (EU).
The EU is a strong believer in the link between
security and development. We believe that holistic
approaches to security and peacebuilding ensure their
sustainability. The EU applies this reasoning in our
development programmes, counter-terrorism strategies
and common security and defence policy, in Africa and
in many other countries beyond.
Multilateralism is key to the promotion of peace
and security, and the United Nations is at its core. We
therefore greatly value the strategic partnership we
have with the United Nations on peace operations and
crisis management. The EU-United Nations Global
Terrorist Threats Facility is a good example of this. Our
partnership has created important synergies between
the United Nations and EU missions on the ground. We
will continue to work together, including on supporting
regional counter-terrorism efforts.
Other multilateral efforts also have important roles
to play in supporting and complementing the United
Nations. The Global Counter Terrorism Forum (GCTF)
is one key platform. Last September, the EU assumed
the role of co-Chair of the GCTF, and we made the
threat of terrorism in Africa a key priority for our twoyear tenure.
What does this multilateral engagement mean on
the ground? The EU counter-terrorism efforts build
on our strong presence in Africa. Several EU missions
currently provide military and civilian support to
African countries, the latest example being the EU
Training Mission in Mozambique. This mission
deployed last year to train and support the Mozambican
armed forces, with a view to protecting civilians
and restoring security in Cabo Delgado. Five of our
civilian missions include a counter-terrorism mandate:
the capacity-building missions in the Niger, Mali and
Somalia, the border assistance mission in Libya, and

22-683295/27

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

the security-sector-reform assistance mission in the
Central African Republic.
Moreover, the EU continues to support African-led
peace operations. Earlier this year, the EU approved
€600 million in assistance to the African Union through
the European Peace Facility, our financial instrument
aimed at preventing conflicts, building peace and
strengthening our partners.
Yet despite our collective efforts to keep the threat
of extremist groups at bay, we have all come to realize
that these efforts have not been enough. We find
ourselves on the back foot in too many places, and we
will need to do more if we are to be successful over
the long haul. We will also need to cooperate better.
The EU plays a role in this by bringing its 27 member
States together. Many EU member States have long and
multifaceted relationships with the African continent,
and the EU has a strong commitment to working
with African nations, the African Union and with
the United Nations, to address the growing threat of
terrorism and bolster resilience in the face of violent
extremist ideologies.
Resilience in the face of violent extremism and
terrorism is a security matter, but it is equally a political
matter. We cannot root out violent extremism by force
alone. So let us talk about prevention as well. The EU’s
efforts in preventing and countering violent extremism
have shown real results and will remain key to our
counter-terrorism engagement, for example, through
addressing youth extremism in Kenya or intercommunal
conflict in Nigeria. At present, the EU provides around
€500 million in support of related projects across the
African continent, which strengthen local authorities,
local communities and civil society actors alike.
Preventing violent extremism and building
resilience requires a whole-of-society approach. Good
governance is crucial if we want to truly address the
ideologies and driving forces behind emergent violent
extremism. That means respect for the rule of law,
human rights and the principles of democracy and
international law. That political question is primarily
the responsibility of national leaders, but it will require
the continued attention and, at times, action of the
Security Council as well.
Let me also make the case for actively including
women and girls in our prevention approach. Often,
women and girls are victims of oppressive terrorist
groups, for example in Nigeria or the Niger at the
6/27

10/11/2022

hands of Boko Haram. Of course, they also have a
positive role to play, such as in the women-led startups in Tunisia that provide jobs in their community.
Recognizing that and empowering them to be active
members of society — economically, politically and
culturally — will make them and their societies more
resistant to extremist influences in the long run.
In closing, West Africa requires our immediate
attention to stem the risks of spillover from advancing
terrorist actors. The EU is stepping up its security
support to the coastal countries in the Gulf of Guinea
through its “arc of stability” policy. Allow me here
to also commend Ghana for organizing the next
conference on the Accra Initiative next week, and for
Ghana’s leadership in the region.
In the longer term, we need to not only further our
shared security agenda, but also to foster sustainable
development and improved governance. The economic
and social challenges facing the Governments in West
Africa and the Sahel are manifold and will only be
compounded by the impact that climate change will
inevitably have on the region. Addressing that will
remain a long-term shared responsibility of African
nations, the United Nations, the EU and other partners.
The EU can be counted on to remain committed,
engaged and present on the ground.
The President: I thank Ms. Von Seherr-Thoss for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ero.
Ms. Ero: I thank Deputy Secretary-General
Mohammed, Chairperson Faki and Ms. Von SeherrThoss for their remarks.
The International Crisis Group is an international
conflict prevention organization that has long had a
special focus on Africa. I was Director of the Africa
programme from 2011 to 2021. The issues before us
today are therefore of particular interest both to me
personally and to the Crisis Group.
The Crisis Group has published analysis of the
African-led stabilization and counter-terrorism missions
under discussion today, including the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational
Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin. A year ago,
we published a briefing on the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), reflecting on the Security
Council debates at the time. We have focused on those
missions for three reasons.
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

First, we believe that conflicts involving non-State
armed groups, including jihadi groups, will be a source
of instability in Africa for some time to come.
Secondly, we assess that robust, African-led
missions are well positioned to counter those threats,
but that they can be effective only if they are properly
and reliably resourced. Like it or not, the best way to
resource those missions is through some sort of United
Nations mechanism.
Thirdly — and perhaps provocatively in the context
of this debate — the Crisis Group also believes that
those stabilization missions alone cannot stem the
threat of non-State armed groups. There is a role for
the use of force against jihadis. The military operations
that come as part of robust stabilization and counterterrorism missions are a crucial component of any
effort against such groups, but those operations must
be subordinate to a political strategy. They should be
part of a broader set of responses, including projects
to provide basic services and better governance to
populations in areas in which non-State armed groups
have gained influence. At times, although it is hard,
that political strategy must contemplate engaging in
dialogue with non-State armed groups — something
often seen as a taboo — to resolve both humanitarian
and political issues.

S/PV.9188

As the Crisis Group has recently argued, the
Council should do a serious stock-taking of whether
United Nations forces such as the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali are fit for purpose in such cases. But if Blue Helmets
cannot do the job, who can? African-led stabilization
operations are at least one potential answer.
As the Crisis Group noted more than a year ago,
African Union (AU) forces in Somalia can claim some
success in the battle against the Al-Shabaab jihadi
group. Between 2011 and 2012, and at great cost to
Ugandan, Burundian, Kenyan and Somali partner
forces, AMISOM ended Al-Shabaab’s formal control of
Mogadishu and Kismayo, the country’s second-largest
city, prised swathes of territory out of militants’ hands
and provided much-needed security for two electoral
cycles. We can now add that Somalia’s most recent
electoral cycle was also a success. It is hard to imagine
that vote happening without the AU Mission holding
the line against Al-Shabaab.

I will return to that call for dialogue at the end
of my remarks, but let me first make the case for
supporting regionally led stabilization operations to
counter non-State armed groups. The case for investing
in stability in Africa hardly needs repetition here. The
continent is now the centre of civil wars in the world, and
jihadi groups are often actors in those wars. Non-State
armed groups and jihadi organizations both fuel and
profit from those conflicts, building power bases in
places where State control is minimal or non-existent
owing to violence. Jihadis have tended to gain strength
in places where the State has collapsed, often moving in
to exploit opportunities in existing war zones.

Missions of that type often face challenges. These
include not only tough opponents, but also tense relations
with the national Governments and local populations
they aim to assist. One of the most serious headaches
for missions of that type is donor fatigue. When African
officials and military planners look at how to tackle
non-State armed groups in situations such as in the
Sahel and Somalia, they do not just have to think about
threats on the ground, they also have to worry about
whether the partners who back their missions will keep
providing the necessary financial and other resources
they need to deliver on their mandate. That makes the
medium- and long-term planning that is crucial for
such operations very difficult. Policymakers in the
countries — often but not exclusively in North America
and Europe, and often members of the Council — that
fund those missions face a mirror image of the same
problem. For those donors, it is hard to assess whether
the resources they offer will have a real impact.

In some cases, notably Mali, the Security Council
has sent Blue Helmet peacekeepers as part of the response
to such threats. But United Nations peacekeeping forces
are not designed or equipped to fight extended counterterrorism campaigns, as we have seen in Gao and
Kidal. Such operations are not formally part of Blue
Helmets’ mandates, but often other components of the
mandate, such as the protection of civilians, inevitably
entail confrontation with militants.

In the case of Somalia last year, the Crisis Group
looked at both African and Western perceptions of
stabilization operations in the country. We found that
European donors in particular appreciated the risks
African troops took, but feared that they were funding
an expensive status quo. It therefore behoves the Council
to ask how to offer missions authorized by the African
Union more systematic and predictable funding in order
to allow them to plan, operate and deliver better.

22-683297/27

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

That topic is hardly new. Members know that
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council have been debating how to provide AU
missions with reliable funds for years. Many studies
have concluded that the only really credible option is
a mechanism to enable the Security Council to direct
United Nations assessed contributions to African-led
stabilization missions.
The Crisis Group agrees with that analysis, although,
in every individual crisis and conflict, both the United
Nations and the AU will need to explore whether an
African-led mission is the right operational choice. In
2020 we published a report reviewing those debates.
As we recognized in the report, entitled The Price of
Peace: Securing United Nations Financing for AU
Peace Operations, there are numerous obstacles to
establishing a solid mechanism for channelling United
Nations funding to African-led operations. Cash is not
the only issue. The United Nations and the AU still have
a lot of work to do to define the rules that would govern
the political oversight of future United Nations-funded,
African-led operations, as well as the mechanisms for
assessing their operational performance and accounting
procedures to oversee their finances.
As the International Crisis Group argued back in
2020, it is time for the representatives of the United
Nations and the African Union to engage in a serious
joint effort to work out answers to questions about how
United Nations-AU funding will work. That is partly
a job for the two organizations’ secretariats. But the
members of the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council also need to make a political effort to
agree on the terms for future funding and operations. I
heartily encourage the Security Council to take steps in
that direction today.
I want to conclude by reminding the Council that
we cannot address the challenges of non-State armed
groups and jihadist movements in Africa with technical
fixes alone. And we cannot and should not ask Africa’s
soldiers to try to solve those problems through military
means alone. Military operations against non-State
groups can secure territory, protect civilians, deter
further violence and create space for non-military
conflict resolution. But it is rare — in fact so far it is
unheard of — that military operations alone can defeat
movements that are quite deeply entrenched, if not
necessarily popular, in parts of society. The question
is, what can we do to complement military operations?
Let me leave the Council with three points to consider.
8/27

10/11/2022

First, providing basic services is a crucial shortterm counter-terrorism tool. Groups such as Al-Shabaab
and local branches of Al-Qaida or the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham thrive by occupying areas that
Governments cannot control, and in some cases by
providing basic services to inhabitants. We need to
direct more funds to help Governments deliver such
services alongside stabilization operations. Ousting
jihadists from areas they control is not enough. It is
crucial to win over the populations in those areas, too.
Secondly, governance is an essential medium-term
counter-terrorism tool. Building on service provision,
the only effective way to close the space available to
non-State armed groups is to show civilians that the
State can govern in ways that respond to their needs.
Finally, dialogue should be part of the counterterrorism toolkit. The International Crisis Group’s
research and interactions with non-State armed groups
leave us convinced that dialogue with militant leaders
is worth exploring. Talks about humanitarian access
often happen already. In some cases, more political
talks about violence-reduction measures and local
governance, or simply testing whether such groups
are open to wider compromise, might be feasible.
At the International Crisis Group, we have pushed
Governments in the Sahel to seek dialogue with armed
groups that could for instance encourage local ceasefire
accords that could ease suffering in rural areas, open
up space for the restoration of State services and enable
residents to return to their homes and rebuild their
livelihoods. There are risks to such approaches, but
they should not be ruled out as an option.
The International Crisis Group therefore
encourages the Security Council to reinforce the
United Nations mechanisms that support African-led
missions in fighting non-State armed groups. But it
also encourages the United Nations, the AU and other
African actors, above all national and local actors,
to keep an open mind about talking to those groups
specifically, an approach that some authorities, notably
in countries such as the Niger, have publicly adopted in
recent months. That may seem provocative and perhaps
contradictory. I agree that it may be provocative, but
I do not actually think that it is contradictory. The
conflicts that destabilize several African regions are
not only about counter-terrorism. They are often rooted
in concrete grievances with State authorities and elites
whose members live in distant capitals and whose level
of public legitimacy is dismal. The use of force should
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

always be part of a wider political strategy. That is true
from the Sahel to the Horn and wherever non-State
armed groups exist. I hope today’s debate will be an
opportunity to think about how to get that balance right
in each case.
The President: I thank Ms. Ero for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
President of Ghana.
The last time I was in this Chamber, I came in
my capacity as the Foreign Minister of Ghana (see
S/PV.4933). I am happy to be here once again, 16
years later, to address the Security Council, this time
as President of the Republic. Having overseen my
country’s successful bid for a non-permanent seat on
the Council, I want to assure all Member States that
as we have often stated, Ghana will work to address
our collective interests as spelt out in the Charter of
the United Nations. That is why Ghana chose “Counterterrorism in Africa: an imperative for peace, security
and development” as the theme for today’s highlevel debate.
Terrorism has always posed a danger to international
peace and security and continues to threaten peaceful
coexistence between and within nations. In our
current circumstances, the forms and manifestations
of terrorism, especially on the African continent, have
claimed the lives of thousands of innocent people,
rendered millions homeless and handicapped the ability
of many economies to pursue growth and sustainable
development. The Sahel, for example, with a population
of some 300 million people, accounted for the highest
incidence of terrorist attacks recorded between January
and June of this year, a period in which such attacks
killed 5,412 people across Africa. Indeed, the African
Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism tells us
that 179 of the 699 attacks in Africa this year occurred
in the Sahel, with 1,909 fatalities.
While we can admit that the political context of
the Security Council’s involvement is complex and
the operating environment dangerous, our collective
inaction, even as we contemplate whether or how to
intervene, risks the further spread of instability across
the continent. Some Sahelian and West African countries
have already been overrun by terrorists and other armed
groups. They now feel motivated and emboldened to
extend their reach of influence to the coastal countries
of West Africa in a grand attempt to get access to the
high seas and create a vicious linkage between terrorism

S/PV.9188

and piracy. The international community, particularly
the Council, which has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
therefore cannot choose to be neutral in the design
and implementation of the specific responses required
to confront the threat of international terrorism. We
acknowledge that the fight against terrorism can be a
protracted one that could take a number of years, but
with collective efforts, terrorism and those behind its
evil acts can and will eventually be defeated.
We reiterate Ghana’s strong rejection and
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. It is important to underscore that
arresting the deteriorating security situation in the Sahel
and West Africa will require urgent action predicated
on concerted efforts if we are to succeed in our attempts
to bring progress, prosperity and development to the
peoples of the region. In that regard, I would like to
share three key points for the Council’s consideration.
First, in addressing the threats relating to terrorism
in Africa, it is important that we leverage the role of the
African Union and its regional economic communities
in order to raise a robust and well-resourced force to
confront terrorists and other armed groups, alongside
other peace operation initiatives. Ghana welcomes
the ongoing joint strategic assessment of the security,
governance and development issues of the Sahel, just as
we encourage the high-level panel led by the respected
former President of the Republic of the Niger, His
Excellency Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, to leverage the
best elements of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel, the Accra Initiative, the Nouakchott Process
and the Multinational Joint Task Force and consider
recommendations for a unified and restructured
regional force. We urge the Council to be supportive of
such efforts.
Secondly, the burden of confronting terrorism
cannot be borne by those in the region alone. It requires
strong collaboration among the United Nations, the
African Union and the regional economic communities,
particularly the Economic Community of West African
States, to address the question of adequate, predictable
and sustainable financing for regional-led operations.
The African Union has demonstrated its commitment
and capacity to effectively manage such financing and
comply with the required human rights standards in
such operations. The Security Council and the wider
international community must play their part if there is
a desire to have continuing relevance.

22-683299/27

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

Thirdly, the structure and approach of international
support to countering terrorism, including in the
Sahel, must be pre-emptive rather than reactive. There
is therefore the need for the Council and the wider
international community to address the underlying
drivers of instability through the building of resilience
in conflict-prone regions, including in the areas of
promoting democratic values, development and State
services. International support must be fully placed
behind deliberate interventions to promote inclusive
governance and the extension of effective State authority
in several parts of our territories in order to meet the
expectations of our largely youthful populations, who,
in some instances, unfortunately fell victim to the
radicalized messages of extremists.
The Security Council’s support for the adequate,
predictable and sustainable financing of Africanled operations would be an important starting point
if it is to continue to assume its responsibility as the
primary actor in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
In conclusion, I strongly urge the members of
the Council to revisit the vexed issue of the reform of
the United Nations system, particularly the Security
Council, and to do so on the basis of the African
Common Position on United Nations reform, as
expressed in the Ezulwini Consensus, if the authority
of the Council, which, in recent times, appears to have
been devalued because of its anachronistic structure, is
indeed to be restored.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Immongault (Gabon) (spoke in French): Allow
me to convey to you, Mr. President, the appreciation
of His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, President
of the Republic of Gabon and Head of State, for your
invitation to take part in this high-level debate of
the Security Council. The President of the Gabonese
Republic also asked me to convey his regret at not being
able to participate with you in this meeting, while doing
me the great honour of delivering, on his behalf, his
statement to the Council.
“Terrorism, the manifestations of which are
constantly evolving, is an assault on the common
values enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the Constitutive Act of the African
10/27

10/11/2022

Union. Today the threat is more difficult to
identify and thwart, and its capacity to cause harm
is measured by the number of terrorist attacks,
the continued existence of operational networks
and their ability to defy stabilization efforts in
many parts of the world, in particular the Arabian
peninsula, North Africa, West and Central Africa,
East Africa, South-East Asia and South Asia.
“Terrorism is proving to be a significant
transnational threat that no Government or
organization can combat alone. Moreover, since
no country is immune, coordinated action at the
national, regional and global levels is required. That
action must be as determined and multidimensional
as the threat itself. Above all, it must be based on a
more robust multilateralism.
“Africa has become one of the main front lines
in the fight against terrorism. In its propaganda,
the Islamic State is increasingly claiming
responsibility for terrorist acts in Africa to the
extent that it significantly affects the development
and prosperity paths of African countries.
Fortunately, African leaders understood that and
committed themselves to the scale of the challenge.
On 28 May, the Heads of State and Government
of the African Union, meeting in Malabo, adopted
an important declaration, in which they reiterated
their condemnation of, and resolve to combat, all
forms and manifestations of extremist violence on
the continent.
“The evidence is overwhelming: no African
region is spared, and the upsurge in terrorist
acts is causing destruction, loss of human life,
massive population displacement and destitution
everywhere. The terrorist front in the so-called
tri-border area of the Sahel is now the hub of an
asymmetric war, whose end no one can foresee.
It is a war that is straining the limited capacities
of national security and defence forces and is
destabilizing entire regions. New technologies,
including social media, encrypted communication
tools and cryptocurrency, are being used for
propaganda, the radicalization of new recruits and
the perpetration of atrocities. Similarly, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, alongside drug
trafficking, human trafficking and kidnapping
for ransom, are emerging as the main sources of
funding for terrorist groups.
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

“If the response of the international community
is not more determined and immediate following the
warning issued by African leaders, the threat will
unfortunately increase. It will further undermine
peace and security in Africa. It will hamper efforts
to achieve the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the African Union’s
Agenda 2063. It will leave no prospect for building
the Africa we want.
“Aware of the magnitude of the threat and
the danger, Africa is resolutely committed to
stepping up regional counter-terrorism initiatives,
including the Group of Five for the Sahel, the
Accra Initiative, the Multinational Joint Task Force
and, more recently, the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia (ATMIS). Those commendable
efforts deserve to be supported by the international
community with adequate financial, logistical and
material resources, while taking decisive action to
cut off the sources of funding for terrorist groups.
I would like to take this opportunity to call for the
mobilization of resources to ensure the success
of ATMIS, as well as to welcome the significant
contribution of the European Union.
“The
approach
of
highlighting
the
peace-governance-development nexus seems the
most appropriate to break the cycle of sudden
political transitions and chronic insecurity. We
need to tailor our response in a consistent manner,
as fragmented responses fuel the interests of
terrorist groups, who exploit systemic flaws to
foment a breeding ground for violence.
“The humanitarian crises resulting from
that scourge are becoming increasingly complex
with the impact of climate change in Africa,
compounded by the increase in violent extremism,
poverty and inequality associated with the
recurrent political and socioeconomic crises. An
effective fight against terrorism in Africa therefore
requires a holistic approach and addressing the
socioeconomic challenges faced by the affected
countries, with particular attention to the root
causes, the education of young people, inclusive
development, strengthening State authority
throughout the country, poverty resulting from a
lack of opportunities and improving the living
conditions of the disadvantaged.
“Another crucial area in which we need to
strengthen our partnership is cooperation and

S/PV.9188

intelligence, particularly in identifying and tracking
funding sources and online money transactions in
order to curb the illicit activities without which
terrorism could not thrive.
“The Council must redouble its efforts,
increase its means of action and boldly support
African peace support initiatives and operations.
The front against terrorism must be unified, with
the full commitment of everyone, everywhere.
(spoke in English)
“For Gabon, the joint efforts of the United
Nations and the African Union, combined with
the active participation of the countries of the
region and subregional organizations, must focus
on people in local communities. They are the ones
who suffer daily attacks from terrorist groups.
“Our efforts will hardly have a lasting impact
without a coherent improvement of local strategies
based on the engagement of women, youth and
the most vulnerable populations, as well as the
prevention, resolution and consolidation mechanisms
of regional and subregional organizations.
“Development, governance and security
policies must go hand in hand with an absolute
determination to uphold the values of social
cohesion and the prohibition of hate speech, with
a view to maximizing the impact of our efforts to
promote lasting peace and stability in the region.
“In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
fight against terrorism is absolutely an imperative
for peace, security and development in Africa.
The commitment of the international community
in fragile regions must be commensurate with
the scale of the threat. It takes only one weak
link in the chain to shake the entire system of
collective security.”
Mr. Al Nahyan (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Ghana for organizing and presiding over this important
discussion on the growing threat of terrorism in coastal
West Africa and the Sahel. In a region suffering from
extremism, the Accra Initiative is a vivid illustration
of Ghana’s wise vision and active role in countering
extremism and terrorism in the region. I would also like
to thank all the briefers for their valuable insights.
There is no doubt that terrorist groups have had
a particularly corrosive impact on various regions in
Africa. According to the Global Terrorism Index, almost

22-6832911/27

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

half of the terrorism-related deaths last year were in
sub-Saharan Africa. Extremism leads to terrorism and
fuels terrorist groups. It greatly hampers productivity
and development, including social development
opportunities, while undercutting access to basic
services and challenging State authority. Extremism
dashes the hopes and aspirations of local communities,
particularly the youth, and undermines the creation of
economic opportunities. The impacts of that scourge
extend beyond national borders. Any meaningful and
effective response must therefore concurrently address
the root causes and the transnational nature of the threat.
That is where regional and international coordination
must come in.
The African Union (AU) and subregional
organizations are central to countering extremism and
terrorism. The United Arab Emirates commends the
efforts of African leaders to strengthen the African
Peace and Security Architecture in order to meet today’s
challenges — chief among them cross-border terrorism.
That sentiment was reflected in the May meeting in
Malabo convened by the African Union Heads of State,
who committed to developing a continental strategic plan
of action on countering terrorism and to establishing an
AU ministerial committee on counter-terrorism.
We stress the considerable importance the United
Arab Emirates attaches to combating extremism and
terrorism. From our own experience, we know that it is
essential to have effective policies in place to address
the challenge. We have strongly supported regional and
international efforts, including through contributions
to the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force and our
membership in the Global Coalition against Da’esh. We
have also supported the establishment of the Coalition’s
Africa Focus Group, which will work to counter the
threat posed by Da’esh across Africa.
I would also like to share three recommendations
for our collective pursuit of countering extremism and
terrorism in coastal West Africa and the Sahel.
First, effectively countering extremism requires an
integrated approach that combines all the tools at the
disposal of the international community in a way that
addresses the local contexts of the threat. The extension
and maintenance of State authority is key and can be
sustained in the long term only through the provision of
basic services and support for sustainable development,
both of which enhance stability and weaken the
ability of extremist actors to exploit the grievances of
affected populations as a tool to radicalize and recruit.
12/27

10/11/2022

Inclusive governance is critical to addressing the root
causes of extremism and terrorism through building
community resilience.
Countering extremism in all its forms is essential.
Prevention includes the development and deployment
of effective counter-narratives, increasing awareness
and promoting the values of tolerance and peaceful
coexistence. However, that must be done in coordination
with the leaders of local communities, including
religious leaders. That is critical, as terrorist groups,
such as Da’esh, hijack the moral practices of religion in
order to spread extremism and recruit fighters.
Secondly, climate change has the potential to
exacerbate the consequences of terrorism. Shifting
climate patterns, such as extreme-weather events, can
lead to the loss of livelihoods, thereby allowing extremist
actors to exploit the resulting economic vulnerabilities
and attempt to recruit local populations by offering
alternative sources of income. Well-financed climate
adaptation strategies are not just a moral imperative
for all of us; they are a security requirement to combat
extremism in Africa and elsewhere.
Thirdly, the frameworks built by the Council over
the past two decades must be adjusted in order to ensure
that they contain the right tools to address the threats
of extremism and terrorism. Da’esh, Al-Qaida and their
affiliates remain a clear threat to international peace
and security, but we cannot neglect other terrorist
organizations, including those labelled as such by the
Council, whose activities continue to evolve. In order to
be able to keep pace with threats to international peace
and security, the Council must consider the challenges
arising from a counter-terrorism approach focused on
Da’esh and Al-Qaida, to the exclusion of others.
We must also delegitimize terrorist groups that
claim to act in the name of religion or that suggest that
they constitute a State or province. Accordingly, we
should refrain from using the terms “Islamic State” or
“ISIL” in reference to Da’esh and its affiliates in coastal
West Africa and the Sahel, and elsewhere. We must
deny terrorist groups their self-proclaimed connections
to Islam.
In conclusion, we affirm the full support of the
United Arab Emirates for all international and regional
efforts to combat terrorism and extremism on the
African continent. They must succeed in achieving
the stability, security and peace that Africa and all its
people deserve.
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Ms. Sherwood-Randall (United States of America):
I want to begin by expressing my appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for bringing us all together and for
elevating this vital conversation. Your country is on the
front lines, and you are surrounded by security threats
on your borders. Your Government has developed a
thoughtful approach to countering terrorism, and you
have distinguished yourself as a regional leader who is
committed to deepening collaboration and cooperation
with your neighbours in the face of this existential threat.
I want to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Mohammed, Chairperson Faki Mahamat, Managing
Director Von Seherr-Thoss and Ms. Ero for their
remarks this morning. I have listened very carefully,
and I have learned a lot from what they have said.
The United States fully agrees that none of us can
effectively meet the terrorism challenge alone. Our
experience since 11 September 2001, and even before
then, has proven that we are much stronger when we
stand together in the fight against terrorism so that we
can enable people to build peaceful lives and live free
from fear. This morning, I would like to discuss the
growing threat to Africa and how the United States
is approaching it, and, most important, I would like
to offer some perspective on how we can do even
more together.
As we all know, countering terrorism has been a
top priority for the United States for more than two
decades, but, over the years, the threat has evolved.
It has become more ideologically diverse, and it has
become more geographically diffuse. Nowhere is the
evolution in the global terrorism landscape more vivid
than in Africa, where terrorist groups, from Al-Qaida
branches to affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS), now collectively occupy vast swaths
of territory and extract benefits from millions of
suffering people.
Across every region of the vast continent, they
brutalize and terrorize civilians. In Burkina Faso,
terrorist groups attack villagers and displace farmers
from their sole source of income. In Nigeria, ISIS
affiliates have massacred worshippers in churches. In
Mozambique last year, hundreds of Islamic militants
linked to ISIS laid siege to an entire town, holding guests
in a hotel hostage. In Mali, violent extremists continue
to kill United Nations peacekeepers, making the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali one of the most dangerous peacekeeping
missions in the world. In Kenya, Al-Shabaab threatens

S/PV.9188

election workers and polling sites and has attacked
hotels, shopping malls and other locations in which both
citizens and foreigners congregate. And in Somalia,
the group targets and kills civilians, including, just
two weeks ago, more than 100 Somali educators and
first responders during tragic bombings in which an
additional 300 people were injured.
Across the region, terrorists are also attacking
Americans and other foreign citizens, including from
the countries around this table. Still, there is reason for
optimism where populations are rising up against terror
to reclaim their communities. The United States stands
with African Governments and with African people
who are confronting the threat every day. Counterterrorism successes are hard won, and they often take
place out of public view. Unfortunately, terrorist acts
are far more visible. According to the United States
Department of Defense, violence from militant Islamic
groups in Africa has risen 300 per cent over the past
decade, with 95 per cent of that increase concentrated
in the Western Sahel and Somalia.
As I have discussed with Presidents Bazoum
and Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, and as I expect to do
today with President Akufo-Addo, the violence is only
rising. That affects all of us. Therefore, as members
of the Security Council know, terrorism in Africa is
a shared challenge, and it demands our collective
response. The United States is doing three key
things to tackle the threat. First, we are investing in
governance, development and diplomacy. Secondly, we
are deepening our ties with our African partners and
working to empower them to take the lead in facing the
challenge. And, thirdly, we are leveraging the collective
strength of the international community, including the
United Nations.
I want to take a few minutes to discuss each of those.
First, as I said, we are investing in governance,
development and diplomacy, which, as we have heard
repeatedly around this table, is essential to addressing
the root causes of terrorism. The United States is
pursuing an integrated strategy that addresses the
drivers of radicalization to violence — a strategy that
supports effective governance and recognizes that
stability and security are intertwined with opportunity
and prosperity. It is not just about fighting terrorists; it
is about promoting economic opportunities that offer
more attractive alternatives to young recruits than the
terrorism enterprise can offer and building institutions
and capacity to hold those who commit acts of terror

22-6832913/27

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

to account through strong law enforcement and
judicial systems.
Secondly, we are deepening our ties with our
African partners and empowering them to take the lead
on the challenge. I have travelled to Djibouti, Somalia,
Kenya and the Niger in my current role. I have seen
first-hand how our diplomats, intelligence professionals
and military service members rely on local partners to
understand and respond to terrorist threats. A successful
counter-terrorism strategy in Africa must always be
built on and led by the citizens of the countries that we
are working to support. Our partners must include local
law enforcement, military personnel, public servants
and regional bodies, such as the African Union and its
regional economic communities. The United States is
asking our partners to identify and communicate their
counter-terrorism priorities. We will rely on our regional
counterparts to tell us what training and support they
need. We will do everything we can to enable them to
lead across the African continent, and we will empower
them to conduct capacity-building efforts that enable
more enduring outcomes.
Thirdly, as I said, the United States is leveraging
the collective strength of the international community,
including the United Nations. More than 15 years ago,
every United Nations Member State signed on to the
United Nations Global Counter-terrorism Strategy,
which promotes a shared vision and a common
approach to fighting terrorism. But this threat, as I have
mentioned, has changed substantially since we adopted
that resolution. The need for collaboration across the
world, however, is more important than ever.
The United States will continue working with all
partners to strengthen the use of the sanctions regime
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) against terrorists to
induce a change in behaviour. We will maintain our
intensive work with the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
the Office of Counter Terrorism and the members of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact to monitor the latest threats. We will expand
our collaboration to ensure security assistance is well
coordinated so that we maximize our impacts and do
not duplicate or waste precious efforts.
I have to be candid. We are eagerly awaiting the
recommendations of the ongoing joint assessment
on the Sahel — a project undertaken by high-level
representatives of the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Group of Five for the Sahel so that we
14/27

10/11/2022

can provide effective support where our partners have
decided it is most needed. The outcomes of the report
will be essential to shaping our next steps.
Finally, our joint efforts must be grounded in
democracy and built on respect for the rule of law and
human rights in order to succeed over the long term.
When nations use terrorism as a pretext to silence
political dissent or interfere with the activities of
civil society, the effort to counter terror can actually
become counterproductive and contribute to greater
divisiveness, dysfunction and violence. Similarly,
when armed mercenary groups, including the
Kremlin-backed Wagner Group, commit human rights
abuses, the security environment becomes bleaker, and
citizens pay the price.
Let me close with the following: as we all know,
countering terrorism is a demanding task, and it is an
enduring one. The conditions that give rise to terrorism
are complex, and the perpetrators are innovative and
ruthless. But by investing in governance, diplomacy
and development, empowering local partners and,
most importantly, working together in strong and
collaborative partnerships, both bilaterally and
multilaterally, we can more effectively counter the
metastasizing terrorism threats that we are facing in
Africa. I look forward to continuing our conversation,
including next month at the United States-Africa
Leaders' Summit in Washington, D.C. Security,
stability and countering terrorism will be top priorities
on the agenda for the Heads of State and Government
whom President Biden will be welcoming to the White
House. Our goal is to generate greater understanding
for and commitment to the work we must do together to
tackle the region’s peace and security challenges.
I thank you once again, Mr. President, for convening
this gathering and for allowing me the opportunity to
address the Council today.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): On behalf of Kenya’s
delegation, I want to say how delighted we are to see
you preside over the Security Council during this
important debate, Mr. President. We salute you for your
leadership in the quest for sustainable peace, security
and development in Africa. I also want to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohamed, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Ms. Benedikta von Seherr-Thoss and
Ms. Comfort Ero for their briefings.
As we debate this important threat, terrorist
affiliates of Al-Qaida and the Islamic State of Iraq and
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

the Sham (ISIS) are expanding in multiple regions in
Africa. They are embedded in local, national and crossborder conflicts while retaining key strategic links with
global networks. They are capitalizing on instability
caused by insufficient governance, local grievances
and humanitarian emergencies caused by extreme
weather patterns that are partly due to climate change.
States are hard pressed to provide robust security or
basic services, as they lack the capacity, political
stability and financial resources they need to overcome
their challenges.
In the Sahel and West Africa, the terrorist threat
is escalating and expanding its footprint, with multiple
countries under threat with varying levels of intensity.
Various strategies have been developed, but most have
been only partially implemented. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali has done as well as it could, given its mandate and
resources, but it has come nowhere close to degrading
the threat to an acceptable level. The initiative of the
Group of Five for the Sahel is only a shadow of the hopes
that the people and Governments of the region placed
in it. The forces deployed by countries partnering with
the region also appear inadequate to the challenges for
a number of reasons, not least because of mushrooming
unconstitutional changes of Government. Even as
military efforts against the terrorist groups falter
or make only partial progress, critical political and
economic measures are not advancing with the urgency
and robustness needed. Not enough is being done to
address entrenched and intensifying grievances about
political and economic exclusion based on ethnic or
religious identity. The equitable provision of basic
services is not keeping pace with demand as Government
financial resources dwindle in the aftermath of the
shocks of the coronavirus disease pandemic and global
economic decline.
We are at an important fork in the road. United
Nations peacekeeping, which began as an innovation,
is not innovating enough to address terrorist groups
that are threats to international peace and security. The
main reason for the existence of the United Nations is
to protect international peace and security by ensuring
universal respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Member States. By that standard, terrorist
groups in Africa are challenging the fundamental basis
for the United Nations, and that is not acceptable. We
urge the Council to learn from and respond to the
situations in Somalia and Mozambique. Both countries
are suffering from brutal attacks and peace-shattering

S/PV.9188

operations by Al-Qaida and ISIS affiliates. But their
successes against the terrorists offer us an example
and perhaps even a template of how we can achieve
lasting victory.
In Somalia, ISIS remains small but is an important
link in a global franchise. Campaigns in the Great Lakes
and Southern Africa are under way under its umbrella.
The African Union Transition Mission in Somalia
(ATMIS) is standing shoulder to shoulder with the
people and Government of Somalia against a destructive
Al-Qaida affiliate. I will not refer to it by name this
morning, in a sign of our respect for the decision by
the Government of Somalia and the country’s religious
leaders to strip the group of its name’s association
with youth. They have asked that the group be named
Khawarij to reflect the fact that it is a deviant sect
exploiting religion for evil and inhuman purposes. This
is part of a total war against the terrorists by the people
and Government of Somalia under the leadership of
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. In Somalia we are
witnessing what a determined Government can achieve
when it rallies its forces and its people. In ATMIS and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the
international community is standing with the people
of Somalia. The European Union and other partners
are making important contributions financially, with
military training and even through the kinetic targeting
of terrorist leaders. While success has taken a long time
to achieve and the Al-Qaida group is still persisting in
its efforts, we can be more confident that if the effort is
maintained, the country will be liberated.
The ISIS-affiliate in Mozambique initially made
progress in its campaign of terrorism. However,
Mozambican forces, with strong support from Rwanda
and forces from the Southern Africa Development
Community, have retaken ground and are protecting
civilians and economic activity. I would now like to
draw some conclusions from our observations and offer
recommendations for our collective action.
First, we need to stand with Governments, as we
are doing with Somalia, by mandating and deploying
robust African forces assembled by the African Union
and regional communities. They need adequate and
predictable funding, including through United Nations
assessed contributions, if we are serious about ensuring
that the United Nations can truly protect international
peace and security. Another way to give support is by
ensuring that Security Council mandates are supportive
of Governments that show a strong commitment to

22-6832915/27

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

fighting international terrorist groups militarily,
politically and economically. It is important in that
regard to review the sanctions regime for Somalia in
order to ensure that the Government is empowered to
use its full sovereign will to defeat the Al-Qaida and
ISIS affiliates in its territory.
Simultaneously, we must tighten the sanctions
that are most clearly targeted at these groups’ ability
to raise and send funds regionally and internationally,
assemble explosives and recruit and transport foreign
fighters. Their leaders should also come under stronger
sanctions that are automatically deployed based on
their identification by the multiple Al-Qaida and ISIS
monitoring groups in the Security Council. We need to
listen closely to the needs of the Somali Government
and critical stakeholders, especially as ATMIS
transitions, to ensure that it is in step with the Somali
forces’ growing capabilities and success in winning
and effectively holding territory. The response in the
Sahel, West Africa and the Great Lakes by the Council
and the international community should be more like
that in Somalia and Mozambique.
Secondly, increased capacity-building for national
and regional military actions against terrorist groups
is urgently required. That includes financial, training
and infrastructural support focusing on anti- and
counter-terrorism efforts. We should ensure the
full operationalization of the efforts of the Office of
Counter-Terrorism in Africa, such as the regional
Programme Office in Nairobi.
Thirdly, States in the region must endeavour to
undertake ambitious legal and political efforts aimed at
ensuring religious, regional and ethnic inclusivity. The
State’s ability to promote and protect fair and equitable
inclusion must be regarded as a core competence. Without
it, the State may appear strong in the short term but will
suffer fragilities that are quickly exposed by militarized
grievances. Inclusion is a key action to preventing
terrorism, insurgency and political instability. The
Peacebuilding Commission is an important resource in
this area. It can undertake catalysing initiatives that are
then adopted by the Government in a more entrenched
and far-reaching manner.
Fourthly, the Security Council must equally apply
its counter-terrorism architecture against terrorist
groups and their affiliates, particularly those in Africa.
This should include appropriate listing of these groups
in the sanctions regime adopted by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
16/27

10/11/2022

1267 (1999), where they appropriately belong. The
fight against global terrorism cannot and will not be
won by applying double standards in the face of such a
serious threat.
Fifthly, resilient communities must be built by
resourcing national disengagement and reintegration
capabilities. To this end, there must be coordinated
action among countries of the region, particularly in
the programmes to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate
armed groups, including returning foreign and
terrorist fighters.
Finally, climate shocks continue to constitute
a major driver of conflict and instability, and they
provide an environment conducive to entrenching
terrorism. The strongest defence against climate
change and its attendant security risks is development
that enables adaptation, mitigation and resilience.
The twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, coincidentally taking place this
year in Africa, should lead to a pledge by countries to
meet their climate commitments and contribute to the
development of climate-change-affected countries in
Africa. In this way, we will deny terrorists the breeding
ground to thrive.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to say that I am honoured
to participate in today’s debate, which your country has
coordinated. Ghana brings to our attention a situation
which, as highlighted by the Deputy Secretary-General,
is regional in its enunciation but global in its ability
to threaten international peace and security. In this
context, I would like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Amina Mohamed, the Chairperson
of African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, the representative of the European External
Action Service, Ms. Benedikta von Seherr-Thoss,
and the President and Chief Executive Officer of the
International Crisis Group, Ms. Comfort Ero, for their
insightful remarks.
There may be a perception that at present terrorism
is less menacing than it used to be a few years ago.
Unfortunately, this assessment is not grounded in reality.
It is a misunderstanding that can be attributed to a great
extent to insufficient attention by international media
outlets to certain parts of the world and the unbalanced
treatment terrorism receives according to the region
where its effects are directly felt. The expansion of
terrorism in Africa is a reality, with serious impacts
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

on the peace and security of the continent. It should
remain a priority on our agenda.
I would like to reiterate Brazil’s position that
counter-terrorism efforts will only be sustainable and
effective if consistent with international law, including
the United Nations Charter, international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law. If counter-terrorism takes place at the
expense of international legal parameters, it will have
defeated its purpose and may contribute to generating
additional extremism conducive to terrorism.
While United Nations peacekeeping operations are
not a tool for military counter-terrorism actions, they
help create and consolidate the conditions for long-term
stability and security. They therefore have an inhibiting
effect on terrorism. In the same vein, regional and
subregional organizations play an important part in
containing the spread of terrorism, and, in doing so,
they must receive our support.
We commend all the efforts and progress made by
the African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations in countering terrorism within the
framework of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. The African Union
Mission in Somalia, now the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia, has been an example by assisting
countries of the entire Horn of Africa to reduce
Al-Shabaab capacities. Similarly, the Southern African
Development Community mission in Mozambique has
achieved results in the fight against terrorism in Cabo
Delgado. The Accra Initiative may further contribute to
containing the spillover of terrorism from the Sahel. We
also hope that the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force
will overcome its current challenges, since its action is
also relevant for countering terrorism in that region and
preventing it from spreading to its neighbourhood.
We have been following with great concern the
deteriorating security situation in the Sahel. We regret
the appalling increase in the number of terrorist acts
in the region and their expansion towards the West
African coast. The current political instability in the
Sahel might accelerate its expansion southwards. In this
context, the international community must strengthen
support to counter-terrorism initiatives in the region.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, enacted by the most representative body of
the United Nations, provides the most comprehensive

S/PV.9188

guidance for the fight against terrorism. In adopting
it, Member States recognized the importance of
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
in the field, and this cooperation should be centred on
capacity-building. Technical cooperation, including
South-South cooperation, could be an important tool
for strengthening national institutions’ capabilities for
fighting terrorism.
Furthermore, prevention is instrumental in any
sustainable counter-terrorism strategy. I echo the Deputy
Secretary-General in underscoring the circumstances
in which terrorist groups thrive, the reasons why their
ideology attracts young people to their ranks, and the
social and economic aspects of the phenomenon. A
comprehensive response to terrorism must therefore
include policies directed at its root causes, mainly on
the development front. For that, we need to value the
expertise of regional organizations in addressing local
realities and proposing local solutions.
Brazil condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. The repudiation of terrorism is a
constitutional principle that guides our international
relations. Our foreign policy also highly values the role
of regional and subregional organizations in securing a
safer and more peaceful world. We must not hesitate to
support them in combating terrorism.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico warmly welcomes you to the Security
Council, Mr. President, and recognizes Ghana’s
leadership in bringing the issue before us today to the
attention of the international community. I also thank
all the briefers for their briefings, which have enriched
the context of our debate.
My country reaffirms that terrorism constitutes
a serious threat to international peace and security
and, as such, requires coordinated, forceful and
effective responses. We have heard how, for several
years now, some regions in Africa have been particularly
affected by that scourge. While significant progress has
been made on some fronts — thanks, in large part, to
regional mobilization — the strategies employed thus
far to prevent and combat terrorism have unfortunately
not been able to reverse the ongoing spread of that
phenomenon in the continent.
Given the urgent need to rethink our approaches
to fighting terrorism, it is necessary to integrate the
lessons learned. In that connection, I will highlight
three points.

22-6832917/27

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

First, the deployment of military counter-terrorism
operations in regions such as the Sahel, the Lake Chad
basin and the Horn of Africa clearly show that such
efforts are important to halt the advance of extremist
groups. However, in order to be truly effective, those
operations must have realistic strategic objectives that
are more focused and achievable — and, where possible,
achievable over shorter periods of time. The Security
Council’s analysis of regional situations in Africa
reminds us that, when counter-terrorism missions are
prolonged over time and their objectives are expanded,
they lose effectiveness and can provoke responses that
run counter to their objectives. That leads to fatigue,
both among donors and public opinion in the countries
in which those forces operate.
In addition, we have seen how concentrating
resources on the security component in regions such
as West Africa and the Sahel can be to the detriment
of the civilian administration, which is responsible
for providing basic services to the population. That
imbalance between the different tasks of the State can,
in turn, have negative effects on governance and even
pose a challenge to the constitutional order.
Secondly, we believe that military efforts should
be framed within a broad political strategy, the main
objective of which is to transform the conditions
fuelling the emergence of terrorism. Mexico reiterates
that particular attention must be paid to combating
inequality, exclusion, discrimination and corruption,
among others. That is the only way in which it will be
possible to more successfully neutralize the recruitment
and mobilization mechanisms of terrorist organizations.
Unfortunately, the economic and social challenges
linked to the effects of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, as well as the current food and energy
crises, threaten to exacerbate inequalities, particularly
in the most vulnerable countries. In addition, the
impact of extreme weather events — a consequence of
climate change — is depriving entire communities of
their livelihoods.
It is therefore urgent to strengthen social policies
and to prioritize peacebuilding activities in order to
prevent the prevailing difficult economic and social
situation from becoming an even greater security
crisis. We therefore insist on the relevance of the
peacebuilding architecture and the need to align
international cooperation objectives in order to focus
on addressing the structural causes of violence.
18/27

10/11/2022

Thirdly, Mexico recognizes the various existing
regional mechanisms to address terrorism in Africa. The
Accra Initiative, the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
Nairobi process are examples of regional willingness to
respond to the activity of terrorist groups and therefore
deserve the support of the international community.
In order to limit the ability of terrorists to act, it
is necessary to prevent them from having access to
weapons, especially small arms and light weapons. That
can be achieved by strengthening the fight against the
illicit trafficking of those weapons and their diversion,
in accordance with resolution 2616 (2021), adopted by
the Council in December at the initiative of Mexico.
Finally, my country believes that the fight against
terrorism must prioritize the protection of civilians and
the promotion of human rights. An exclusively military
strategy only reinforces the spiral of violence, in
addition to the fact that such operations sometimes have
a serious impact on the civilian population, particularly
women and children.
We therefore call for regional mobilization efforts
to include actions to strengthen democratic governance
and the rule of law. Judicial cooperation must be
an important element in the strategy to fight against
terrorist organizations and to ensure victims’ access
to justice.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me begin by expressing
gratitude to you, Sir, for your leadership of the Council
and by congratulating the delegation of Ghana for
organizing this important open debate on counterterrorism in Africa. The Secretary-General’s
observation last month in Mumbai, India, while paying
tribute to the victims of the 26 November 2008 terror
attack, that terrorism is pure evil and one with which
we can never compromise is reflective of the gravity
of the issue not just for Africa, but for the entire world.
I also take this opportunity to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for their respective
statements. I also thank Ms. Comfort Ero and
Ms. Benedikta von Seherr-Thoss for their very
useful insights.
Even after the end of colonialism, for several
decades now, many countries in Africa have continued
to face serious security threats from terrorism, armed
groups, transnational organized crime and drugs and
arms trafficking. Perhaps you, Sir, would agree with
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

me that those challenges have a negative impact on
their socioeconomic development.
Terrorism’s footprint in Africa, particularly in
the Sahel and Horn of Africa regions, has expanded
significantly in recent years. That trend has constantly
been highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
biannual report on the threat of Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) (S/2022/576), as well as by the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team in
its periodical reports. Ghana’s concept note for today’s
debate (S/2022/822, annex) also eloquently brings out
the counter-terrorism challenges faced by African
countries, particularly in the Sahel, the Horn of Africa
and Central Africa.
Terrorist groups in Africa continue to target
civilians, security and peacekeeping forces across
conflict zones. The main recipients of their atrocities,
sadly, remain women, children and other vulnerable
sections of the population. Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam
wa al-Muslimin, affiliated with Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, has expanded
its activities in and around the Sahel and West
Africa towards the coastal regions. Groups linked to
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
as well as Boko Haram, have also continued to expand
around the eastern and northern shores of Lake Chad.
In Mozambique, the Islamic State Central Africa
Province has become emblematic of the influence of
ISIL in Africa. The attacks by terrorist groups against
United Nations peacekeepers, particularly through the
use of improvised explosive devices, is alarming. A
strong, effective and coherent response that reflects the
international community’s collective commitment to
defeating the scourge of terrorism is therefore essential,
in Africa as elsewhere. In that regard, I would like to
submit the following key points for the consideration of
the Council.
First, the threat of terrorism in Africa is real. It is a
threat to all of us, and not an isolated one. We live in an
interconnected and interdependent world where no one
is safe unless everyone is safe. However, the response
of the international community to the terrorist threat in
Africa remains less than satisfactory. We have to show
strong political will to help African countries address
the threat of terrorism.
Second, easy access to new and emerging
technologies has been further exploited by terrorist
groups in Africa for the purposes of disseminating their
propaganda, transferring funds and raising finances.

S/PV.9188

Drones have been used to monitor the movement
of security forces and peacekeepers, making them
vulnerable to terrorist attacks. I would like to remind
the Council that last month India hosted a special
meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the
Security Council to discuss that issue in a holistic
manner. The Council’s collective resolve was reflected
in the Committee’s adoption of the Delhi Declaration on
countering the use of new and emerging technologies
for terrorist purposes. We very much hope that the
Delhi Declaration will pave the way for the formulation
of a normative framework at the United Nations to
address that threat.
Third, the ideological influence that the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida have
over their affiliates in Africa, as well as the linkages
between them, should not be underestimated. Following
the Taliban’s takeover of Afghanistan, the risk of ISIL
affiliates and other terrorist groups in Africa imitating
it in Africa remains high. In that context, we underline
the need to fully implement resolution 2593 (2021).
Fourth, it is possible that by presenting
themselves as viable political stakeholders, ISIL and
Al-Qaida affiliates may try to influence the national
reconciliation efforts in countries that are trying to
establish democratic institutions. Apart from that, such
countries may also co-opt ISIL and Al-Qaida elements
in order to achieve political stability and peace. In
our view, such actions are both futile and dangerous.
Terrorists are not wedded to the democratic polity,
nor do they have faith in democratic values. Engaging
them in national reconciliation will only give terrorism
legitimacy. What we need is a zero-tolerance policy
on terrorism.
Fifth, we need to abandon double standards when
dealing with terrorism. We cannot divide terrorists into
good and bad categories based on political convenience.
The same yardstick should be applied to all terrorists.
They should all be countered, without exceptions of
any kind.
Sixth, we need to acknowledge the links between
terrorism, transnational organized crime and piracy.
That nexus facilitates human trafficking, drug
trafficking and the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Improvised explosive devices have become a
weapon of choice for terrorist groups in Africa. While
the countries of the region should demonstrate political
will and manage arms and ammunition effectively,
United Nations agencies can also support the efforts

22-6832919/27

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

10/11/2022

of States through capacity-building aimed at breaking
that nexus.

change and security-related issues without a firm
scientific basis.

Seventh, the Security Council must update
its toolkit to deal with the increasing threat to
international peace and security posed by terrorism.
Robust mandates for United Nations peace operations
have not brought much success either, and the reason
is simple — traditional peacekeeping cannot be the
answer for countering terrorism.

India has been contributing proactively to enhancing
the capacities of African States to combat terrorism.
Since 2018, India contributed more than $1.5 million to
programmes in the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism targeting the capacity-building of countries
in East and Southern Africa. Moreover, as India’s
Minister for External Affairs announced at the special
meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee held in
New Delhi, this year we have contributed $500,000
to further strengthen those efforts. India has a robust
security partnership with several countries in Africa
aimed at building the capacities of security forces,
including for countering terrorism. We are committed
to strengthening every effort of our African friends,
together with the international community, to fight
terrorism, in order to ensure that we are not found
wanting in that regard.

Eighth, regional and subregional organizations
enjoy advantages with regard to language and
situational awareness. They can respond more quickly
and effectively in combating terrorism because they
have a better understanding of the complexities
involved. Africa’s leading role in addressing African
problems through African solutions therefore needs
to be supported. Regional security initiatives, such as
the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia, the
Southern African Development Community Mission
in Mozambique, the Multinational Joint Task Force
and the Group of Five for the Sahel, have proved their
resilience in effectively dealing with the threat of
terrorism. Those are Africa’s homegrown solutions,
led by African countries that best understand their
issues. The international community should provide
sustainable and adequate financial and logistical
support to those regional security initiatives. That is all
the more necessary against the backdrop of the receding
presence of international security forces in the Sahel.
If the affected countries do not receive that assistance,
they will try to seek it elsewhere.
Ninth, several States lack the legal operational
frameworks and capacities necessary for countering the
threat of terrorism. However, there are other States that
are clearly guilty of aiding and supporting terrorism and
wilfully providing financial assistance and safe havens
to terrorists. While we must enhance the capacities of
the States that need it, the international community
must also collectively call out those that aid terrorism
and hold them accountable for their doublespeak.
Tenth, in our view, the Council should remain
wary of attempts and schemes that distract attention
from the fight against terrorism though hypothetical
cause-and-effect linkages. The issue of climate change
should be addressed holistically, in accordance with
the provisions and principles of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. We reiterate that
no artificial links should be drawn between climate
20/27

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome your presence, Sir, in the seat of
the President of the Security Council and thank Ghana
for its commendable leadership on this important
issue. We also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, as well
as Ms. Benedikta von Seherr-Thoss and Ms. Comfort
Ero, for their briefings.
We suggest that the Security Council consider the
current urgent problem of the growing terrorist threat
in Africa through a specific historical perspective. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida and their
branches and affiliated terrorist groups feel at ease on
the continent and their influence has only strengthened
over time. What led to the spread of terrorist activity in
Africa? The fact is that over and over again in the States
of Africa and the neighbouring Middle East we have
seen external interference create chaos and provoke
instability. Foreign interventions weaken and destroy
State institutions, as they have done in Iraq, Syria and
Libya, creating a breeding ground for terrorists, helping
criminals to profit and take advantage of countries’
artificially created socioeconomic distress in order to
recruit new adherents into their ranks.
It is essential to effectively counter the financing
of terrorism, and that primarily involves addressing
the links between criminal and terrorist groups.
Establishing channels of communication with
transnational organized crime is a hugely important
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

way for terrorists to obtain financial, material and
technical support. Africa continues to face the problem
of terrorist activities that are financed through the
illicit trafficking of natural resources and drugs, the
smuggling of cultural treasures and arms trafficking.
If Africa was previously plundered by colonial
Powers, today they have been replaced by big Western
corporations. And terrorists and organized criminals,
who plunder national wealth and siphon off natural and
other resources, fit neatly into that landscape.
I would like to elaborate on the problem of
weapons. We regularly sound the alarm over violations
of arms embargoes against terrorist organizations in
various regions of the world, including on the African
continent. However, those violations do not stop, and
information about the sources of support for terrorists
is often concealed.
The situation on the African continent clearly
requires prompt decisions, including from the United
Nations. In that regard, the central and coordinating role
of the world Organization and respect for the primary
role of affected States in combating terrorism, as well
as the consideration of their national particularities
and priorities, are of paramount importance. We would
like to emphasize that the requisite counter-terrorism
mechanisms in the United Nations system, particularly
within the Security Council, have already been
established. States have specific obligations with regard
to combating terrorism, which, if strictly observed,
will achieve the desired result. The only issues are
effective cooperation and rejecting double standards.
In that context, we do not believe that it would be
productive to impose additional counter-terrorism
obligations on United Nations missions in Africa. Such
an expansion of their mandates is not in line with the
specific nature of the United Nations presence and
diverts valuable resources from other necessary United
Nations assistance.
We are convinced that an effective response to
terrorists requires coordinated national and regional
efforts. We welcome the measures being taken by
African countries to develop coordinated approaches
to counter-terrorism, including in the context of
subregional organizations.
It is important to remember that there is a
mechanism in place for reviewing the implementation
of Security Council counter-terrorism resolutions
by States. That is done by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. Based on the

S/PV.9188

results, appropriate recommendations are developed
for each State. If there are difficulties regarding their
implementation, States can request technical assistance
from the United Nations. It is important that such
assistance not be formulaic, but that it fully take into
account national priorities and country specifics.
In that regard, we support strengthening
cooperation and coordination between the entities of
the Secretariat and regional organizations in the fight
against terrorism. In that context, a special role is played
by the Office of Counter-Terrorism, which develops and
implements various programmes and projects, provides
technical assistance to States in countering terrorism,
acts as the counter-terrorism coordinator for all United
Nations agencies and collaborates with other relevant
regional and international partners in that area.
In conclusion, I would like to say that some
speakers today seem concerned about the achievements
of Russian private military companies on the African
continent. I want to tell them that African countries
have every right to choose with whom and under what
conditions they cooperate. They can work with various
actors in the private-military-services market and
generally pursue an independent policy in that area. It
is the failures of Western countries that cause African
States to turn to those that can make a real contribution
to countering terrorism on the continent. We all
remember that, against the backdrop of Operations
Serval and Barkhan, allegedly aimed at combating
terrorism, the terrorist threat in West Africa and the
Sahel only continued to increase.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Terrorism in Africa is part of a
global threat, and counter-terrorism therefore deserves
global support. We thank Ghana for organizing this
important meeting, and we thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over today’s debate. I also thank the
briefers for their insights. Let me now turn to the
questions that were posed to us in the concept note (see
S/2022/822, annex).
The first question is: How can United Nations
missions in Africa better support regional counterterrorism efforts? As a starting point, United Nations
missions are not set up to conduct counter-terrorism
due to the geographical limitations in their mandates,
troop- and police-contributing country restrictions and
the risk of neutral Blue Helmets becoming too involved
in local conflicts.

22-6832921/27

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

Counter-terrorism must primarily be a national
responsibility. Yet the situation in the Sahel shows us
that cooperation among nations is also key. We see
United Nations missions — both peacekeeping and
political — as complementary to national and regional
counter-terrorism efforts. Working side by side with
counter-terrorism operations, United Nations missions
can greatly contribute to spheres of stability and the
protection of civilians, including by supporting viable
political solutions through the coordinated use of
good offices. They can also provide capacity-building
for governance, service delivery and human rights
protection. The close and operational partnership
between the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia proves that that is possible.
I now move on to the second question: In what ways
can the United Nations support building resilience to
curb terrorism and violent extremism? That was also
the topic of last week’s debate on resilience-building
and sustainable peace (see S/PV.9181). As we affirmed
then, military solutions alone can never be enough.
To achieve sustainable peace, affected States must act
holistically by both countering immediate terrorist
threats and addressing the underlying conditions that
cause radicalization and violent extremism. That
requires integrating counter-terrorism efforts within
a broader political strategy that is conflict-sensitive,
pursues the Sustainable Development Goals and
protects and promotes human rights.
National efforts can also be strengthened through
close cooperation with civil-society, bilateral and
multilateral partners. In that regard, consulting
with women’s organizations and ensuring women’s
participation are key. Preventive United Nations
missions, such as the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, should therefore be further
enabled, including to work with the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
in pursuit of a whole-of-United Nations approach to
supporting national counter-terrorism efforts.
Finally, I turn to the third question: Which
sustainable funding mechanism can be leveraged against
terrorism in the Sahel region and coastal West Africa?
While a member of the Security Council, Norway
has used its place at this table to back the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a United Nations support office for
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. We
have done that based on the conviction that regional
22/27

10/11/2022

operations with African Union (AU) mandates can
supplement United Nations peacekeeping, especially in
cross-border counter-terrorist responses. The Security
Council should not shy away from serious discussions
on predictable, sustainable and flexible funding for
AU-led and regional operations. At the same time,
it is necessary that any United Nations funding be
matched by sufficient human rights due diligence and
AU compliance frameworks, building on the good work
already done within the AU over many years. On both
funding and compliance, we have seen progress on the
AU side, which should pave the way for new, serious
discussions on United Nations support.
There is a need to think innovatively about how
regional-led, AU-mandated peace operations can
contribute to holistic solutions. We need to bring out the
best of United Nations, AU and other regional initiatives.
That is why Norway actively supports the high-level
panel on security, development and governance in the
Sahel, and we look forward to its proposals.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Ghana for convening
this high-level meeting, and we welcome President
Akufo-Addo to preside over it. I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and all the briefers for their valuable
insights.
Despite our ongoing best efforts, particularly in
the course of the past two decades, we must face the
troubling evidence that terrorism remains a serious
threat to international peace and security. Terrorist
violence and their extremist ideology continue to
spread, with devastating consequences for civilians,
women and children.
In that respect, Africa has been particularly
exposed to such consequences. It has experienced
an influx of terrorist groups that seek to establish a
presence in areas where States lack authority, including
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
north-eastern Nigeria, the Lake Chad basin, northern
Mozambique, the Sahel and Somalia. Terrorist networks
take advantage of the manifold social, economic,
political circumstances and explore security and other
vulnerabilities in order to spread their hateful activities
and ideology.
Two of the three most dynamic Da’esh networks are
based in Africa. Boko Haram continues to destabilize
the Sahel, a region that is home to the world’s fastestgrowing and deadliest terrorist groups. Al-Shabaab
maintains its presence and has spread its tentacles in
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

the Great Lakes region, incessantly threatening the
civilian population. Cabo Delgado, in Mozambique,
has caused the forced displacement of 84,000 people,
including 32,978 children, in one month alone.
It is tragic that almost 50 per cent of global terrorist
deaths happen in sub-Saharan Africa. That is a deeply
troubling situation, and it requires a robust global,
unified, coordinated and effective response to fight it
and to eradicate it. It requires continued action as well
as the means and resources to successfully implement
initiatives designed to respond to underlying causes
of violent extremism, such as climate change,
underdevelopment, illiteracy, poverty and the absence
of a strong an effective Government presence.
We must fight terrorism with all means available,
including through the use of force. While we fully
subscribe to the notion, without any reservation, that
there can never be a justification for any act of terrorism,
we believe that the eradication of that scourge will not
be fully achieved by condemnation and military means
alone. Cutting the terrorist hydra’s heads alone will not
be enough, and unleashing brutal force that disrespects
the law risks harming more than healing.
To be successful, we will need to tackle the root
causes that lead to extremism so that we can suppress
what it feeds and, by doing so, focus to prevent the spread
of extremist propaganda and ideologies. To that end,
there is hardly a better alternative than strengthening
the rule of law and institutions, ensuring legitimacy
through fair elections, effectively protecting all human
rights by all, building open and cohesive societies and
ensuring a fair redistribution of resources in order to
address staggering disparities and inequalities.
Promoting social cohesion and respect for other’s
values are important deterrents since, as we know,
terrorists’ strong desires for revenge through violence
are often motivated by what is perceived as humiliation.
We in Albania will not tire of promoting the approach
by developing domestic policies based on respect for
difference and religious harmony, and we will share
our experience with neighbours and others beyond
the region.
It is a known fact — democracies create the
necessary environment and opportunity for discussion
and change so that frustrations can be articulated
peacefully. The emergence of domestic terrorism, which
might have an international impact, is often linked to
violations of human rights, a lack of legitimacy and the

S/PV.9188

absence of the values of freedom and democracy. But
economic hardship, poverty and other vulnerabilities
play their role, further plunging large swaths of people
into deeper poverty, including in Africa, rendering
such people more vulnerable to extremist ideologies.
Albania condemns in the strongest terms any form
of terrorist acts or ideologies, anywhere and by anyone,
and lends its full support to international efforts to
combat terrorism. For that, we need to deal with what
feeds it and keeps it alive. We must find better ways
to reduce inequality within and across countries. We
must fully and strictly implement the “zero finance to
terror” policy in order to cut the lifeline to terrorism.
We must confront extremist ideologies — online and
offline — and never legitimize terrorism in any form.
In conclusion, even though States’ specific needs
can differ and the nature of terrorism has evolved, we
must be united in our common goal to tackle terrorism.
Without a holistic approach, what is countered and
suppressed in one place will end up popping up
elsewhere, as we have seen.
We must therefore strengthen our engagement
with African Member States, recognize their efforts
to enhance African ownership of counter-terrorism
initiatives and policies and ensure that counterterrorism policies and strategies are implemented
globally, in a coordinated manner and with a special
emphasis on inclusivity.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes His Excellency President Akufo-Addo’s
initiative to hold this important meeting, and welcomes
his presence in the Chamber to preside over this debate.
We would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed. Chairperson Faki Mahamat,
Ms. Von Seherr-Thoss and Ms. Ero for their briefings.
Terrorism is one of the major threats facing
Africa. It severely impacts the security and stability
of African countries, taking a heavy toll on Africa’s
socioeconomic development. Helping Africa to combat
terrorism is a matter that impacts world peace. It is also
an important responsibility of the Security Council. In
recent years, the Council has met many times to discuss
and consider the issue of counter-terrorism in Africa.
Some progress has been made on issues of concern
to African countries; however, a lot of work remains
to be done. The Security Council should respond to
Africa’s urgent needs as its own and further prioritize
its attention and resources towards Africa in order to

22-6832923/27

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

help Africa address the most pressing challenges and
their root causes, in terms of combating terrorism.
First, we should build a strong foundation to
support African countries in enhancing their counterterrorism capacity. It has been proven time and again in
international counter-terrorism practice that only when
the countries concerned have established professional,
efficient and robust security teams can they create
an effective deterrent against terrorist activities.
The countries of Mali, Burkina Faso, the Niger, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mozambique and
Nigeria have long been at the forefront of fighting
terrorism. The security sectors in those countries
have made tremendous efforts and sacrifices. Their
achievements in combating terrorism deserve full
recognition. The experience they gained in building
up their security capacities is worth summarizing and
disseminating. The international community should
address weaknesses in security capacity-building in
African countries and scale up support in terms of
funding, equipment, intelligence and logistical support.
When it comes to counter-terrorism cooperation
with African countries, we must fully respect the
sovereignty of the countries concerned and their right
to carry out external security cooperation. No other
political conditions should be attached. The arms
embargoes imposed by the Security Council on the
Sudan, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have had a negative impact on security capacitybuilding in those countries and should therefore be
adjusted or lifted in a timely manner.

10/11/2022

General Guterres to provide financial support through
the United Nations regular budget or peacekeeping
assessment deserves careful study by the Security
Council The Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel is actively carrying out counter-terrorism
military operations, which have recently encountered
some difficulties. China supports the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations in undertaking a joint
assessment on the Sahel and expects that it will produce
practical and actionable recommendations to revitalize
cooperation on counter-terrorism in the Sahel and in
West Africa in general.
Thirdly, we should address both the symptoms
and the root causes of terrorism. We cannot fully and
completely eliminate the threats posed by terrorism by
military and security means alone. We must focus on the
reality on the ground in Africa, with a view to adopting
a systematic governance approach that implements
integrated measures. The Sahel and the Lake Chad
region are highly representative. The local economy
is comparatively underdeveloped, and the people there
have difficulties in making a living. Terrorist forces
take advantage of the situation by targeting poor
and unemployed young people from underprivileged
backgrounds for recruitment.

Secondly, we should support regional cooperation
and build a solid, common-security defence line
for regional countries. In recent years, terrorist
organizations in Africa have shown a posture featuring
cross-border linkages and multipoint outbreaks. The
Southern African Development Community set up a
mission to combat terrorism in northern Mozambique,
with success. That shows once again that to combat
terrorism it is necessary to uphold a common, integrated,
cooperative and sustainable security vision and to
coordinate regional forces to respond collectively. The
international community should support the efforts of
African regional organizations to strengthen border
control and law-enforcement cooperation and forge
synergy in regional counter-terrorism efforts.

The international community should take measures
to support Africa’s development with a greater sense
of urgency. The United Nations should listen to Africa
and give greater priority to the development agenda
in order to create an environment that will enable
Africa’s development. As a developing country itself,
China shares the aspirations of African countries for
development. Under the framework of the Forum on
China-Africa Cooperation, the Belt and Road Initiative
and the Global Development Initiative, China is
actively working with Africa to address the obstacles
related to infrastructure, human resources, trade
and investment and dedicating resources to poverty
reduction, food security, public health and other areas
where people’s livelihoods are at stake, in order to help
African countries eliminate the root causes of political
instability and terrorism. I would like to inform the
Council that beginning on 1 December, China will levy
a zero tariff on 98 per cent of the items originating from
nine least-developed countries in Africa, including
Burkina Faso.

The funding shortfall affects counter-terrorism
cooperation in Africa. It is therefore important to
address that challenge. The proposal of Secretary-

Fourthly, we should leverage the United Nations
leadership role and deepen international cooperation on
countering terrorism in Africa. The Counter-Terrorism

24/27

22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Committee,
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive Directorate and the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism should use their respective strengths
to promote the consolidation of the counter-terrorism
legal framework at the international, regional and
national levels, enhance information-sharing, provide
targeted assistance to African countries in order to
improve their legislative, judicial, and law-enforcement
capacities and increase the effectiveness of preventive
counter-terrorism actions.
African countries have certain expectations with
regard to United Nations peacekeeping troops’ support
for counter-terrorism operations in the continent. The
Secretariat should take that into serious consideration
in order to present solutions that not only conform to
the troops’ peacekeeping mandates but also meet the
needs of the African countries concerned.
China has always been a staunch supporter of
counter-terrorism and the maintenance of stability in
Africa and has contributed actively to that cause. We
have fully delivered on the peace and security projects
that were announced at the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation and have provided military grants to the
AU and countries in the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and the
Gulf of Guinea to promote project cooperation. Through
the China-United Nations Peace and Development
Fund, China has supported the establishment in Africa
of counter-terrorism offices and regional offices
for countering radicalization and preventing violent
extremism on the continent, with a view to training
large numbers of African law-enforcement and security
personnel, as well as providing financial support for
counter-terrorism capacity-building projects in Africa.
Going forward, China will continue to work with
the international community in the implementation of
the Global Security Initiative, proposed by President
Xi Jinping as an opportunity to further support Africa
in its fight against terrorism and make a greater
contribution to its achievement of lasting peace and
sustainable development.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Ghana for convening this
important meeting, and I welcome your presence among
us, Mr. President. I also welcome the participation
of the Deputy Secretary-General, the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, the President of the
International Crisis Group and the Managing Director
for Common Security and Defence Policy and Crisis
Response of the European External Action Service.

S/PV.9188

I would like to emphasize two critical
needs — steadfast support for African initiatives and
the unequivocal rejection of excesses committed in the
name of the fight against terrorism.
First, the Security Council must strengthen its
support for African initiatives. All regional efforts
such as those of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel, the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia (ATMIS), the Southern African Development
Community Mission in Mozambique and the Accra
Initiative are to be commended. But we know that such
efforts are hampered by a structural lack of funding
and equipment. The European Union, Africa’s leading
security partner, contributes more than 90 per cent of the
African Union’s budget dedicated to peace operations
through the African Peace Facility of the European
Union. The European Union has contributed more than
€2.25 billion to the African Union Military Observer
Mission in Somalia and ATMIS. It also supports
African armed forces through Common Security and
Defence Policy missions. But that is not enough. We
need to engage the entire international community.
It is time to ensure sustainable and predictable
financing for African peacekeeping operations, including
through mandatory United Nations contributions or in
the framework of an innovative mechanism that would
combine United Nations with bilateral contributions.
France welcomes the progress of the African Union
Peace Fund. We encourage the members of the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the African
Union Commission to redouble their efforts so that they
can arrive quickly at a common position on financing
African Union-mandated operations. Once that step
has been taken, France recommends that the Security
Council resume discussions on the subject as soon
as possible.
Regional solutions must go hand in hand with
the strengthening of national armies. As we all know,
France has long been committed to helping West African
countries fight terrorism. France will continue to provide
its full support to States in the region that request it,
based on a partnership approach, while supporting the
national strategies of the States concerned.
The fight against terrorism requires coordinated,
comprehensive and resolute action that respects
international law both in Africa and the rest of the
world. As we know, the terrorist threat, far from
declining, has continued to increase. In West Africa,

22-6832925/27

S/PV.9188

Threats to international peace and security

it is now affecting the northern reaches of the coastal
States on the Gulf of Guinea and is a challenge that
we must tackle in support of the African partners
concerned. The spread of Al-Qaida and Da’esh terrorist
activities is also affecting other countries throughout
the African continent.
Given the brutal and indiscriminate nature of
the threat, there is also a risk of falling into the trap
of resorting to an equally brutal and indiscriminate
response. That is the approach proposed by certain
private military companies, whose counter-terrorist
response is totally counterproductive. Their exactions
and plundering of natural resources serve only to
maintain a dangerous spiral of violence by pitting
one community against another. France welcomes the
African Union’s readiness to adopt a robust framework
for all its operations aimed at compliance with human
rights and United Nations principles. We are proud that
the European Union is funding those efforts.
The goal of terrorists is to impose their ideologies
on the African people and African States through force
and deadly action. In addition to the fight we are waging
on the ground against terrorism, we must make societies
more resilient and deal with the socioeconomic factors
underlying insecurity by addressing climate change and
education and supporting civil-society organizations
that work for the participation of women and young
people and the defence of human rights.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank you, Sir, for convening us today, which is
consistent with your personal leadership on security,
including the creation of the Accra Initiative, with the
robust defence by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) of democratic values in
the region. Moreover, you have joined us this morning
from the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, a reminder that climate is a threat multiplier
and another challenge to peace and security in Africa
and around the world. I would like to join others
in thanking the Deputy Secretary-General and our
briefers today. And I would like to make three points to
contribute to today’s discussion.
First, we welcome and endorse the calls we have
heard today for a holistic response to terrorism, an
integrated approach to tackling the conditions that give
rise to terrorism while protecting those at most risk.
We welcome the Accra Initiative’s work to address
the security situation and strengthen cooperation on
26/27

10/11/2022

regional security and intelligence. The United Kingdom
is working with the Ghanaian Government to consider
how best to support the Accra Initiative. Besides
our efforts to limit the spread of violence, including
terrorism, we are working with journalists to promote
moderate voices. We are supporting communities in
managing land more effectively and withstanding the
challenges of climate shocks in regions threatened by
violent extremist groups. We also want to emphasize
that we cannot ignore the destabilizing role the
Wagner Group is playing in the region. It is a driver of
conflict and an exploiter of natural resources wherever
it operates. Whatever the question, Wagner is not
the answer.
Secondly, in the fight against terrorism, it is
counterproductive to violate human rights and
international law. The Council has consistently
stressed that the fight against terrorism has to abide
by international human rights and humanitarian law.
In our experience, putting respect for human rights
at the centre of counter-terrorism campaigns, and in
close cooperation with civil society, will bolster their
effectiveness, counter radicalization and build resilient
communities. And that fight will be successful only with
the meaningful participation of women, who in many
cases are disproportionately affected by terrorism.
Thirdly, terrorism and violent extremism are
transnational problems that require a coordinated
international response. We have heard a lot this
morning about the important role of the Accra
Initiative, ECOWAS, the African Union and many
other regional organizations. And I want to join others
in emphasizing the importance of the United Nations
system — not just the Office of Counter-Terrorism, but
also in implementing the mandates that are agreed by
the Council, including the provisions on United Nations
human rights monitoring.
Like others, we look forward to the New Agenda
for Peace as an important contribution to addressing the
triple challenge that terrorism poses to peace, security
and development.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your presence at this meeting today and for your
leadership. And I thank the Ghanaian presidency for
organizing this important briefing. I also want to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Ms. Von Seherr-Thoss and
Ms. Ero for their briefings.
22-68329

10/11/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Less than two weeks ago, Al-Shabaab detonated two
car bombs in Mogadishu, killing more than 100 people
and injuring many others. Lives in Africa are once
again being shattered by the blight of terrorism. But that
terrorist attack was not an isolated one. Regrettably,
those attacks are an all-too-common occurrence across
the African continent, particularly in the Sahel and
Western Africa, where violence is now expanding into
coastal States. Other regions have also been blighted by
terrorism, including the Horn of Africa, the Lake Chad
basin and Mozambique. Last year, Africa accounted
for nearly half of all global terrorism-related deaths,
with groups such as the Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin, Boko Haram and the Islamic State-West
Africa Province leaving a trail of death and destruction
in their wake.
The Council’s response to acts of terror takes a
familiar approach. We issue words of condemnation,
condolence and solidarity. And words matter, but
they are not enough. The key to tackling the terrorist
threat in Africa is addressing the underlying drivers
of terrorism and violent extremism. We know that
communities affected by conflict, poverty, inequality,
poor governance and human rights violations and abuses
are more vulnerable to radicalization and recruitment.
Pressures on local communities are compounded by
the global food security crisis. We also know that
the climate crisis is an exacerbating factor in armed
conflict. Terrorist organizations are exploiting those in
vulnerable conditions for recruitment purposes.
Ireland’s view is that overly militarized counterterrorism efforts can be ineffective or even counterproductive in the long term. Comprehensive responses
look beyond security measures alone. The Council’s
efforts must therefore address the drivers of terrorism
and violent extremism in a more holistic manner,
as part of a One United Nations approach. We must
work closely with the African Union (AU), African
subregional organizations and African Member
States. In that regard, Ireland welcomes the work of
the Independent High-level Panel on Security and

S/PV.9188

Development in the Sahel. We hope that the Panel’s
findings and recommendations can pave the way for
long-awaited progress on strengthening international
coordination to address the crisis in the region. We
also recognize the need for predictable and sustainable
financing for United Nations-authorized, AU-led peace
support operations. We anticipate that the SecretaryGeneral’s upcoming report on the issue will prompt
an open and frank discussion, as well as providing a
window of opportunity to make real, concrete progress.
For Ireland, human rights must remain at the
core of counter-terrorism responses. Human rights
violations committed in the context of counterterrorism operations drive radicalization and feed
terrorist narratives. Counter-terrorism measures must
always comply with international law, particularly
international human rights law. Effective counterterrorism responses also demand whole-of-society,
gender-responsive approaches. That requires the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women and the
inclusion of young people, as well as engagement with
civil society.
Terrorism not only helps to create humanitarian
crises, but it also undermines humanitarian activity
and endangers humanitarian actors. Council-mandated
measures to counter terrorism, including sanctions, are
therefore crucial to deterring and addressing terrorist
threats. However, those tools can also have unintended
negative humanitarian effects. To address that issue,
Ireland, together with our United States colleagues,
has introduced a draft resolution providing for a
humanitarian exemption across all sanctions regimes.
We urge all Council members to support that initiative,
thereby allowing aid to reach populations at risk.
In conclusion, the Council must do more to prevent
and counter the terrorist threat in Africa. Failure
to do so would risk eroding many of the hard-won
development gains achieved over the past three decades
in the region. And failure is simply not an option.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

22-6832927/27
