S/2005/682

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 October 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 27 October 2005 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Central Africa from 4 to 10 November 2005. The
mission will be led by Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière of France. The
members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference of the mission, which
are annexed hereto.
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière (France), head of mission
Ambassador Abdallah Baali (Algeria)
Ambassador Alberto D’Alotto (Argentina)
Ambassador Simon Bodéhoussè Idohou (Benin)
Ms. Irene Vida Gala (Brazil)
Mr. Cheng Jingye (China)
Ambassador Ellen Margrethe Løj (Denmark)
Ambassador Adamantios Th. Vassilakis (Greece)
Ambassador Kenzo Oshima (Japan)
Ambassador Lauro L. Baja (Philippines)
Ambassador Mihnea I. Motoc (Romania)
Ambassador Alexander V. Konuzin (Russian Federation)
Mr. Justin McKenzie Smith (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland)
Ambassador Augustine P. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania)
Mr. William J. Brencick (United States)
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Mihnea I. Motoc
President of the Security Council

05-57561 (E) 281005

*0557561*

S/2005/682

Annex to the letter dated 27 October 2005 from the President of
the Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
[Original: French]
[26 October 2005]

Security Council mission to Central Africa, 4 to 10 November 2005
General elements
1.
The mission will underscore the importance of the resources committed by the
United Nations to peacekeeping in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi and the need for a clear, unequivocal commitment on the part of national
and regional actors.
2.
It will emphasize the unity of the Security Council. It will recall the Council’s
attachment to respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of all the States in the region.
3.

Peace in Africa’s Great Lakes region has never been so close.

4.
The mission will stress the importance of achieving sustainable peace and
security and stability for all countries in the region. It will welcome the efforts
already made by countries in the region to resolve their differences through peaceful
dialogue and consultations and the establishment of confidence-building measures
and mechanisms, and will encourage them to continue to do so.
5.
The success of the transition in Burundi is an encouraging sign for the whole
region.
6.
All that has been achieved will be jeopardized, however, if the Congolese
transition is not completed by the 30 June 2006 deadline.
7.
The international community’s investment in the organization of free elections
open to all in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is unprecedented.
8.
The Council will be especially vigilant with regard to those who might seek to
obstruct the transition process, particularly those who might act in violation of the
arms embargo in the Democratic Republic of the Congo or refuse to participate in
the processes of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration or disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or resettlement and the integration of
the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
9.
The Council has condemned the violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The parties
and Governments concerned must ensure, inter alia by arresting persons for whom
an arrest warrant has been issued by the International Criminal Court, that those
responsible for such violations are brought to justice and that human rights and
international humanitarian law are respected.
10. The Council remains vigilant with regard to cases of sexual abuse committed
by United Nations personnel. The mission will welcome the action taken by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) and the United Nations Operation in Burundi (ONUB) to investigate
allegations of such abuse, whatever the category of personnel involved, and to

2

S/2005/682

institute preventive measures, notably through training. It will reaffirm the zerotolerance policy, the need for troop-contributing States to take the necessary
disciplinary and judicial measures and the need to attend fully to the victims.
11. The mission will examine, with the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi and with officials of
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the question of children in armed conflict, inter
alia in the context of the implementation of resolution 1612 (2005).
Democratic Republic of the Congo
12. The transition must culminate in the holding of free elections by 30 June 2006.
There is no alternative scenario.
13. The Council has made an exceptional effort to assist the electoral process by
increasing the logistical and human resources of MONUC.
14.

It fully supports the work of the Independent Electoral Commission.

15. The Council has noted the significant progress made: the voting on a balanced
Constitution and the smooth conduct of the voter registration process.
16.

This progress is not enough, however:
• The electoral law must be considered by Parliament without delay
• An increased effort will have to be made by the transitional authorities, with
the support of the International Committee for Support to the Transition and
the international financial institutions, in the area of governance
• Army and police training efforts must be stepped up; participants in the
transition process must, without delay, resume sending former combatants to
centres de brassage, as provided for in the second phase of the plan for
integrating the army
• Implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
programme must be accelerated

and reintegration

17.

All protagonists of the transition process must contribute to it.

18.

The Council will not accept any questioning of these objectives.

19. Everyone must continue to ensure that no support is given to those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo who do not share this objective.
20. The international community has devoted huge efforts to trying to solve the
problem of the presence of armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
21. The strengthening of MONUC in the Kivus has made it possible to limit the
capacity of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) to cause
harm, as well as to prevent further incursions on Rwandan soil.
22. The Council is determined to step up the pressure on the foreign armed groups
present in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in conjunction
with the initiatives being taken within the framework of the tripartite process.
23. Cooperation with the group of experts responsible for verifying compliance
with the arms embargo is an obligation for all States.

3

S/2005/682

24. The Council supports the efforts to form integrated brigades of the Congolese
army in order to increase the military pressure on FDLR.
25. The Council has also recommended a number of measures (customs control
and air traffic control, in particular), both nationally and regionally, to improve
monitoring of the embargo.
26. The Council has noted with satisfaction the creation by the Congolese
authorities of a focal point to ensure the proper application of the embargo.
27. The mission will reiterate the Council’s readiness to support the efforts of the
transitional authorities to combat impunity in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
28. The Council is determined to consider individual sanctions against those who
violate the arms embargo in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Burundi
29. The success of the transition augurs well for the future of Burundi and that of
the region as a whole.
30. This success was achieved through dialogue, sharing and consensus, a path
that Burundi must continue to follow.
31. The international community will remain heavily involved in Burundi: the
renewal of the mandate of ONUB on 1 December (and its adjustments to the
progress of the political process) and the creation of the Forum of Partners will be
an illustration of this involvement.
32.

It will be the Forum’s task to:
• Support the Burundi authorities in implementing the reforms provided for in
the Arusha Agreement
• Mobilize international assistance for the reconstruction of Burundi

33.

Improvement in the security situation must be consolidated.

34. The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme must be
completed, including the effective reintegration of former combatants.
35. The Forces nationales de libération (Palipehutu-FNL), which pose a threat to
the security of Burundi and of the region as a whole, must join the peace camp
without delay. The international community supports the regional initiative to that
end.
36. The Council encourages the Burundi authorities to work with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to put in place a mechanism for ending
impunity and promoting reconciliation.
Rwanda
37. The mission will welcome the positive contribution of Rwanda to the success
of the transition process in Burundi.

4

S/2005/682

38. The stabilization of the Great Lakes region is in Rwanda’s interest. The
Council encourages the Government of Rwanda to continue to cooperate with its
neighbours to that end, particularly in the framework of the tripartite process.
39. The holding by 20 June 2006 of free elections open to all in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will be decisive for restoring lasting peace in the region.
40. Everyone must continue to ensure that no support is given to those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo who do not share this objective.
41. The international community has devoted huge efforts to trying to solve the
problem of the presence of armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
42. The strengthening of MONUC in the Kivus has made it possible to limit the
capacity of FDLR to cause harm, as well as to prevent further incursions on
Rwandan soil.
43. The Council is determined to step up the pressure on the foreign armed groups
present in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in conjunction
with the initiatives being taken within the framework of the tripartite process.
44. The Council supports the efforts to form integrated brigades of the Congolese
army in order to increase the military pressure on FDLR.
45. The Council has welcomed with satisfaction the measures taken by the
Government of Rwanda, with the support of the international community, to
repatriate FDLR members returning to Rwanda, in conformity with the applicable
norms of international law and respecting the rights and freedoms of the human
person. It encourages the Government to give more publicity to its commitments.
46. Cooperation with the group of experts responsible for verifying compliance
with the arms embargo is an obligation for all States.
47. The Council has also recommended a number of measures (customs control
and air traffic control, in particular), both nationally and regionally, to improve
monitoring of the embargo.
48. The Council is determined to consider individual sanctions against those who
violate the arms embargo in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Uganda
49. The Council pays tribute to the decisive role of Uganda in the success of the
transition process in Burundi.
50. The stability of the entire Great Lakes region is in the interest of Uganda.
Coordination between capitals, particularly in the framework of the tripartite
process, is a step in the right direction and must be intensified.
51. The success of the transition would be threatened were the elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo not to take place by 30 June 2006.
52.

No support must be given to those who do share this objective.

53. The Council is concerned at the continuing tensions in the Ituri district and
wonders about the outside support received by the militias responsible for the
situation.

5

S/2005/682

54. Cooperation with the group of experts responsible for verifying compliance
with the arms embargo is an obligation for all States.
55. The Council has also recommended a number of measures (customs control
and air traffic control, in particular), both nationally and regionally, to improve
monitoring of the embargo.
56. The Council is determined to consider individual sanctions against those who
violate the arms embargo in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
57. The disarmament and repatriation of the Allied Democratic Forces/National
Movement for the Liberation of Uganda must be taken into account within the
framework of the tripartite dialogue. If necessary, MONUC could, to the extent
permitted by its current mandate, provide assistance to the process.
58. The Council remains concerned at the grave humanitarian situation resulting
from the persistence of the conflict in northern Uganda.
59. The mission will discuss with the Ugandan authorities ways and means of
resolving this conflict, including implementation of the amnesty law for members of
the Lord’s Resistance Army who are not responsible for the most serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law, in the context of recent attempts
at negotiation and the proceedings instituted by the International Criminal Court to
bring to justice those responsible for serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
60. The Council has called upon the States of the region to increase their
cooperation with a view to halting the activities of illegal armed groups, reiterated
its attachment to the sovereignty of States and emphasized that any threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity of a State is contrary to the purposes and
principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations.
United Republic of Tanzania
61. The Council pays tribute to the stabilizing role of the United Republic of
Tanzania in the Great Lakes region. It is grateful to it for having given shelter to
several hundreds of thousands of refugees in recent years.
62. The success of the transitional process in Burundi is encouraging for the
region as a whole.
63. This success must be consolidated by solving the problem of FNL. The
Council fully supports the mediation undertaken by the Government of the United
Republic of Tanzania.
64. The conditions and modalities for the orderly return of the many Burundian
and Congolese refugees in the United Republic of Tanzania to their countries of
origin must be reviewed in order to be able to speed up the return flows observed in
recent months. The Council is gratified that the authorities have cooperated
constructively with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and neighbouring countries to this end.

6
