S/PRST/2011/6

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 March 2011
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6494th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 March 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council stresses the need for a comprehensive strategy to
encourage the establishment of peace and stability in Somalia through the
collaborative efforts of all stakeholders in the fields of political process,
security sector building, humanitarian relief, protection of civilians, human
rights, socio-economic development, counter-terrorism and combating piracy.
The Council reiterates its grave concern at the continued instability in Somalia
which has led to a multitude of problems, including terrorism, acts of piracy
and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia and a dire humanitarian
situation.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the Djibouti Agreement
as the basis for the resolution of the conflict in Somalia. It urges the
Transitional Federal Institutions to broaden and consolidate the reconciliation
process, intensify efforts to complete the outstanding transitional tasks and
prioritize the timely completion of the constitution and the delivery of basic
services to the population, paving the ground for a better future for Somalis,
including their economic and social development and the realization of their
human rights.
“The Security Council welcomes the work of Mr. Augustine P. Mahiga,
Special Representative of the Secretary General, to support the Somali people
in reaching agreement on post-transitional arrangements in consultation with
the international community. It strongly urges the Transitional Federal
Institutions to engage in this process in a more constructive, open and
transparent manner that promotes broader political dialogue and participation
in line with the spirit of the Djibouti Agreement. The Council requests the
Secretary General to assess, in his regular reports delivered to the Council
before the end of the transitional period, the respect for these principles. These
principles are essential for future co-operation between the international
community and the Transitional Federal Institutions. The Security Council
notes that the transitional period will end in August 2011. The Council regrets
the decision by the Transitional Federal Parliament to extend its mandate

11-25890 (E) 100311

*1125890*

S/PRST/2011/6

unilaterally and without carrying out necessary reforms and urges the
Transitional Federal Institutions to refrain from any further unilateral action.
“The Security Council expresses its strong support for the work of SRSG
Mahiga, welcomes his efforts and those of the UN, and calls for an increased
UN presence and increased coherence of UN activities in Somalia.
“The Security Council affirms the importance of the development of
government institutions and the strengthening of civilian capacity building
across Somalia, including ensuring the participation of women in public life,
the prevention and resolution of conflict, peacebuilding and socio-economic
reconstruction. The Council urges the international community to mobilize
additional support to the TFG, local and regional administrations in this regard.
“The Security Council expresses its serious concern about the worsening
humanitarian situation in Somalia, and the impact of the current drought,
which have left over 2 million Somalis in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance and have resulted in significantly higher flows of refugees to
neighbouring countries. The Security Council also expressed concern at the
continuing decline in humanitarian funding for Somalia. The Security Council
commends the work of humanitarian aid workers and urges all member states
to contribute to current and future consolidated humanitarian appeals.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the targeting and obstruction
of the delivery of humanitarian aid by Al-Shabaab and other armed groups in
Somalia and demands that all parties ensure full, safe and unhindered access
for the timely delivery of humanitarian aid.
“The Security Council emphasizes the importance of strengthening the
Somali Security forces including the development of effective command and
control. While emphasizing the Somalis hold the primary responsibility for
achieving political stability, security and the rule of law, the Council urges
member States and regional and international organizations to contribute
generously and promptly to the United Nations Trust Fund for the Somali
security institutions, and to provide assistance to the Somali security forces.
“The Security Council recognizes the progress made by AMISOM and
Somali National Security Forces in consolidating security and stability in
Mogadishu. The Council deeply regrets the loss of life in the recent fighting
and recognizes the significant sacrifices made by AMISOM and Somali
National Security Forces. The Council expresses its sincere gratitude to the
Governments of Burundi and Uganda for their commitment to AMISOM, and
expresses its condolences to them and to the TFG and the Somali people.
“The Security Council condemns all attacks, including terrorist attacks
on the Transitional Federal Government, AMISOM, and the civilian population
by armed opposition groups, and foreign fighters, particularly Al Shabaab.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of predictable, reliable
and timely resources for AMISOM in order for it to better fulfil its mandate.
The Security Council calls on the international community to make
contributions urgently and without caveats to the UN Trust Fund for AMISOM
or directly in support of AMISOM. It notes the recommendations on Somalia
of the Africa Union Peace and Security Council of 15 October 2010 and

2

11-25890

S/PRST/2011/6

underlines its intention to keep the situation under review. It encourages the
full deployment of 4000 additional AMISOM troops as authorized by the
Security Council Resolution 1964 as soon as possible.
“The Security Council stresses the responsibility of all parties and armed
groups in Somalia to comply with their obligations to protect the civilian
population from the effects of hostilities, in particular by avoiding any
indiscriminate or excessive use of force. The Security Council expresses deep
concern about the continuing violations and abuses committed against children
in Somalia by parties to the conflict and urges the immediate implementation
of all conclusions of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in
Somalia.
“The Security Council remains gravely concerned about the threat posed
by piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia, especially by the
extended range of the piracy threat into the western Indian Ocean, the increase
in pirate capacities and the increasing violence by the pirates. The Security
Council condemns in the strongest terms such violence, including hostage
taking, murder and other acts of violence against individuals. The Security
Council recognizes that the ongoing instability in Somalia contributes to the
problem of piracy and armed robbery and stresses the need for a
comprehensive response to tackle piracy and its underlying causes.
“The Security Council calls upon all Member States, in particular those
in the region, to refrain from any action in contravention of the Somalia and
Eritrea arms embargo and to take all necessary steps to hold violators
accountable, and affirms the importance of enhancing the monitoring of the
Somalia and Eritrea arms embargoes through persistent and vigilant
investigation into the violations, bearing in mind that strict enforcement of the
arms embargoes will improve the overall security situation in the region.
“The Security Council welcomes the endeavors of the African Union
(AU), Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and other
regional organizations to promote peace and stability in Somalia and reiterates
its full support to AMISOM and its troop and police contributing countries,
especially Burundi and Uganda.”

11-25890

3
