S/PV.7199

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7199th meeting

Tuesday, 17 June 2014, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zagaynov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Millicay
Ms. King
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Gálvez
Mr. Cai Weiming
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. McKell
Mr. Lord

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

14-43238 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1443238*

S/PV.7199

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: Today’s briefing marks the
nineteenth visit of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court to the Council to update
its members on the situation in Darfur. December 2014
will mark the twentieth such briefing, and March 2015
will mark 10 years since the Council referred the Darfur
situation to the International Criminal Court. None of
these milestones gives cause for celebration.
In the close to 10 years since the Council’s
much-lauded referral of the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC), systematic and
widespread crimes have continued to be committed with
total impunity in Darfur. It is indeed an understatement
to say that we have failed the Darfur victims who
continue to bear the brunt of those crimes. Over the past
years, a number of players, including the International
Criminal Court, the United Nations and others, have
been engaged in efforts to bring justice and other forms
of relief to Darfur’s victims. The time has now come for
us to take a critical look at the impact of all our efforts
vis-à-vis Darfur. What have we achieved, in concrete
terms? Have we lived up to the expectations of Darfur’s
victims? Sadly, the intellectually honest answer is a
resounding “no”.
While the International Criminal Court may have
significantly contributed to raising awareness of the
massive and systematic crimes committed in Darfur, the
Court’s best contribution to ending impunity — through
a judicial process that independently, fairly and
impartially assesses the evidence and determines guilt
or innocence — is yet to be achieved. The reality is
that the International Criminal Court’s judicial process

2/16

17/06/2014

cannot take place without arrests. Darfur suspects
remain at large and no meaningful steps have been
taken to apprehend them and bring them to justice. To
be clear, the Court does not have the power to arrest
indictees. It is the responsibility of States and others
to arrest and surrender indictees to the custody of the
International Criminal Court.
There are critical questions to which Darfur’s
victims are seeking answers from the Council. How
much longer will legality and accountability be
sacrificed at the altar of political expediency? How
much suffering should Darfur’s victims endure for the
Council to act decisively on the situation in Darfur?
The Court remains firmly convinced that enforcing
warrants of arrest in Darfur is a key element of peace
and stability and of ending the victims’ suffering.
Today we are in the same position we have been
in since 2007, when warrants of arrests were issued
against Mr. Ahmad Harun and Mr. Ali Kushayb. Even
with the addition of another three arrest warrants — two
for Mr. Omer Al-Bashir in 2009 and 2010, and one for
Mr. Abdel Raheem Hussein in 2012 — the situation
has not changed. It is a sad reality that action from the
Council has not been forthcoming when it matters most
for Darfur’s victims. That not only reflects badly on the
international criminal justice system, of which the ICC
is only a part, it also greatly undermines the Council’s
credibility as an instrument of international peace and
security. The time is long overdue for the Government
of the Sudan’s consistent defiance of Security Council
resolutions to be met by decisive action from the
Council.
Recent allegations that reporting from the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) has been subject to manipulation, with
the intentional effect of covering up crimes committed
against civilians and peacekeepers, in particular those
committed by the Government of the Sudan, should be
a matter of concern for all of us. These allegations call
for a thorough, independent and public inquiry. While
the responsibility for such manipulation may lie with
a handful of individuals, it impugns the credibility
of the mission as a whole and deprives advocates of
peace and justice of an essential tool for evaluating
the ever-evolving situation in Darfur. The victims in
Darfur, and the peacekeepers who have sacrificed their
lives, deserve better. We all do. It is to be hoped that
the Council — and, indeed, the United Nations as a
whole — will take immediate and concrete steps to

14-43238

17/06/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

establish the full facts and take appropriate action if
the allegations prove to be well-founded.
The implementation of the non-essential contacts
policy, particularly with regard to the Darfur situation,
deserves closer scrutiny within the United Nations
system. As my Office suggested in its June 2013 report
(see S/PV.6974), the application of the non-essential
contacts policy requires a rigorous assessment as to
whether such contacts are indeed strictly required for
carrying out essential United Nations-mandated duties.
Without such an ongoing assessment, both before and
after contacts with those subject to the Court’s arrest
warrants, the potential for those individuals to take
advantage of the goodwill of the United Nations to
legitimize their own actions is great. In order to dispel
misperceptions about United Nations engagements with
indictees, the Organization might wish, to the extent
that it is possible, to make public all its contacts with
those subject to ICC warrants of arrest, including, as
far as is necessary, providing explanations of why such
contacts are deemed to have been strictly required for
carrying out essential United Nations-mandated duties.
We have taken note of Mr. Omer Al-Bashir’s
travels during this reporting period, including his visits
to States that are party to the Rome Statute. States
parties are clearly obliged to cooperate with the ICC
in arresting and surrendering those subject to ICC
warrants. In a recent Chamber decision, the judges
made it clear that States parties must consult with
them about any problems they have identified that may
hinder their cooperation with the Court in effecting
arrests. On the issue of immunity, the judges also found
that there could be no lack of clarity about Mr. Omer
Al-Bashir’s lack of immunity under article 27 of the
Rome Statute.
The question of Mr. Bashir’s travels remains a
matter before the Council. Such travels are not simply a
challenge for the States parties that he may visit, it is a
challenge for all States to provide the necessary support
and assistance to one another to ensure that an effective
arrest and surrender can take place. In that regard, it is
worth recalling that in addition to the obligations of the
Rome Statute, all States Members of the United Nations
have been urged by the Council to cooperate with the
Court’s investigations and prosecutions in Darfur. As
the Pre-Trial Chamber recently emphasized,
“When the Security Council, acting under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, refers
a situation to the Court as constituting a threat to

S/PV.7199

international peace and security, it must be expected
that the Council would respond by way of taking
such measures which are considered appropriate,
if there is an apparent failure on the part of States
parties to the Statute or the Sudan to cooperate in
fulfilling the Court’s mandate as entrusted to them
by the Council. Otherwise, if there is no followup action on the part of the Security Council, any
referral by the Council to the ICC under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter would never
achieve its ultimate goal, namely, to put an end to
impunity.”
Accordingly, the Chamber concluded, “any such
referral would become futile.”
I share the deep concern of UNAMID’s Deputy
Joint Special Representative for Political Affairs,
Joseph Mutaboba, and the United Nations Resident
and Humanitarian Coordinator in the Sudan, Ali
Al-Za’tari, about the increasing violence in Darfur
and the immense number of people who continue to be
displaced. I likewise deplore the increasing constraints
being put on those who are trying to aid the displaced,
making it more and more difficult for them even to
properly monitor the conditions of the displaced. The
deliberate obstruction of humanitarian aid must end.
Equally worrying are the ongoing patterns of
aerial bombardments and armed attacks on civilian
populations by militia and Janjaweed, and in particular
the involvement of the newest iteration of the Janjaweed,
the Rapid Support Forces, led by Mohamed Hamdan.
It is particularly disturbing that in February the Rapid
Support Forces shifted their operations from North
Kordofan to Darfur. My Office’s factual indicators
seem to illustrate a similar pattern of indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks on civilians by the Rapid
Support Forces. In all the reported attacks, crimes
against civilians were allegedly committed from the end
of February onwards, coinciding with the deployment
of the Rapid Support Forces to Darfur. In 12 of the 17
reported attacks, civilian villages were set ablaze. In
the majority of the attacks, the presence of rebels in
the attacked areas is not reported, while in others the
information available is ambiguous. All of the attacks
were carried out in areas located in South and North
Darfur.
This reporting period has also witnessed an
increasing pattern of gang rapes of women and girls.
I have just released a comprehensive policy paper on
sexual and gender-based crimes. My Office recognizes

14-432383/16

S/PV.7199

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that sexual and gender-based crimes are among the
gravest of crimes under the Rome Statute. The policy
paper will guide the Office’s work in this area in Darfur
and all other situations under the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court.
Attacks on students, on civil society and on
local leaders — in particular the 21 January attack
in Zalingei, in central Darfur, in the course of which
security forces attacked and beat students who
were protesting military fees imposed on residents
in support of military operations — are also very
disturbing. Equally disturbing is the 3 April attack at
the University of Nyala, in South Darfur, during which
approximately 100 students were beaten and dispersed
with tear gas, with seven arrested. That followed a
demonstration against the arrest of four students who
had criticized the Government over ongoing killings,
lootings and burnings in Darfur. The use of violence
against unarmed civilians must be addressed.
Let me repeat what I have stated to the Council
many times before. The Government of the Sudan, as
the territorial State, has the primary responsibility and
is fully able to implement the warrants, consistent with
its sovereign authority. It has consistently failed to do
so. At the same time, it has also failed to provide any
meaningful measure of justice at the national level.
I look forward to constructively interacting with
the Council on the Darfur issue. What is needed is a
dramatic shift in the Council’s approach to arresting
Darfur suspects. I appreciate the efforts being made
to ensure that the Council produces a substantive
response to the eight outstanding communications from
the Court. Likewise, I believe that concerted efforts to
promote cooperation with the Court may help to fill the
gap. In that regard, I kindly call on all States and the
Council to find creative ways to support those among
them that may be most vulnerable to planned visits by
Mr. Omer Al-Bashir or other individuals wanted under
ICC arrest warrants.
I thank the members of the Council for their
attention and for remaining actively seized of the Darfur
situation. Darfur does not have to be a failure for the
Council, for the United Nations or for the International
Criminal Court. It is incumbent upon all of us to take
concrete and effective action now to ensure that our
efforts to protect victims in Darfur show tangible
results and do not go down in history as an indefensible
failure.

4/16

17/06/2014

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for her briefing on the recent
developments in the Darfur situation.
Darfur was the first case the Security Council
referred to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
As such, the situation has given us an opportunity to
realize the vision of putting an end to impunity, through
close interplay between the Council and the ICC, for
those who committed serious crimes against the human
conscience. At the same time, the situation has imposed
upon us various challenges that we have to confront
in order to make the interplay more constructive and
relevant to the maintenance of international peace
and security. So far, the Council and the ICC have not
lived up to that expectation. The situation has been
tarnished by the lack of cooperation, not only on the
part of the Sudanese Government but also on the part
of other States, which have international obligations to
cooperate with the ICC.
Although the ICC has reported to the
Security Council that there have been instances of
non-cooperation, efforts within the Council to respond
to the reports were defeated because the Council failed
to forge unity on what would be the most proper way
to do so. It was the Security Council that referred the
situation to the ICC; therefore, follow-up action on the
part of the Council to the referral is not only fair but also
necessary. Despite the difficulties we face, the Council
and the ICC need to redouble their efforts to that end.
In addition, more rigorous consultations between the
United Nations and the ICC should be encouraged to
close any potential communications gap. Making their
respective work compatible and mutually reinforcing is
essential to bring justice and peace to the region.
The international community created the ICC out
of the conviction that holding perpetrators of serious
crimes against humanity accountable could prevent
the emergence of such criminals in future. The current
situation in Darfur seems to confirm that conviction
in the reverse. As the culture of impunity continues
to prevail, security in Darfur is deteriorating because
perpetrators do not need to be concerned about the
consequences of their crimes. The outcome is an ever

14-43238

17/06/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

worsening security situation and unabated human
suffering, driving many innocent people from their
homes. That vicious cycle must be stopped. Delivering
justice to those who have committed heinous crimes
is the first step to that end. A robust monitoring and
review of alleged crimes involving international human
rights and humanitarian laws, such as various forms of
attacks against civilians, should be stressed. Proactive
campaigns to pursue those who have committed sexual
and gender-based crimes against the most vulnerable
must be given top priority. International cooperation in
that regard needs to be further solicited.
The situation in Darfur and the role of the ICC
in it is a litmus test of our ability to bring peace and
stability through the pursuit of international criminal
justice. The Council needs to consider what support
it can render to the ICC to accomplish that goal. We
continue to work with other Council members and the
ICC in that vein.
Mr. Cai Weiming (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing.
Recently, the situation in Darfur has been generally
calm with some ups and downs. The Sudanese
Government has stepped up its preparations for the
national dialogue, actively implemented the Darfur
Peace Agreement, promoted communal reconciliation
and combated crimes. It has taken some positive steps
with regard to humanitarian access. China welcomes that
and supports the efforts by the Sudanese Government
in advancing the political process and reconciliation.
China is deeply concerned about the attacks against
civilians, United Nations peacekeepers and international
humanitarian relief workers that took place in Darfur.
We are deeply troubled by the increasing number of
internally displaced persons. We call on all armed rebel
groups to stop the violence immediately and take part
in the political process.
The United Nations plays an important role in
promoting a solution to the Darfur problem. China
supports and encourages dialogue and cooperation
between the United Nations and the Sudanese
Government and supports the important role of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur in maintaining peace and stability in Darfur.
The question of Darfur is very complicated, as it
involves the political process, security and stability,
development
and
reconstruction,
humanitarian
assistance and judicial justice. Among those aspects,

S/PV.7199

the political process is the most crucial. Only when
sustained progress in the political process is made, can
Darfur enjoy lasting peace, which will pave the way for
work in other areas, such as judicial justice and finding
a comprehensive solution to the Darfur question.
China has not changed its position on the ICC in
regard to Darfur.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for presenting her
nineteenth report on the situation in Darfur and the
Court’s ongoing judicial activities.
The Council is meeting again at a time when the
arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court against four individuals indicted for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and, for one of them, genocide
have not yet been executed. The Government of the
Sudan has the primary responsibility to comply with
resolution 1593 (2005) and to fully implement the
arrest warrants. It continues to refuse to do so. At the
same time, as the Prosector just recalled, the Sudanese
Government has failed to implement measures to
effectively fight impunity at the national level. More
generally, the report of the ICC Prosecutor reminds us
that, despite the 55 resolutions adopted by the Security
Council on the Sudan since 2004, almost none of
the requests contained in those resolutions has been
implemented. That is unacceptable.
It is with great concern that we note the cases of
non-cooperation with the Court. We are particularly
dismayed that the President of the Sudan, Omer
Al-Bashir, continues to make trips in the region,
including to States parties to the Rome Statute.
Since our last meeting with the Prosecutor, in
December (see S/PV.7080), the security and humanitarian
situation in Darfur has seriously deteriorated. That is
the result of an increase in conflicts between tribes
and communities, the deployment by the Sudanese
Government of Rapid Support Forces, attacks by rebel
groups and indiscriminate shelling by the Sudanese
Armed Forces. What is particularly worrying are the
serious abuses against civilians, particularly sexual
violence against women and violence against children.
The clashes are becoming more frequent and
increasingly deadly in many parts of Darfur. An
additional 320,000 people have been displaced in
Darfur since 1 January, bringing the total number of
internally displaced persons to over 2 million. We call

14-432385/16

S/PV.7199

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

on all parties to ensure free and unhindered access for
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and humanitarian actors throughout
Darfur. Serious threats continue to affect the safety
and security of humanitarian workers and UNAMID
personnel. Attacks that target them are unacceptable.
However, to date, none of the investigations by the
Sudanese authorities on attacks against Blue Helmets
has led to any convictions.
The report of Ms. Bensouda outlines the crimes
currently being perpetrated in Darfur that are likely to
fall under the Rome Statute. We encourage the Office
of the Prosecutor to continue to monitor the situation in
Darfur, to gather information on alleged crimes and to
consider opening new investigations into the situation
in Darfur. We take this opportunity to reiterate our
request to all Member States, whether they are parties
to the Rome Statute or not, and all regional and
international organizations to cooperate fully with the
ICC, as required by resolution 1593 (2005).
For its part, the Security Council should ensure
effective monitoring of cases referred to the ICC. It is
a question of credibility and efficiency. In that regard,
we strongly hope that the ongoing efforts aimed at
leading the Security Council to respond to the eight
formal communications that the Court has conveyed
to it to report cases of non-cooperation will soon bear
fruit. While the Security Council must be consistent,
Member States and the Secretariat should be likewise.
That applies in particular with regard to the elimination
of non-essential contacts with those accused. The
directives of the Secretary-General regarding contacts
between United Nations officials and those subject to
an arrest warrant or a summons issued by the Court
must be strictly observed.
We express our support for Ms. Bensouda’s
proposal that the Secretary-General initiate an
in-depth, independent and public investigation into
the allegations of information manipulation contained
in UNAMID reports, following the revelations made
recently by a former spokesperson of the Mission. It
is essential that the Security Council have the most
complete and reliable information possible on what is
happening in Darfur.
To conclude, I would like to assure the ICC
Prosecutor of Luxembourg’s complete support the
resolute work that her Office continues to carry out in the
fight against impunity for crimes committed in Darfur.
We join the call that Ms. Bensouda has launched today
6/16

17/06/2014

for stronger action by the Security Council and States
parties to the Rome Statute so that justice can finally be
rendered to the victims of the Darfur conflict. Indeed, a
lasting peace in Darfur will remain out of reach as long
as the persons accused of having committed war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide in Darfur do not
have to answer for their actions.
Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
presenting her nineteenth report in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005).
Argentina deplores the continued violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law in
Darfur. In resolution 2138 (2014), adopted in February,
the Security Council noted that it was imperative that
all parties refrain from any violence against civilians,
in particular vulnerable groups such as women and
children, and from committing violations and abuses
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law. In the same resolution, the Council deplored
the continuing obstacles to the work of the Panel of
Experts and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and called on the
Sudanese Government to lift the state of emergency in
Darfur and to ensure accountability for serious crimes.
Argentina once again commends the Office of the
Prosecutor’s focus on monitoring the crimes currently
being committed, including aerial bombardments
affecting civilians, which are clearly referred to in
resolution 2138 (2014); ground attacks against civilians,
which have escalated since February; continuing
sexual and gender-based violence, which has become
a prominent element of the conflict in Darfur; attacks
on human rights and civil society activists; kidnappings
of and attacks on humanitarian workers and UNAMID
staff; obstacles to access for humanitarian assistance and
peacekeeping personnel; and the forced displacement
of civilians, who now include 250,000 newly displaced,
thus bringing the number of internally displaced persons
in Darfur to 2 million people. Argentina, as always,
encourages the Prosecutor to continue to investigate
such acts, which may qualify as crimes under the Rome
Statute, and takes this opportunity to recognize the
value of the policy paper on sexual and gender-based
crimes published by the Office of the Prosector.
Another crucial aspect that the Prosecutor usually
highlights in her reports on Darfur is, of course, that
of cooperation. The Sudanese Government is required,
14-43238

17/06/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

under resolution 1593 (2005), to cooperate with the
Court and render all assistance necessary. The States
parties to the Rome Statute are obliged to cooperate
under that instrument. But the resolution also urges
all other United Nations Member States and members
of regional organizations to cooperate with the Court.
Implementing the arrest warrants is an essential element
of that cooperation. Currently, the arrest warrants
issued by the Court since 2007 on charges of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity have still not
been implemented. Argentina regrets the position taken
by the Government of the Sudan vis-à-vis the Court,
since the Sudan’s own citizens continue to be victims
of serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
It is also regrettable that other States, including
States parties to the Rome Statute, have disregarded their
obligation to cooperate with the Court. Consequently,
Argentina again urges all States to act as pursuant
to the Rome Statute, and also calls on regional and
subregional organizations, as presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/12 notes, to cooperate with the Court in
order to prevent impunity from prevailing.
The issue of cooperation with the Court leads
directly to the follow-up by the Council of its referrals
to the ICC. The Prosecutor herself recalls in her
briefing the Court’s eight communications to the
Council on cases of non-cooperation. It is of concern
that none of those has received an answer or has been
acted upon by the Council. In its presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/2, the Council committed to an effective
follow-up of referrals to the Court. To date, however,
despite the efforts of many Council members, it has
not been possible to reach an understanding on the
mechanism for that follow up. We again urge all Council
members to advocate for the responsible follow-up of
the referrals, since this body cannot ignore its referrals
to the Court.
Both General Assembly resolution 67/295 and
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/5 recognize the
issuance by the Secretary-General of guidelines on
non-essential contacts with officials of the Organization
by persons who are the subject of arrest warrants of
the International Criminal Court. That is due to the
recognition of the crucial role of cooperation with the
Court for the success of its mandate, including in cases
of referrals by the Security Council.
Argentina, not in its capacity as a State party to
the Statute but as a Member of the Organization, has

S/PV.7199

always maintained that the Secretary-General must
ensure the strict implementation of the guidelines. In
that regard, my country agrees with the Prosecutor
on the need for a rigorous assessment of the necessity
of every such contact in order to comply with United
Nations mandates. Furthermore, any contact that is
deemed essential following such an assessment must
be brought to the attention of the Court before it takes
place. We also encourage the Secretary-General to
inform Member States, which adopt such mandates.
Such measures are necessary because contacts with
United Nations officials, in particular senior officials
and field staff, including as part of a peacekeeping
operation, could not only affect the Court but also
fundamentally undermine the credibility of the United
Nations. We are also concerned about the Prosecutor’s
statement with regard to the way in which UNAMID’s
reporting of crimes committed against civilians and
peacekeeping forces may have been handled. We
believe that it is imperative that the Secretary-General
investigate such allegations.
As on every occasion that the Council talks about
the International Criminal Court, allow me recall that
there are two aspects of referrals to the Court, including
in the case of Darfur, with which Argentina does not
agree. One is the exception of the Court’s jurisdiction
for nationals of States not party to the Rome Statute and
the other is the statement that the United Nations will
not bear the costs of the referral. Argentina’s position in
that regard is well known. I will therefore not reiterate
it but will, however, repeat that both such matters are
not in compliance with the Rome Statute.
The Court is an institution that was founded on the
common understanding that serious crimes should not
go unpunished and that justice and the punishment of
perpetrators help to prevent such crimes. I therefore
wish to commend the work of the Prosecutor and of her
Office on the follow-up of this referral by the Security
Council. I thank her for her continuing readiness to
dialogue with the Council. Finally, I would like to once
again reaffirm Argentina’s strong commitment to the
International Criminal Court.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her briefing. Nigeria notes the concerns of the Office
of the Prosecutor about the recent allegations of the
manipulation of reporting by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
of the cover-up of crimes committed against civilians
and peacekeepers. We share those concerns and urge

14-432387/16

S/PV.7199

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Secretary-General to look into the allegations with
a view to determining the truth. It is essential that the
United Nations report on UNAMID convey the truth
about the situation on the ground. That is crucial to
maintaining the integrity not only of United Nations
reporting but also of the United Nations itself.
We are greatly concerned about the increase in
violence in Darfur, which has had a negative impact
on the humanitarian situation. The displacement of
more than 200,000 persons in the first three months of
2014 alone underscores the magnitude of the problem.
We are deeply disturbed by the difficulty experienced
by humanitarian actors, including the United Nations,
in terms of access to those in need. We deplore the
restrictions placed on humanitarian agencies, which
have made it increasingly challenging for them to
monitor the number of people displaced from their
homes.
The report indicates that the Office of the
Prosecutor is currently monitoring several trends that
could constitute crimes under the Rome Statute. Those
include alleged attacks by rebel groups on civilians, as
well as alleged attacks on humanitarian aid workers and
peacekeepers. The dangers to humanitarian workers
and peacekeepers in Darfur are real. Only last month,
a Rwandan peacekeeper tragically lost his life while
mediating a peace meeting in the village of Kabkabiya.
Three other peacekeepers were wounded on the same
occasion. The picture is the same for humanitarian
workers, who work in extremely challenging
circumstances and at great risk to their safety.
We look forward to seeing the outcome of the
monitoring activities of the Office of the Prosecutor in
Darfur.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and
we welcome the presence of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda. We
also thank her for her briefing to the Council on the
situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
The adoption of resolution 1593 (2005) under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, which
referred the situation of Darfur to the International
Criminal Court, provides for the Court’s jurisdiction to
extend to a State not party to the Rome Statute, in this
case the Sudan, and compels it to cooperate with the
Court. The Council has the primary responsibility for
following up the situation in Darfur in the International

8/16

17/06/2014

Criminal Court, which should not be seen as having
been discharged solely by referring the situation to the
Court, holding such debates or receiving briefings from
the Prosecutor.
The eight communications from the Court to the
Council on non-cooperation in the case of Darfur
are an example of the need for that follow-up. In that
regard, the Security Council should continue due
dialogue with the Court and its Prosecutor and respond
to the Court’s requests. The silence of this body with
regard to those requests indicates a failure in meeting
its responsibility. Chile therefore supports effectively
following up the situations referred by the Council to
the Court, to ensure the effectiveness and impact of the
Council’s resolutions.
In order to ensure successful investigations and
prosecutions by the International Criminal Court,
States must duly cooperate, either by virtue of being
parties to the Rome Statute or in line with Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations, as provided in
resolution 1593 (2005).
The specific case of Darfur has generated a series
of situations of non-cooperation with the Court, in
particular and quite regrettably on behalf of the Sudan
as well as on the part of other States. Chile therefore
reiterates its call upon all the relevant States to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court and to
comply with the rulings handed down by the Court.
The humanitarian situation in Darfur as described
in the recent report is even more worrisome than it
was in the Prosecutor’s previous report. This year,
the number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) has
surpassed the numbers of 2011 and 2012. All told that
is half as much as those who had to flee their homes in
2013, resulting in more than 2 million displaced persons
in Darfur since the conflict erupted.
We are also concerned that, according to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, serious
crimes falling under the Rome Statute continue to be
perpetrated. We underscore the need for ongoing support
to those institutions aimed at strengthening respect for
the rule of law and human rights, while promoting full
compliance with the obligation to cooperate with the
Court and with the Prosecutor.
On repeated occasions the Council has addressed
the humanitarian situation in Darfur. In particular we
call for immediate compliance with resolutions 2138
(2014) and 2148 (2014), referring to the need to cease the
14-43238

17/06/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

violence, particularly against civilians and especially
against women and children.
My delegation welcomes the briefing on the recent
judicial activities of the Prosecutor’s Office, especially
in the case of Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain, and the
registering of individuals outside of the Sudan who face
the Court’s arrest warrants.
Chile underscores the serious nature of the crimes
set out in the report, including aerial bombardments
against civilians, sexual and gender-based crimes and
crimes against human rights activists and members of
civil society and community leaders. Abductions and
attacks have also been carried out against humanitarian
assistance providers and staff of peacekeeping
operations. We encourage the Office of the Prosecutor
to continue gathering evidence on new allegations of
crimes perpetrated in Darfur, as that could serve as the
basis of new investigations.
Chile is concerned about the alleged manipulation
of reports carried out by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as described
in paragraph 10 of the Prosecutor’s report. Those
would cover up crimes against civilians and against
peacekeepers. We firmly support an investigation by
the Secretary-General into that matter.
Lastly, my country emphasizes the importance of
maintaining appropriate relations between the Court
and the Council with regard to their jurisdiction and
responsibility. We also reiterate our commitment in
support of the work of the Court and of the Prosecutor.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): At the outset, I
would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her
presentation of the nineteenth report of her Office
to the Security Council. We have taken note of the
recent judicial activities undertaken by the Court in
relation to the continued monitoring of serious crimes
committed in Darfur and the status of cooperation by
the Government of the Sudan and other parties.
Our position on this debate has always been
consistent. It is now about nine years since the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC. However,
those present might remember that since February
2009, African Heads of State and Government adopted
during different African Union Summits decisions to
request that the proceedings against President Omer
Hassan A. Al-Bashir be deferred in accordance with
article 16 of the Rome Statute. The African Union,

S/PV.7199

while reiterating its commitment to the fight against
impunity, has stressed that the search for justice
should be pursued in a way that does not impede or
jeopardize efforts aimed at promoting lasting peace.
Subsequently, it decided that all African countries that
received President Al-Bashir since his indictment were
in conformity with the decision of the African Union
Summit and were pursuing the same goal of peace
in the region. Therefore, we believe that reports of
non-cooperation by African States impede efforts of
the regional organization for peace in Darfur. In that
regard, we are convinced that a concerted approach
among the United Nations, the African Union and the
Government of the Sudan is the best way to ensure
accountability, while addressing the conflict in Darfur.
Indeed, peace and justice cannot be mutually exclusive.
On the security situation in Darfur, we are deeply
concerned about the ongoing hostilities that have
continued to increase the suffering of the Darfuri
people. It is particularly unacceptable for armed groups
to use civilians as human shields in their fight against
the Government.
Furthermore, Rwanda strongly condemns the
repeated attacks on peacekeepers of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), especially the recent incident of 24 May,
in which a Rwandan peacekeeper was killed and three
others were wounded.
We are very troubled by allegations of the
manipulation of UNAMID reports, with the intent
to cover up crimes committed against civilians
and peacekeepers. We hope that UNAMID and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations will provide
clarification on that issue.
A decade after the start of the conflict in Darfur,
the Government of the Sudan needs to do much more
in ensuring that those who committed human rights
violations and other crimes, including sexual and
gender-based violence and attacks on peacekeepers, are
held accountable.
We also need to emphasize the responsibility of the
Government of the Sudan in ensuring the protection of
its people. Similarly, it is important that the Government
takes concrete steps in addressing the root causes of
repeated inter-communal violence in Darfur.
The last 10 years of conflict in Darfur have proved
that there can be no military solution to the conflict.
Only a genuine political dialogue can bring peace

14-432389/16

S/PV.7199

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to Darfur. In that regard, we believe that the time
has come for all warring parties to the conflict to
understand that reality. In that respect, we commend
the efforts of Mohamed ibn Chambas, Joint Special
Representative for Operations and Management
in UNAMID, which are aimed at convincing the
non-signatory movements to join the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. Likewise, we commend his efforts
and those of President Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, in
facilitating the national dialogue. It is important that
the international community redouble its efforts in
supporting all of those processes.
To conclude, let me state again that Rwanda — as
a member of the Security Council, State member of the
African Union and African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur troop- and police-contributing
country — will continue to work towards sustainable
peace, genuine reconciliation and accountability for the
most serious crimes in Darfur.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I would like to start by
thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing and
her nineteenth report to the Council on the situation
in Darfur. Both the report and the Prosecutor’s
briefing show that the overall situation in Darfur has
not improved since she last briefed the Council in
December (see S/PV.7080). On the contrary, over the
past six months the situation in Darfur has continued to
deteriorate. Clashes between the Government and the
rebels continue. Civilians are affected by indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks. Approximately 250,000
people have been newly displaced, including due
to attacks carried out by the Sudanese Government
supported Rapid Support Forces on villages and the
camps of internally-displaced persons. That number
dwarfs the number of people displaced in 2011 and
2012. Humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers are
subject to attacks throughout Darfur. The deliberate
obstruction of humanitarian assistance must end.
The report also notes the persistence of sexual and
gender-based violence in Darfur. I strongly condemn
those horrendous crimes. It is imperative that an end
be put to the culture of impunity that allows sexual
and gender-based crimes to continue unabated. An
investigation into such cases should be made a priority.
All perpetrators of those and other serious crimes must
be brought to account. The Government of the Sudan
should do more to end attacks against civilians, fight
impunity, ensure accountability and guarantee justice

10/16

17/06/2014

for the victims. Justice must be made the cornerstone
of a lasting and sustainable peace agreement in Darfur.
The report before us contains multiple reminders
of the challenges the Prosecutor’s Office is facing in
fulfilling its mandate. Resolution 1593 (2005) remains
a dead letter and has yet to be implemented. After
10 years and countless victims since the beginning
of the conflict in Darfur, only four senior officials
have been indicted for war crimes and crimes against
humanity; one of them is also accused of genocide.
They are the only ones who have been held to account.
We again urge the Government of the Sudan to meet
its obligations and to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court (ICC), including on the enforcement
of the arrest warrants issued by the Court. All States
parties to the Rome Statute and all relevant regional and
international organizations are required to cooperate
fully with the ICC, in accordance with resolution 1593
(2005).
We welcome the guidelines issued by the SecretaryGeneral last year on non-essential contacts on the part
of members of the Secretariat with individuals subject
to ICC arrest warrants, yet we share the concerns
expressed by the Prosecutor on high-level contacts with
individuals under ICC arrest warrants.
The Council can do to more to assist the Court.
One obvious step is to list individuals under ICC
arrest warrants on the Sudan Sanctions Committee.
Another step is to ensure an effective follow-up
of the cases referred to the ICC and to answer the
correspondence the Court has addressed to the Council
on cases of non-cooperation. As a matter of fact, in a
presidential statement on the protection of civilians last
year (S/PRST/2013/2), Council members committed
themselves to carrying out effective follow-up.
However, there has been no agreement on a mechanism.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Lithuania’s
full support for and cooperation with the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court in carrying out her
important mandate.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her report. It is a report with
a particularly serious tone that warrants not only the
Security Council but also the Secretariat to question
the impact of the activities we have undertaken for the
benefit of the civilian population in Darfur.

14-43238

17/06/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The immense region of Darfur has been the site
of atrocities since 2002. At the very start, the Council
created the International Commission of Inquiry for
Darfur and, on that basis, referred the situation in
Darfur to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) in 2005. The first arrest warrants of the
ICC were delivered in 2007. Furthermore, the Council
has not remained inactive on the political front as it
has actively participated in the mediation efforts with
the African Union. It also deployed to Darfur one of
its largest peacekeeping operations, the African Union/
United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
But let us be clear enough to acknowledge that,
failing the genuine implementation of resolution 1593
(2005), the situation has only gotten worse. We have
not succeeded in meeting our responsibility to protect
the civilian population in Darfur. Almost 400,000 new
internally displaced persons (IDPs) since February
2014, aerial bombings of villages, sexual violence on
a massive scale committed against women, militias
practicing scorched-earth policies attacking the IDP
camp at Khor Abeche — the destruction of an entire
people is the goal. The only development is that they
changed the name of the Janjaweed militias. They now
go by the name Rapid Support Forces, but the crimes are
the same. Their modus operandi remains the same as
that they followed in the darkest periods of the conflict.
The tragedy has taken on a national dimension. The
action of the Rapid Support Forces and the violation
of fundamental rights involve the entire territory.
Although the Sudanese Government says that it is ready
to launch a comprehensive process of national dialogue
and constitutional review, its calls to action are void of
any meaning as it increases the negative signals it is
putting out — arresting opponents, bombing of civilian
targets and sentencing Mariam Yahya Ibrahim to death
for abandoning Islam.
UNAMID’s effectiveness at protecting civilians
is now open to question. The Security Council has
therefore decided to undertake a strategic review of
the force in order to improve its responsiveness and to
allow it to refocus on its principal task — the protection
of civilians. The Mission has been reproached for selfcensoring, for minimizing the responsibility of the
Sudanese authorities in the attacks, and for failing to
take into full account the crimes that it had witnessed.
Those are serious allegations. The Secretariat should
seek to remedy the situation. Many of us also regret that
the policy of avoiding essential contacts with persons

S/PV.7199

subject to International Criminal Court arrest warrants,
defined by the Secretary-General, has been sullied in
the context of Darfur.
But we cannot put the blame for failure on the
Mission alone. UNAMID is not a mission for imposing
peace. We ask it to protect civilians who are directly
affected, but at the same time to work in harmony
with security forces that are guilty of crimes. If the
Council is genuinely serious about implementing the
peace agreement and protecting civilians, we must
go beyond a strategic review of UNAMID. The fight
against impunity must be reinvigorated. We cannot
continue discussing the role of the Council in the fight
against sexual violence and confine ourselves, as we
are doing now, to asking UNAMID and the agencies to
undertake training activities on how victims should fill
out a complaint form. That is not serious.
Not a single head of militia is worried.
President Thabo Mbeki himself said so before the
Council. We must in fact pursue and arrest responsible
parties if we want to finally bring an end to the violence
in Darfur.
We are divided on the opportunity to arrest
President Al-Bashir, which is unfortunate. It is also
unfortunate that certain States parties to the Rome
Statute continue to meet with him. France believes
that such visits show disrespect for resolution 1593
(2005) and States’ obligations under the Rome Statute.
Beyond a particular interpretation of the law, one must
also think of the impact of such visits, which can only
encourage the Sudanese security forces and the militias
to continue their practices.
Let us look towards the future. With respect to
the Secretariat and the agencies, that means that the
principal actors must have better communication
with the Court; that aplies in particular to the African
Union/United Nations Joint Special Representative,
the Darfur Peace Agreement, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United
Nations Development Programme. Let us be more
consistent in the information that is disseminated and
in the activities we deploy on the ground. We need a
results-based approach, not an approach based on the
number of seminars we hold.
As for the Council, we must measure the negative
impact of our inability to implement resolution 1593

14-4323811/16

S/PV.7199

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

(2005). We see it in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
states, where the Sudanese Government is repeating
the same old practices against the population, including
aerial bombings that target hospitals and schools. We
see it throughout the region, in South Sudan and in
the Central African Republic, where perpetrators of
massive abuses believe — wrongly — that they enjoy
total impunity. It is not a question of whether or not
we support the ICC, but a matter of the maintenance of
peace and security throughout the region.
In conclusion, I reiterate our full confidence in the
Prosecutor. It would undoubtedly be useful, as proof of
that support, if the Secretariat reassured her that it will
mobilize all its components in support of international
criminal justice. It would also be useful if future
Council resolutions on Darfur reflected its concerns
over the aerial bombings, the disarmament of militias,
sexual violence and the necessity for the Sudan to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her briefing, as well as
for the continuing efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor
in relation to Darfur. These briefings are an important
opportunity for us to reaffirm that both the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the Council have vital
roles to play in ensuring that peace and justice are
delivered to the people of the region. We cannot avoid
Ms. Bensouda’s central message to us that a dramatic
shift is needed in the Council’s approach to the level
of support it provides to the International Criminal
Court’s effort to provide justice and accountability for
the people of Darfur.

17/06/2014

civilians have reportedly continued despite clear
demands from the Council that they cease. The air
strikes have been coupled with the rise of the Rapid
Support Forces paramilitary group, which the Prosecutor
reports has been involved in attacks against civilians,
including attacking and burning villages, and which
the Government of the Sudan has admitted is affiliated
with the Sudanese Armed Forces. Humanitarian access
continues to be deliberately restricted.
We are therefore grateful for the Office of
the Prosecutor’s efforts to continue to monitor the
situation in Darfur, despite the significant challenges
it faces in conducting meaningful investigations.
Accurate information is obviously essential to future
accountability processes and to ensure informed
Council deliberations. That includes information from
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), of course, so we therefore support
the Prosecutor’s call for a thorough, independent and
transparent inquiry into allegations that information
about crimes committed against civilians and
peacekeepers have been withheld.
We welcome the ICC’s ongoing preparations for
the trial of Abdallah Banda, and look forward to the
Trial Chamber’s decision on a revised start date. We
call on the Sudanese authorities to cooperate with the
Court so that the Office of the Prosecutor can make
progress in other investigations and prosecutions. In
particular, the Sudanese authorities must arrest and
surrender President Al-Bashir, Abdelrahim Mohamed
Hussein, Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb, in line with
the Sudan’s obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).

The Prosecutor’s nineteenth report presents an
extremely disturbing picture of the situation in Darfur,
and the impact of the ongoing climate of impunity. It
draws together what we in the Council have been trying
to respond to this year alone in adopting resolutions
2138 (2014) and 2148 (2014), namely, the serious impact
of the deteriorating security situation on the civilian
population. We agree with the Prosecutor that there is
every reason to be concerned about the trends in violence
and the extent of its impact, including widespread sexual
violence, which is causing great danger to civilians and
to the peacekeepers and humanitarian workers seeking
to help them.

It goes without saying that ICC States parties
must also meet their obligations to cooperate with
the Court. We are very disappointed that some States
parties continue to invite President Al-Bashir to visit
their countries and fail to meet their obligation to
arrest and surrender him when he does. We welcome
the Prosecutor’s call for relevant States parties to be
provided with the necessary support and assistance
to ensure that effective arrests and surrenders can be
made. And the Council should at least do the ICC the
courtesy of responding to the Court’s eight letters about
the failure of some States to cooperate with the Court in
relation to the Darfur referral.

This year alone, several hundred thousand
people from Darfur — many of them women and
children — have been displaced. That significant
displacement reflects the fact that air strikes targeting

The crimes reported by the Prosecutor are
indicative of a pervasive culture of impunity in Darfur
and a systemic failure by the Government of the Sudan
to pursue accountability for attacks against its own

12/16

14-43238

17/06/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

civilians, against humanitarian workers and against
UNAMID peacekeepers. The Prosecutor is right to
remind us that the Council’s repeated demands to
the Government of the Sudan to end impunity and
bring justice and accountability to victims have gone
deliberately unfulfilled. As Ms. Bensouda has told us
this morning, the Government of the Sudan has failed
to provide any meaningful measure of justice at the
national level.
Those committing the crimes alleged in the
Prosecutor’s report must be held to account, and we
know that the latest report presents only a fraction of
what is actually taking place in Darfur. Where there
is an allegation of an attack, such as that referenced in
paragraph 44 of the Prosecutor’s report — “in which
militia forces, specifically from the Rapid Support
Forces, reportedly gang-raped a 10-year-old girl” — it
is unconscionable that the Government of the Sudan
should fail to hold such perpetrators to account.
Despite the international community’s efforts
to date, the violence in Darfur is only getting worse.
Perpetrators of Rome Statute crimes continue to avoid
justice, emboldening others to commit similar crimes.
Given the failure of the Sudanese authorities to take
appropriate action on accountability, the ICC’s efforts
to ensure such accountability are critical. It was the
Council that referred the situation to the ICC, and it
is the Council that must shoulder its responsibility to
support the Court’s efforts to fulfil its mandate. There
is no justification for further delay in the Council taking
meaningful steps, therefore, to support the ICC’s work
in Darfur.
Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): We thank
Ms. Bensouda for her report and her briefing today. In
December last year, we expressed our concern at the
lack of progress since she last addressed the Council
(see S/PV.7080). It is extremely depressing that we must
do so once again now.
First and foremost, that lack of progress is evidenced
in the continued non-cooperation of the Government of
the Sudan with the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and by its non-implementation of its obligations under
resolution 1593 (2005) and subsequent resolutions on
the situation in Darfur. That is of serious concern, and
we call once again on the Government of the Sudan to
meet its obligations in that regard in full.
The Prosecutor’s report refers to the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in Darfur and the continuing

S/PV.7199

perpetration of serious crimes against civilians. We are
deeply concerned by the increased violence this year,
including a resurgence of activities by rebel groups
and the activities of the Government’s Rapid Support
Forces, as well as the continuing intercommunal
violence.
Civilians continue to pay the highest price, with
hundreds of thousands of people newly displaced this
year. The reports of sexual and gender-based violence
are deeply disturbing, both in terms of the high number
and of the particular brutality of the violence. We are
also concerned by alleged crimes against human rights
defenders, civil society members and community
leaders, as well as humanitarian workers and United
Nations peacekeepers. The authorities’ suspension of
the activities of several humanitarian organizations will
have an impact on civilians in dire need of assistance.
We hope that the situation can be improved as quickly
as possible.
We are deeply concerned by the active role that the
Government’s Rapid Support Forces are alleged to have
played in the increased violence, including the looting
and burning of villages. In addition, allegations of aerial
bombardments by the Sudanese Armed Forces in rebelheld areas, harming civilian life and infrastructure,
are extremely troubling. We also note with concern
that the rebel forces have allegedly been involved in
attacks on civilians. All parties must stop such actions
immediately, take steps to ensure the protection of
civilians in Darfur and grant unfettered and timely
access to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and humanitarian
workers.
We welcome the ICC’s continued monitoring of
actions that could constitute crimes under the Rome
Statute, and reiterate our firm wish to work with partners
to ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes face
justice. The ICC States parties must play their part, too,
by fully implementing their obligations under the Rome
Statute. We urge States to implement essential contact
policies in support of the Court and the Office of the
Prosecutor. We note with concern that the Prosecutor’s
report raises questions over the implementation of the
United Nations policy on non-essential contact and
urge the Secretariat to ensure full compliance with it.
We are also concerned by the allegations referred
to in the Prosecutor’s report regarding UNAMID’s
handling of information about crimes committed
against civilians and peacekeepers. It is of pivotal

14-4323813/16

S/PV.7199

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

importance that the Mission keep the Council fully
informed, and in detail, about developments on the
ground. Only with that, can the Council do its work
most effectively. We encourage the Secretariat to look
carefully into the allegations made.
We welcomed the strategic review of UNAMID
in February this year and look forward to its full
implementation. We urge the Mission, the Secretariat
and UNAMID’s troop- and police-contributing
countries to continue to work together towards that
goal.
Finally, we must do more to follow up on the
referral to the ICC. It is a poor reflection on the Council
that we have not been able to respond in substance to
the many letters received from the Court notifying us of
instances of non-cooperation.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her report on
the situation in Darfur.
Chad is deeply concerned about the serious
deterioration in security conditions in Darfur, owing
to ongoing clashes between the Sudanese Government
and the armed rebel groups and to worsening
inter-community violence. The involvement of
paramilitary units and tribal militias in the conflict
are clearly a primary cause of the violence among
civilians and the chief cause of displacement in the
population. All violence, including the destruction of
villages, rapes and abductions, and including attacks
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), must be halted. We condemn
every act perpetrated on civilians by the Rapid Support
Forces and other militias involved in the conflict.
As we have emphasized many times, there can be
no military solution to this conflict. An open political
settlement is essential to the restoration of peace in the
region, which has been ravaged for more than a decade
by an unprecedented civil war. On the humanitarian
front, the escalation of the conflicts has resulted in a
renewed deterioration of the situation. Since February,
400,000 people have fled the violence in numerous
areas. This serious situation demands the attention of
the entire international community and renders it vital
that everything be done to stop the violence and protect
innocent civilians. In that regard, we ask the Government
of the Sudan to pursue the presumed perpetrators of
these crimes and to help combat impunity.

14/16

17/06/2014

Regarding the issues of insecurity and access that
have hindered the ICC’s investigations, as discussed
in the Prosecutor’s report, we call on the Sudanese
Government to show proof of its flexibility and
willingness to cooperate. Chad takes note of the Court’s
judgement in the case of Mr. Abdallah Banda and would
like to express its support for the ICC in its efforts to
bring justice to the victims and to end impunity.
It is clear that implementing the various Security
Council resolutions on the crisis in Darfur has been
difficult, due to the complexity of the crisis and to the
fact that the concerns of the regional and subregional
organizations involved in the quest for a way out of
the crisis are not taken into account. We believe that it
would be helpful to broaden the scope of our thinking
on how to support the ICC in accomplishing its mission,
by emphasizing the cooperation and involvement of all
concerned through dialogue and by raising awareness.
It would be counterproductive, in our view, to try to
use the Security Council to exert systematic pressure
in order to help the cases make progress in the Court.
The issue of a solution to the follow-up of cases referred
to the ICC could be usefully and judiciously discussed
within the Conference of States Parties.
As we have always stated, concerning the issue
of Chad’s cooperation with the ICC, despite some
difficulties linked to our status as a neighbour of the
Sudan and our role as a facilitator in the Darfur crisis,
Chad has always fully cooperated with the Court. It
should be recalled that the ICC has conducted all its
Darfur investigations from Chad, where it opened an
office at the beginning of the crisis in the region. The
situation in Darfur has had a huge impact on Chad, and
it is no accident that almost 300,000 Sudanese refugees
have ended up in the border area with Darfur since
2003. A lasting peace in Darfur would be a guarantee of
stability and security for Chad and for all the countries
bordering Darfur.
Furthermore, for the aforementioned reasons and
at the international community’s request, Chad has
taken on the role of facilitator in settling the crisis in
Darfur. It would be difficult, if not impossible, for us
to play that part without being in contact with all the
Sudanese parties. Chad nonetheless remains committed
to its obligations under the Rome Statute and will do
all in its power to meet them. However, considering the
necessity of achieving security and stability, we ask for
understanding on the part of the Court and the States
parties for the non-compliance with certain procedures.

14-43238

17/06/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Lastly, in future Chad will take advantage of the
consultation process outlined in the Rome Statute,
enabling it to advise the Court in advance should it have
difficulties in meeting its commitments.
Mr. Lord (United States of America): I would like to
thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing today. The
United States appreciates her efforts to bring justice to
the people of Darfur. We look forward to seeing further
progress with the start of the trial of Abdallah Banda,
who is alleged to be among those responsible for the
deaths of 12 African Union peacekeepers.
The continued work of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) in investigating ongoing war crimes
and crimes against humanity in Darfur is made more
difficult by the alarming levels of violence and the
persistent failure of the Government of the Sudan to
abide by its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005)
to cooperate fully with the Court. While the people of
Darfur continue to await justice, the architects of the
campaign of terror who bear the greatest responsibility
for atrocities in Darfur go free.
The consequences of this impunity are clear.
Although the world first became aware of crimes in
Darfur a decade ago, the Government continues to use
apparently indiscriminate aerial bombardments with
deadly consequences for civilians. Violence in Darfur
continues to escalate as paramilitary Rapid Support
Force soldiers kill, loot, burn and rape. This year, more
than 322,000 Darfuris have been forced from their
homes, worsening a humanitarian crisis that has been
compounded by humanitarian groups’ lack of access.
Unsurprisingly, the violence has spread beyond
Darfur’s borders. We are outraged by reports of
ongoing indiscriminate attacks, as well as targeted
attacks on civilians, hospitals and schools in the
states of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. These
attacks have resulted in more than 100,000 new
displacements since May, interrupting the planting
season. Nor has the Government of the Sudan honoured
its commitments to justice and accountability under
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We have
yet to see any credible independent investigation into
violations of international humanitarian law or human
rights, much less any cases for such acts prosecuted in
the Special Courts for Darfur. Instead, we continue to
see protracted assaults on civilians, peacekeepers and
humanitarian aid workers. If the Sudan is to enjoy a
peaceful, stable and prosperous future, the Government
cannot be indifferent to the lives of its people.

S/PV.7199

But it is not just the Government of the Sudan that
has failed to live up to its commitments. We note the
decisions issued by the ICC’s Pre-Trial Chamber with
respect to non-cooperation in the Darfur situation.
As the report by the Office of the Prosecutor notes,
President Al-Bashir has traveled internationally on at
least six occasions in as many months. We note that
Africans have not always welcomed his visits. Last
year, public protests and actions aimed at compelling
President Al-Bashir’s arrest made him leave one
country before he was able to make an appearance, and
activists in another country filed petitions demanding
his apprehension and transfer to The Hague. The
Security Council should take a cue from those groups
and do more to follow up on the implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005), since inaction only emboldens
perpetrators in the Sudan and elsewhere.
In closing, the United States continues to believe
that working to ensure justice and accountability for
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide is
not just a moral obligation, but is integral to ensuring
a lasting and durable peace in the Sudan. We will
continue to support Prosecutor Bensouda and ICC
efforts to bring to justice those most responsible for
serious crimes in Darfur.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Bensouda,
for introducing the nineteenth report of her Office,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), and for her briefing
to the Council today.
Guaranteeing and upholding the principles of the
Rome Statute in delivering international criminal justice
and fighting impunity requires full cooperation with
the ICC so that it may fulfil its mandate, as highlighted
in the Prosecutor’s report and in her briefing today.
Considering that the Security Council has referred
the case of the Sudan to the ICC, the persistence
of violations and the deterioration of the troubling
humanitarian conditions in the Sudan, as stated in
the report submitted by the Panel of Experts and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, we reiterate the need to ensure full coordination
and cooperation with the Prosecutor of the ICC on the
part of all parties and countries in order to address the
deficiencies highlighted in the Prosecutor’s report.
Jordan supports the recommendations presented
in the report and in today’s briefing. We must spare
no effort in countering the suspicion that UNAMID

14-4323815/16

S/PV.7199

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

reports have been manipulated in an attempt to cover
up certain crimes.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Russian Federation.
I too should like to thank Ms. Bensouda for
introducing her nineteenth report to the Security
Council and for today’s briefing. We are seriously
concerned about the deterioration of the security
situation in Darfur, given the instensification of
insurgent fighting. Just in the first three months of
this year, as a result of incursions of the Sudanese
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi, 135,000 civilians
were forcibly displaced. Also troubling is the escalation
of skirmishes among different tribes as competition
for resources has tightened. Against that backdrop, we
note the robust efforts of the Sudanese Government
to reconcile warring parties and prevent the spread of
intercommunal violence.
The pressing humanitarian issues, including that
of refugees and internally displaced persons, can be
resolved by normalizing the military-political situation
in the region. Furthermore, improving the situation will
depend to a great extent on the timely implementation
of the decision taken at last year’s Doha conference to
allocate $1 billion to the development needs of Darfur,
and on the easing of the debt burden and the lifting of
the economic sanctions against the Sudan levied by the
United States in circumvention of the Security Council.
Of key importance is the further implementation
of the political settlement on the basis of the 2011
Doha Agreement and the recent Government-launched
national dialogue. We are convinced that the rebels in
Darfur must ultimately join this parallel process without
precondition. In that context, it is high time to reflect
on applying sanctions against intractable insurgents,
as provided for in the Security Council’s resolutions.
We could begin with the leaders responsible for the
killing last year of leaders of the Justice and Equality
Movement faction, who had earlier joined the Doha
peace process.
Russia supports the efforts of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate the situation

16/16

17/06/2014

in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). In the
general political context, the information confirmed
in the ICC Prosecutor’s report regarding unabated
violence in Darfur is of serious concern to the Council.
In that regard, we call on the Court to objectively
assess criminal acts perpetrated by all sides in the
recent clashes. The activities of the Court to fulfil its
mandate to investigate the situation in Darfur cannot
be disconnected from general efforts to normalize the
situation in that troubled Sudanese province. A delicate
balance must also be struck between the interests of
reconciliation and justice.
We take note of the Prosecutor’s observations
regarding the cooperation of States with the International
Criminal Court in the framework of the Darfur dossier.
The situation in that regard demonstrates once again
the importance of States’ support to the successful
functioning of the Court. When assessing the extent
of a country’s compliance with its relevant obligations,
we should take into account that there can be varying
degrees of compliance in each specific case.
In regard to the Security Council’s appeals for
so-called follow-up activities in referring cases to
the ICC, our position has not changed. We believe
that proposals should be considered on the basis of
their practical suitability, taking into account the
Council’s purview, the ICC’s mandate and the general
international legal context. Neither the Rome Statute
nor the agreements struck between the United Nations
and the ICC stipulate automatic actions in response
to such situations. Moreover, we see no added value
to such measures at present. In particular, as is well
known, serious concerns regarding the application of
the Rome Statute to acting Heads of State have been
raised by by the African Union. In our view, issues
relating to the functions of the Rome Statue should not
be resolved in the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on my list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

14-43238
