S/2018/118

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 February 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 9 February 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2379 (2017) of
21 September 2017, in which the Council requested that I establish an investigative
team, headed by a special adviser, to support domestic efforts to hold Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also known as Da’esh, accountable by collecting,
preserving and storing evidence in Iraq of acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes
against humanity or genocide committed by the terror ist group ISIL (Da’esh) in Iraq.
The Security Council also requested that I submit to the Council, for its
approval, within 60 days, terms of reference that are acceptable to the Government of
Iraq, in order to ensure that the Investigative Team can fulfil its mandate, and that are
consistent with the resolution, regarding the operation of the Team in Iraq. The time
frame for the submission of the terms of reference was extended to 9 February 2018
in a letter dated 24 January 2018 from the President of the Security Council addressed
to me (S/2018/64).
Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2379 (2017), the Secretariat
has expended its best efforts to prepare and finalize terms of reference for the
Investigative Team that are acceptable to the Government of Iraq.
On 8 February 2018, I received a note verbale from the Permanent Mission of
Iraq informing me that the Government of Iraq has accepted the t erms of reference
for the Investigative Team.
I thus have the honour to submit to the Security Council, for its approval, the
attached terms of reference for the Investigative Team (see annex).
Following the approval of the terms of reference by the Secu rity Council, I will
expeditiously appoint a special adviser as head of the Investigative Team, upon
consultation with the Government of Iraq. I will also undertake without delay the
steps, measures and arrangements necessary for the speedy establishment a nd full
functioning of the Team.
I believe that these terms of reference will allow the Investigative Team to fulfil
its important mandate in accordance with United Nations policies and best practice.
In this regard, I intend to follow the work of the Tea m closely.
I wish to thank the Member States who have assisted the United Nations in
reaching a positive outcome.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-02266 (E)

200218

*1802266*

S/2018/118

Annex
Terms of reference of the Investigative Team to support domestic
efforts to hold Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh)
accountable for acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide committed in Iraq, established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2379 (2017)
1.
The Investigative Team established by the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2379 (2017) of 21 September 2017 shall act consistently
with the following terms of reference, which have been developed in accordance with
operative paragraph 4 of resolution 2379 (2017).

I. Mandate
2.
The Investigative Team shall support domestic efforts to hold the terrorist group
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also known as Da ’esh, accountable by
collecting, preserving and storing evidence in Iraq of acts that may amount to war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide committed by ISIL (Da ’esh) in Iraq, to
the highest possible standards, to ensure the broadest possible use before national
courts, and complementing investigations being carried out by the Ira qi authorities or
investigations carried out by authorities in third countries at their request.
3.
The Investigative Team shall be impartial, independent and credible and shall
act consistently with these terms of reference, the Charter of the United Nations,
United Nations best practices and relevant international law, including international
human rights law.
4.
The Investigative Team shall operate with full respect for the sovereignty of Iraq
and its jurisdiction over crimes committed in its territory.
Collection
5.
The Investigative Team shall collect evidence pertaining to acts that may
amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide committed by ISIL
(Da’esh) in Iraq, including by conducting interviews, taking witness testimony,
receiving information and documentation and acquiring forensic material.
6.
The Investigative Team shall assess the evidence and materials in its possession,
based on their reliability and probative value. It shall identify gaps in the evidence in
its possession and the need for additional evidence and take steps, where possible and
appropriate, to fill such gaps.
Preservation and storage
7.
The Investigative Team shall systematically organize, catalogue, record,
preserve and store all evidence and materials in Iraq, in accordance with international
criminal law standards and taking into account Iraqi criminal and procedure laws, in
order to ensure their broadest possible usability and admissibility in fair and
independent criminal proceedings, consistent with applicable international law,
conducted by competent domestic courts in Iraq and other States, and in any other
uses to be determined in agreement with the Government of Iraq on a case -by-case
basis.
8.
The Investigative Team shall ensure an uninterrupted chain of custody of the
evidence in its possession.

2/8

18-02266

S/2018/118

9.
The Investigative Team shall be equipped with, or have at its disposal, the
necessary capacities to analyse, preserve and store all forms of evidence and materials
in Iraq. To this end, it may enter into agreements with Member States, bodies,
organizations or corporations in order to gain access to safe, secure and reputable
services and facilities which can support it in these tasks, with all due guarantees of
security and strict confidentiality and respect for the privileges and immunities of the
United Nations. The coordinating or steering committee, which will be designated by
the Government of Iraq to ensure effective coordination between the Investigative
Team and the Government of Iraq, will be duly informed before the implementation
of the above-mentioned agreements.
10. Upon conclusion of the Investigative Team’s mandate, the United Nations and
the Government of Iraq shall agree upon arrangements regarding the custody of
original versions of the evidence and materials collected, preserved and stored by the
Investigative Team in Iraq, as well as any materials and analyses produced by the
Investigative Team.

II. Structure and composition
Head of the Investigative Team
11. The Investigative Team shall be headed by a Special Adviser. The Special
Adviser shall be a person of high moral character and integrity and shall possess the
highest level of professional competence and extensive experience in the conduct of
investigations and prosecution of criminal cases. The Special Adviser shall have a
proven record of independence and impartiality and be committed to upholding
justice, accountability and human rights and ensuring gender equality. The Special
Adviser shall be appointed by the Secretary-General, upon consultation with the
Government of Iraq, for an initial period of two years, which shall be renewable.
12. The Special Adviser shall develop, adopt and periodically review and update a
strategy for the conduct of investigations, determine the work plan of the Investigative
Team and put in place procedures relating to the conduct of its work.
13. In addition to leading the Investigative Team, the Special Adviser will, while
avoiding duplication of effort with other relevant United Nations bodies, promote
throughout the world accountability for acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide committed by ISIL (Da’esh) and work with survivors,
in a manner consistent with relevant national laws, to ensure that their interests in
achieving accountability for ISIL (Da’esh) are fully recognized.
Composition of the Investigative Team
14. The Investigative Team will be composed of international experts and Iraqi
investigative judges and other criminal experts, including experienced members of
the prosecution services, who will work on an equal footing, under the authority of
the Special Adviser.
15. Members of the Investigative Team shall be impartial and experienced
professionals, with expertise in the following areas, inter alia: international criminal
law; human rights law; international humanitarian law; Iraqi criminal law and
procedure; criminal investigations and prosecution; the storage and preservation of
evidence for use in criminal proceedings; military affairs; forensics, including,
notably, with respect to mass graves, digital forensics, forensic pathology and forensic
imagery; witness and victim protection; sexual and gender-based crimes and violence;
the rights of women and children; crimes against children; trafficking in persons; and
the protection of cultural heritage.
18-02266

3/8

S/2018/118

16. All members of the Investigative Team will be appointed by the Special Adviser.
Iraqi investigative judges and other criminal experts will be appointed by the Special
Adviser in consultation with the Government of Iraq.
17. In appointing members of the Investigative Team, due consideration shall be
given to geographic diversity, representation of different legal traditions, gender
balance, language skills, in particular in Arabic, and regional expertise.
18. The Special Adviser and all members of the Investigative Team shall exercise
their mandate and discharge their functions in full independence and with the utmost
impartiality and shall not seek or accept instructions in regard to the performance of
their functions from any government or any external source. They shall maintain the
highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity in the discharge of their
functions.

III. Standards and procedural requirements for the collection,
preservation and storage of evidence
19. The Investigative Team shall adopt procedures for collecting, preserving and
storing evidence and materials in Iraq. These procedures shall be based on the highest
possible standards, consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, United Nations
policies and best practice, relevant international law, including international human
rights law, notably the right to a fair trial and other due process provisions, as well as
the relevant jurisprudence, in order to ensure the broadest possible usability and
admissibility of such evidence and materials before national courts and by national
investigative and prosecutorial authorities. In adopting such procedures, the
Investigative Team shall take into account Iraqi criminal and procedure laws, bearing
in mind that the competent Iraqi authorities shall be the primary intended recipient of
the evidence collected, preserved and stored by the Investigative Team.
20. The Investigative Team shall seek to obtain from witnesses and other sources
their informed consent for the Investigative Team to share evidence with Iraqi and
other domestic investigative, prosecutorial and judicial authorities, and with any other
competent authorities as determined in agreement with the Government of Iraq. The
consent, or lack thereof, must be duly recorded by the Investigative Team. This is
without prejudice to the competencies of the Iraqi and other domestic investigative,
prosecutorial and judicial authorities to obtain evidence according to applicable
domestic laws.
21. The Investigative Team shall take appropriate measures to respect and ensure
respect for the privacy, interests and personal circumst ances of victims, in the light
of their age, sex, sexual orientation, gender and health, and taking into account the
nature of the crime, in particular where it involves sexual violence, gender violence
or violence against children.
22. The Investigative Team shall adopt procedures and methods of work for the
protection of victims and witnesses, with the support of Iraq and other States, so as
to ensure that witnesses, victims and any other persons who cooperate with the
Investigative Team can do so in safety and security.
23. The Investigative Team shall assist in referring vulnerable victims, in particular
children, women and victims of conflict-related sexual violence, who come forward
to the Investigative Team, to the relevant bodies so that they are provided with
appropriate support.
24. The Investigative Team shall determine and record the confidentiality
classification of all evidence obtained or produced by the Investigative Team,
4/8

18-02266

S/2018/118

including its work products and analyses, in line with the United Natio ns policies on
information sensitivity, classification and handling.
25. The Investigative Team shall adopt procedures and methods of work regarding
chains of custody, data protection, information management, case management and
archiving and security, which shall conform to the highest possible standards.

IV. Use of evidence
26. Subject to paragraph 30, the evidence collected, preserved and stored by the
Investigative Team, as well as any materials and analyses produced by the
Investigative Team, shall solely be for use in fair and independent criminal
proceedings conducted by competent domestic courts in Iraq and in third States.
27. The competent Iraqi authorities shall be the primary intended recipient of the
evidence collected, preserved and stored by the Investigative Team. In carrying out
its functions, the Investigative Team will act with full respect for the Iraqi
Constitution and Iraqi relevant laws and Iraq’s right to exercise jurisdiction over
crimes committed on its territory, including in ongoing proceedings. To this end, the
Investigative Team shall share the evidence with the competent Iraqi authorities in
accordance with the present terms of reference and with the modalities to be agreed
pursuant to paragraph 45.
28. The Investigative Team shall share the evidence in accordance with United
Nations policies and best practice and relevant international law, including
international human rights law, rules and standards.
29. In sharing evidence, the Investigative Team shall bear in mind, as set out in
Security Council resolution 2379 (2017), the importance of assisting Iraq and other
States in holding ISIL (Da’esh) members accountable, in particular those who bear
the greatest responsibility, including in terms of leadership, which can include
regional or mid-level commanders, in order to assist in countering terrorism,
including by stemming financing and the continued flow of international recruits to
ISIL (Da’esh).
30. When sharing evidence with a competent State authority, the Investigative Team
shall, among other procedures, provide, to the extent possible and as appropriate,
certified copies of the original evidence. All original evidence shared by the
Investigative Team shall be duly returned, in its original state, to the Investigative
Team as soon as possible. The Investigative Team shall also obtain an assurance from
the competent State authority that the evidence will not be disclosed by the competent
State authority to any authority of another State. The Investigative Team shall inform
the Government of Iraq in the event that it shares evidence collected by the
Investigative Team with the authorities of third States.
31. Any other use of the evidence collected, preserved and stored by the
Investigative Team will be determined by the Investigative Team in agreement with
the Government of Iraq on a case-by-case basis.

V. Cooperation
32. The Investigative Team shall have the authority to conclude agreements with
any State or entity for the implementation of its mandate.
33. The Investigative Team shall develop, in its procedures and methods of work,
modalities for cooperation with States and other organizations and entities.

18-02266

5/8

S/2018/118

34. The Investigative Team will cooperate with all States, including through mutual
arrangements on legal assistance, where necessary and appropriate, and in particular
to receive from States any relevant information that States may possess pertaining to
the Investigative Team’s mandate.
35. The Investigative Team may receive funds, equipment and services, including
expert personnel, from States and regional and intergovernmental organizations in
support of the implementation of its mandate.
36. The United Nations and all its programmes, funds and offices shall, within their
respective mandates, fully cooperate with the Investigative Team and promptly
respond to its requests, including for access to information.
37. The Investigative Team shall cooperate, as appropriate, and consistent with its
investigative functions as set out above, with the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1526 (2004)
and 2368 (2017) and with any other relevant monitoring bodies and work with other
United Nations bodies within their respective mandates, while avoiding any
duplication of efforts.
38. The Investigative Team will cooperate with relevant intergovernmental and
regional organizations, as well as non-governmental organizations, as appropriate and
necessary for the implementation of its mandate.

VI. Capacity-building
39. The Investigative Team will liaise with States and regional and
intergovernmental organizations for the provision of appropriate legal assistance
and capacity-building to the Government of Iraq in order to strengthen its courts and
judicial system. The Investigative Team will encourage States and regional and
intergovernmental organizations to provide funds, equipment and services to the
Investigative Team, to share knowledge and technical assistance with Iraq and to help
build capacity in investigations, prosecutions and the judiciary in Iraq.
40. The Special Adviser and the international members of the Investigative Team
shall ensure that its Iraqi members benefit from the expertise o n the Investigative
Team, and make every effort to share knowledge and technical assistance with Iraq.
41. The Investigative Team will cooperate with other United Nations bodies,
programmes, funds and offices, within their respective mandates, to assist the
Government of Iraq in developing and implementing relevant legisl ation, including
on war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.

VII. Location and premises
42. The Secretary-General, after consultation with the Government of Iraq, will
determine the location of the offices of the Investigative Team, taking into account
security, costs, the location of crime sites and any other relevant considerations.

VIII. Privileges and immunities
43. The Investigative Team, its personnel, records, archives, property and assets
shall enjoy the privileges and immunities, exemptions and facilities provided for in
the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations of 13 February
1946.

6/8

18-02266

S/2018/118

IX. Cooperation with the Government of Iraq
44. The Investigative Team shall liaise with the coordinating or steering committee,
which will be designated by the Government of Iraq to ensure that the Investigative
Team is free from interference in the conduct of its work and provide it with all
necessary assistance to fulfil its mandate and effective coordination between the
Investigative Team and the Government of Iraq, particularly with respect to the
implementation by the competent Iraqi authorities of the following:
(a)

Freedom of movement throughout the territory of Iraq;

(b) Unhindered access to all places and establishments, and freedom to meet
and interview representatives of national, local and military authorities, community
leaders, non-governmental organizations and other institutions, and any person who
may have evidence that is considered necessary for the fulfilment of the mandate, in
an environment of security, confidentiality and tranquillity;
(c) Unhindered access for individuals and organizations wishing to meet the
Investigative Team;
(d) Free access to all sources of information, including documentary material
and physical evidence;
(e) Appropriate security arrangements for the personnel and documents of the
Investigative Team, without restricting its freedom of movement and its
investigations;
(f) Protection of victims and witnesses and all those who come into contact
with the Investigative Team, and an undertaking that no such person shall, as a result
of such contact, suffer harassment, threats, acts of intimidation, ill -treatment or
reprisals.
45. The Investigative Team shall liaise with the coordinating or steering committee
and/or competent Iraqi authorities on modalities for the eventual use, in fair and
independent criminal proceedings, of evidence of crimes collected and stored by the
Team in Iraq, in accordance with the present terms of reference.

X. Reporting
46. The Special Adviser shall submit to the Security Council the first report on the
Investigative Team’s activities within 90 days of the date on which it commences its
activities, as notified by the Secretary-General, and shall present subsequent reports
every 180 days thereafter, while preserving the confidential nature of its substantive
work. These reports shall be in accordance with these terms of reference, in line with
the mandate of the Investigative Team, with full respect for the sovereignty of Iraq
and in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
47. The Special Adviser may, at any time, report to the Security Council any
significant issue that arises in the implementation of the mandate.

XI. Funding
48.

The Investigative Team shall be funded through assessed contributions.

49. Additional funding will be provided to the Investigative Team through the trust
fund established by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 13 of Security
Council resolution 2379 (2017).

18-02266

7/8

S/2018/118

XII. Requests from third States to conduct investigations
outside Iraq
50. In the event that the Investigative Team receives a request from a third State, in
whose territory ISIL (Da’esh) has committed acts that may amount to war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, to collect evidence of such acts in its territory,
the Special Adviser shall inform the Security Council of the request as expeditiously
as possible.

XIII. Renewal of mandate
51. The mandate of the Investigative Team will be reviewed after a period of two
years, and any further extension shall be decided at the request of the Government of
Iraq or any other government that has requested the Team to collect evidence of acts
that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide committed by
ISIL (Da’esh) in its territory.

8/8

18-02266
