UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

‘2115’”

MEETING:

NEW

YORK

\

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . .’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in South-East Asia and its implications
for international
peace and
security. [Letter dated 22 February 1979 from the representatives of Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
.United States of America to the President of the Security Council (S/13111)]

1

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/21
of the agenda

15)

WPV.2115

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention .of: such
a:
I. , .>
.S$.Isymbol
I ,, I..Z! indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
!

:

Documents of the Securky Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quar-’ * I
terly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given. I
The rcsolutkk .of the Security Council,.numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published bi”yearly volumes of Resolutions and Deckions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions- ., I
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2115th MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 24 February 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Abdalla Yaccoub BISHARA

participate in the discussion. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in conformity with the provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

(Kuwait).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kostov (RuIgarict),
Mr. Hollai (Hungary), Mr. Anwar Sani (Indonesia), Mr. Abe
(Japan), Mr. Dashtseren (Mongolia) and Mr. Yang0 (Philip
pines) took the piaces reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2115)
1. Adoption of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw members’
attention to document S/l 3 119, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by China. In this respect I am
very grateful to the Chinese delegation for acceding to my
request that it should submit its draft through me rather
than make the usual introductory remarks. In such a
manner, we have saved time and avoided unnecessary
acrimony.

2. The situation in South-East Asia and its implications for
international peace and security. [Letter dated 22 February 1979 from the representatives of Norway, Portugal,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America to the President of the Security Council (S/131 1l)]
The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.

4. Mr. LEPRETIE (France) (titerpretationfiom French):
Mr. President, I would first of all congratulate you on your
accession to the presidency of the Council. Your qualities
and your experience in the United Nations and your disposition assure us of success.We wish to congratulate you on
the way you have conducted the business of the Council
during the difficulties of thii week.

Adoption of tbe agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in South-East Asia and its implications for
international peace andsecurity. [Letter dated 22 February
1979 from tbe representatives of Norway, Portugal, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
tbe United States of America to tbe President of tbe Secu-

5. I also wish to convey our congratulations to the representative of Jamaica, Mr. Mills, for the excellent manner in
which he conducted the business of the Council in the
month of January. Once again he has given us proof of the
mastery for which he has such a reputation in the United
Nations.

rity CoImcil(S/13111)]

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2114th meeting, I invite the representatives of
Australia, Canada, Cuba, Democratic Kampuchea, the
German Democratic Republic, India, Malaysia, New Zealand, Poland, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
At the invitation of thePresident, Mr. Anderson (Austraha),
Mr, Barton (Canada), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Thiounn
Prasith (Democratic Kampuchea), Mr. Horin (German Democratic Republic), Mr. JaipaI (India), Trm Sn’ Zaiton Jbrahim
(Maya&.), Mr. Francis (New ZeaIar@, Mr. Jaroszek (Pokznd),
Mr. Koh (Singapore), Mr. Guna-Kasem (Thailand) and Mr.
Ha Van Lau (Viet Nam) took the places reservedfor them at
the side of the Council chamber.

6. France, which has frequently expressed the concern it
has felt about the increasing tensions in South-East Asia,
has followed with increasing preoccupation the operations
being carried out on the borders of China and Viet Nam.
Recent developments in the situation, particularly because
of the increase in the numbers of personnel and the quantity
of resources being committed, are indeed creating clear
risks of escalation likely to endanger dCtente and peace.
That is why it was necessary and in conformity with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations for the
Security Council to be convened to deliberate on a problem
falling within its responsiblity for maintaining international
peace and security.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Bulgaria, Hungary, Indonesia, Japan, Mongolia
and the Philippines in which they request to be invited to

7. The French Government considers that the current
operations must be halted immediately and that the intervention forces which have entered Viet Nam should fall
backbehind the international frontier.
1

8. France has seen its conviction borne out, as it had
already been by events in Cambodia, namely that there is no
other means of ensuring the maintenance of peace and
stability in the region except by scrupulous respect for the
independence and territorial integrity of each of the States
in the area. Its past experience and the historical links which
bind it to Cambodia, Laos and Viet Nam enable it to
measure the strength of the aspirations of the peoples of
those countries and the will of each and every one of them to
retain their own identity, to remain masters of their own
destiny. In this respect it cannot but recall the position it
adopted during the last debate in the Security Council on
the withdrawal of foreign forces from Cambodia, a withdrawal which, we observe, has not yet taken place.

15. I can understand why my Soviet and Czechoslovak
colleagues would prefer to discuss only the situation on the
China-Viet Nam border. I can equally understand why my
Chinese colleague wants priority for the Kampuchean complaint. But I think the Council has to be free of the myopia
of the parties and their backers. It is precisely because of this
that four Western members brought the issue to the Council
and phrased their request as they did, in terms of the
situation in South-East Asia as a whole and its implications
for international peace and security.
16, The Council knows my Government’s views on the
Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, which was in total
contravention of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Council also knows who voted against the otherwise
unanimous resolution calling for an immediate cease-tire
and the withdrawal of foreign forces from Kampuchea. It is
perhaps ironic that the State which took the.initiative to
establish the current Committee on the Non-Use of Force’
should have so frustrated the Council when it wasconsidering a flagrant breach of that very principle. My Government
deplored the inhumanities of the Pol Pot regime: in Kampuchea. Nevertheless, there is no excuse whatsoever for Viet
Nam’s violation of the territorial integrity of another
Member of the United Nations.

9. It also feels that the establishment of a peaceful state
of affairs in South-East Asia necessarily requires a solution which would ensure for States in the Indo-Chinese
peninsula the maintenance of their independence and
territorial integrity in a framework of relationships of
good neighbourliness with all other countries in the
region.
10. In recalling these principles, which the Government
of France regards as fundamental, we intend, in so far as
we are able, to serve the cause of the peoples of a region
for which we have a particular regard and, also, to remain
loyal to our general conception of international relations,
which can be based only on the maintenance of detente,
to which we remain firmly attached.

17. The British Government had already‘ expressed
public concern lest the struggle inside Kampuchea threatened the stability of other countries or drew inChina and
the Soviet Union by inadvertence or by miscalculation.
Last week we appealed publicly for restraint’to be exercised on the border between Viet Nam and China. The
Charter enjoins all Member States to eschew the use of
force in resolving disputes. Whatever the provocation,
and the Council has heard two versions of the facts, my
Government deplores the Chinese armed attack on Viet
Nam. We have impressed on the Government of China
the need for China to withdraw from Viet Nam. We urge
: I
them today to do so immediately.

11. It is with respect for these principles that the French
delegation will consider any draft resolution intended to
bring about a cessation of fighting and the withdrawal of
the foreign forces of intervention and a peaceful settlement.
12. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
would at the outset express my congratulations to you upon
the assumption of the office of President of the Security
Council. Your skill and ability as a diplomat have already
been put to a real test this month. I am confident that they
will continue to be tested before the month is finished, and
also that you will guide our proceedings to a successful
conclusion.

18. When I spoke in the Security Council last month, I
commended to the Council the joint statement by the Foreign Ministers of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) [see S/13025] deploring the armed intervention against Kampuchea, calling for an immediate withdrawal of foreign forces from Kampuchean territory, and
emphasizing the right of the people of Kampuchea to decide
their own future without outside interference.The principles on which that statement was based apply with equal
validity today, and I should like to commend to the Council
the further statement by the ASEAN Standing Committee
issued at Bangkok on 20 February (see S/13106]. That
statement may offer the basis for a resolution by the Security Council.

13. I would also exnress my warm thanks and coneratulations to Ambassador Mills of Jamaica for the way ii which
he conducted the affairs of the Council during January.
That was a difficult month too, and the fact that we emerged
collectively relatively unscathed was to no small measure
due to his persistence and to his skill. I thank him very
much.
14. It is barelv a month since the Council met to consider
the Vietnamesk invasion of Kampuchea. Since then the
situation in South-East Asia has continued to deteriorate.
China has now mounted an armed attack on Viet Nam.
Although there is a shortage of the accurate and unbiased
information which a free press on the spot would provide, it
is clear that we are faced now with a situation which gives
cause for even greater concern. The fighting within Kampuchea and on the border between China and Viet Nam
threatens the stability of the whole area. There is also a very
real risk of other, outside Powers being drawn into the
conflict, with incalculable consequences. The case for
action by the Security Council is therefore clear. We have a
responsibility to do what we can to call a halt to this cycle of
violence before the area of conflict widens even further.

19. The elements for such a resolution now seem to be
emerging. In our view there are three minimum requirements: first, a call in clear and unambiguous terms to all
parties to cease hostilities forthwith, secondly, a demand
that foreign forces withdraw from all areas of conflict in
South-East Asia and return to the countries whence they
came; thirdly, a restatement of our collective commitment
to the principle of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
inviolability of all States.
’ Special Committee
On’Enhancingthe
of Non-Use of Force in International
ance of General Assembly resolution

2

Effectiveness
of the Principle
Relations, established in pursu32050.

aligned movement continues to show its vitality and its
members%n&&ving
commitment to peace in an intemational system in which the big Powers have a dominant role.

20. I believe that a resolution on these lines would command wide support. Indeed, it ought to enjoy unanimous
support in the Council. I hope that all members will weigh
the risks of a further extension of the conflict before rejecting such a resolution.

26. We supported the request to convene the Security
Council to consider “The situation in South-East Asia and
its implications for international peace and security’*
because there is a serious conflict prevailing in that region.
Zambia, as a member of the Council, wants to ensure that
this august body will adhere scrupulously to the provisions
of Article 24 of the Charter, which outlines the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Council has to live
up to its responsibilities in dealing with all situations of
major conflict which threaten global peace. The corollary to
this position is that the Council has to deal with all situations involving any combination of members of the intemational community.

21. Wars can come in two ways: deliberate aggression or
drift. The example of July and August 1914 is one which we
would all perhaps do well to ponder, No one wanted a
major conflict; yet it came. Perhaps the Security Council
cannot prevent the extension of war by’the deliberate act of
a Government bent on national aggrandizement. But it can
help to avoid a limited conflict from drifting into a catastrophe. Action along the lines I have already indicated
would, in our view, help. It would give some time for
thought.
22. The responsibility of the international community and
of the Council will not, however, end with the adoption ofa
resolution on the lines which I have suggested. In the longer
term we shall need to consider what action can be taken to
eliminate the underlying causesof tension in the area. I note
that the Secretary-General has said that he is ready to make
his good offices available. I note also that the Governments
of China and Viet Nam have said that they are ready to
negotiate. I note, too, that there have been suggestions that
the international community might help in some way
towards a resolution of the problems of the area. All these
possibilities merit further consideration. The adoption by
the Council of a resolution on the lines which I have already
indicated would, in our view, help to provide time for
precisely such consideration.

27. Zambia has been saddened by and feels anguish about
the recent developments in South-East Asia-the more so
because they involve countries and peoples with which we
maintain very friendly relations. It is for that reason that we
are seeking remedies.
28. The present conflict has all the potential of proliierating in its dimensions both horizontally and vertically. At
face value, the present Sine-Vietnamese conflict may
appear to be a limited war. Yet today’s limited warshave the
capacity to trigger tomorrow’s generalized wars. What is
even more ominous is that the conflict could eventually
bring powerful nuclear Powers into direct confrontation.
This has led us to the conclusion that there is a real danger
of a broader confrontation shaping up to South-East Asia if
the present conflicts are not resolved quickly.

23. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for the kind and generous words he
addressed to me. I endorse his prayer for a successful conclusion of this debate.

29. The paradox of the matter is that these conflicts
involve States which espouse similar social systems. That is
all the more reason to believe that it is possible for these
States to understand each other better. We urge the countries in conflict in South-East Asia to reflect further and use
the similarity of their social systems as a common denominator which should work in favour of peace and not war
between them.

24. Mr. MUTUKWA
(Zambia): As we meet here today,
the deteriorating situation in South-East Asia not only
continues to endanger the security of that region, but in fact
has the potential of threatening the foundations of world
peace and security. Reports indicate that thousands of lives
have been lost in the fighting. People are being displaced
from their homes to become wandering refugees in the
current war. This is in addition to the conflict which has
been raging in Kampuchea since December of last year.
Only last month the Security Council was seized of the
question of Kampuchea. It is because of the recognition of
the gravity of the conflict in South-East Asia that the Zambian delegation has worked closely with the other Council
members behind the scenes in a bid to devise strategies to
avert a further deterioration of the situation.

30. In the debate on the situation in Kampuchea in the
Council last month, my delegation expressed serious concern about violations of certain fundamental principles of
amity among nations and norms of international law. We
continue to uphold these cardinal principles, which stipulate, inter alia, that States should respect the sovereign and
territorial integrity of other States, and that no State has the
right to interfere in the internal affairs of other Stata,whatever the motive.

25. The main tribute for the work which has culminated in
these meetings of the Council must be paid to you, Sir, as
President for the month of February. You have demonstrated that you are not only a skilled diplomat but also a
fearless crusader for peace. We are proud of the role that
Kuwait, which is a fellow non-aligned country, continues to
perform in the service of world peace. Your performance,
together with the excellent manner in which your predecessor, Ambassador Mills of Jamaica, conducted the affairs of
the Council in January, is an additional demonstration, an
additional example, of what prepared diplomats from the
third world and the non-aligned movement can do in the
selfless service of the United Nations. Indeed, the non-

31. If States were licensed to interfere in the affairs of
others, then there would be no order in the world and the
?ntemational*’
law of the jungle would take over. The
situation would be reminiscent of what the political philosopher Hobbes described four centuries ago in his Leviathan as a society ln which lie would be not only brutish and
nasty but short.
32. Zambia has repeatedly expressed deep concern about
the continuous carnage in South-East Asia over a long
period of time. Indo-China has only recently emerged out of
fratricidal wars against forces of imperialism and oppres3

the closest possible ties of friendship and solidarity with the
Government and people of Kuwait, takes immense pride in
your achievements and pledges our fullest support and
co-operation in your continuing endeavours.

sion. We hailed the people of Viet Nam for their heroic
struggle against foreign occupation and artificial divisions.
The people of Kampuchea faced a similar predicament.
During these wars in Indo-China which ended only in the
197Os,
millions of persons were killed, maimed, wounded or
-made homeless. Billions of dollars’ worth of property was
destroyed. It was a sad chapter in the history of those
people.

39. It also gives me the greatest pleasure to pay a tribute to
Ambassador Donald Mills, who charted the course of the
Council during the month of January. Faced with the di%
cult challenge of presiding over the Council in the very tirst
month of Jamaica’s entry as a member and during a period
in which the Council was seized of one of the most intractable and unprecedented of problems, both substantively and
procedurally, Ambassador Mills performed that task with
characteristic expertise, objectivity and firmness. Our
warmest thanks are extended to him and the members of his
delegation.

33. What we expected after these long years of conflict
was that peace and economic reconstruction would follow.
As it has turned out, this expectation and wish are yet to be
realized.
34. The situation on the ground in South-East Asia is one
in which a permanent state of tension is developing that can
trigger war at any moment. The international community
has a bounden duty to assist the people of South-East Asia
to return to peaceful existence.

40. Expediency has once again dictated that the Council
should meet at a critical breaking-point for peace in SouthEast Asia and perhaps-who knows?-beyond. Early in
January of this year, the Council considered the situation
and attempted constructively to dampen tensions, contain
the problem and encourage movement along avenues
towards a peaceful resolution of the problem. However, in
spite of its best efforts, no tangible advance was possible.
The Secretary-General has aptly categorized the present
and continued blood-letting as another tragic situation
where violence begets violence and has warned that, unless
the vicious cycle is broken quickly, it could spread with
unforeseeable consequences.

35. Zambia therefore calls upon the parties in the present
conflicts in the region to effect a cease-fire immediately and
to terminate the hostilities. Thereafter, the parties should
seriously negotiate to resolve the problems and circumstances that led to the present conflicts. This could be done
either bilaterally or under the aegis of the good offices of the
Secretary-General, which have already been offered. In
addition, a committee of the Security Council could also be
established to assist in the mediation efforts. In the interim
the Council has no option but to call for an end to the
hostilities immediately.

41. Bangladesh,‘like the great majority of countries of the
region and beyond, cannot but express its gravest concern
and anxiety over this concentric circle of action, reaction
and counter-action in South-East Asia and the wider ominous implications it holds of eventually drawing into the
vortex of turmoil and war all the countries of the region and
maybe of the world.
:
42. The tasks before us are immediate and urgent. Bangladesh believes that in pursuing them there are four cardinal
factors that we must keep uppermost in our minds.

36. My delegation would therefore like to appeal to all the
States permanent members of the Security Council to co
operate fully in ensuring that the Council will reach a
decision in this matter in the interests of the peace and
security of our world. They should not abuse their powers
of veto, which have often been used to paralyse decisionmaking by the Council. The Council as a whole has to live
up to its duty as the United Nations organ vested with
supreme responsibility to deal with all threats to international peace and security. It is impossible to conclude that
the present situation in South-East Asia is anything other
than a threat to international peace and security. The Council must therefore take appropriate action.

43. First and foremost we believe that there is a direct
responsibility incumbent on the United Nations to take
resolute action. It is our confirmed stand that any Member
State or group of Member States that requests a hearing or
calls for a meeting must be heeded without prejudice to the
merits of the case or the competence of the Security Council
in determining the matter. For the Council not to heed them
would be a dereliction of its duties. That is why Bangladesh
supported a meeting of the Council. We believe that there is
an international moral conscience, a global voice and a
collective responsibility that must be effectively utiliid. To
thii end we have sought to contribute to our utmost to
foster through bilateral contacts and persuasion an atmosphere conducive to a peaceful settlement. We have done so
individually, with the parties concerned, bilaterally, with
members of the Council, and jointly, through our nonaligned colleagues on the Council. It is recogmzed that, on
occasion, behind-the-scenes activities have a more beneficial effect than overt confrontation. We are, however, convinced that the United Nations must not be reduced to a
mere instrument of expediency or an agency of last resort to
justify actions after the event but should be an instrument
with built-in strength which could and should automatically
take up critical issues irrespective of where they arise. In this

37. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Zambia for the kind and generous words he addressed to me and
to my country. Indeed I shall never forget the beautiful days
I spent in the most hospitable of circumstances in his
country.
38. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Mr. President, I wish to
congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February.
Though it is the shortest month of the year, it has perhaps
proved to be one of the most critical periods for world peace
and security. I can say without hesitation that the Council is
fortunate to have you piloting our endeavours at this crucial
juncture in world history. Your dedication, determination,
diplomatic skill and efficiency are attributes that have been
proved consistently in the past and supremely evidenced
once again in the last few weeks. As the junior member from
Asia, as it were, in the Council, I wish formally to record my
own personal tribute to you for the constant advice and
assistance you have rendered so generously to me and to the
members of my delegation. Bangladesh, bound as it is by
4

regard we believe that the Secretary-General’s recent protestation to the effect that Governments preferred to act independently, resorting to military power or other means, and
that only when they were in danger of losing or failing did
they turn to the United Nations and expect miracles, is a
criticism that requires close and earnest introspection by all
members present. We live in a world of independent nations
with diverse political, economic and social institutions and
ideologies. It is a shrinking world inevitably bound into a
global society by close interdependence. Violence anywhere
threatens people everywhere. So long as nations see war as
the only remedy for their grievances and as long as competing national interests bypass global institutions created to
restrain them the world is doomed to a condition of intemational anarchy. The only alternative to recurrent violence is
international law, which cannot be a respecter of nations.

48. In the first instance, it is our primary responsibility to
seize upon and to foster all positive elements proposed by
the parties themselves to this end. We particularly note and
welcome with satisfaction the statement made by the
Secretary-General on 22 February in which he offered his
own “good offices”. We appeal to the parties concerned to
seize upon this initiative in the interests of peace.
49. Bangladesh has consistently supported and joined in
sponsoring the idea that this entire region of South-East
Asia could exist in harmony asa zone of peace, freedom and
neutrality, free from outside interference and bound by ties
of friendship and solidarity. President Ziaur Rahman of
democratic, non-aligned Bangladesh has repeatedly stated
that because of our geographical proximity to those areas
we consider ourselves a bridge between South Asia and
South-East Asia. Developments in that region have therefore caused us-to use an understatement-profound
grief
and regret. We have been integrally bound to the States of
South-East Asia by history, geography and political, economic and cultural associations from time immemorial. We
have established the closest and friendliest relations with
each and every State of the region, individually and collectively, through a variety of international institutions. Thus
our anxiety over the current situation is very profound.

44. Secondly, it follows, therefore, that the paramount
priority facing the Council in striving to prevent a further
aggravation of the situation and wider escalation of the
conflict by outside Powers is to underscore its unequivocal determination to reaffirm and uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter and its obligation to promote the rule of law. Foremost among principles is
respect for the sovereign rights of all peoples and countries to peace, independence, territorial integrity and selfdetermination
without any interference, coercion or
restraint whatsoever from outside Powers. Among other
fundamental principles are those enjoining States to
refrain from the use of force and to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that
international peace, security and justice are not endangered. A crucial factor is the call on all States to refrain
from any action that might aggravate the situation in any
manner.

50. In the final analysis, our concern must be’ directed
towards the people of this region and the fulfilment of their
hopes and aspirations for a better life in larger freedom.
Bangladesh believes that it is the urgent task of the world
community to promote and foster their efforts at rehabilitation, reconstruction and socioeconomic development,
untrammelled by tension or war. A short while ago, we were
rejoicing that, for the first time in generations, this region
appeared to be free of strife and outside interference. It is
our belief that this search for stability and tranquillity in one
of the most important and potentially prosperous regions in
the world must IX pursued with even greater vigour. We
believe that it is realizable, given the goodwill, co-operation
and active support of all countries of the world. Bangladesh
would support any move that could lead to durable peace
through a regional or global settlement, and we stand committed to promote this cause in any meaningful and fruitful
manner.

45. Thirdly, Bangladesh is convinced that the words and
actions of the Council should not be conducive to a negative
approach of accusation, recrimination or moral judgement.
The issues involved are too complex and affect too sensitively the susceptibilities of different national interests to be
subject to the passing of judgement. It would be all too easy
to fall into the quagmire of motives and intentions that
inevitably justify any action or reaction and thus become
diverted from our task. Our pm-eminent goal is to secure
and preserve peace. Our actions must lead to defined ends
that are constructive and contributory, not merely to a
temporary respite or piecemeal pursuit of peace but to
genuine long-term and durable peace and security in the
region.

5 1. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Bangladesh for the over-generous and kind words he addressed
to me and to my country. As he rightly said, his country and
mine enjoy the best of constructive relations.

46. : Fourthly, and proceeding from the foregoing, Bangladesh believes that the situation requires three immediate
and concurrent actions: putting an end to all hostilities and
the cessation of all military operations in the entire region
coupled with genuine respect for the political independence
of $1 States involved, the withdrawal of all troops from all
foreign territories, and the exercise of maximum restraint
on the part of all outside Powers in refraining from any
actions that could exacerbate tension or lead to further
widening of the conflict.

52. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): Mr. President, I should like at
the outset to express to you my delegation’s warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. The skilful manner in which you
have been gsliding the work of the Council has again demonstrated your outstanding qualities of leadership and your
dedication to the United Nations and the principles embodied in, the Charter. My delegation stands ready to cooperate fully with you in the discharge of your duties, and
particularly in respect of the ditlicult issues now facing the
Council. I recall with gratitude the strong support that you
gave last month to me as President and to the Council.

47. Finally, Bangladesh believes that it is the fun&mental
responsibility of the Council to encourage and to promote
the exploration of all avenues that could lead to the normalization of the situation, a peaceful settlement of disputes and
to long-term and durable peace in this region.

53. I wish to express my deep appreciation to representatives for the generous remarks that they have made regarding Jamaica’s presidency of the Council in January, and
should like here to thank all members for the co-operation
5

I

conflagration. No one’s interest would be served by such an
eventuality. Much pressure has already been exerted on the
parties concerned for restraint, for the termination of hostilities and for withdrawal of troops from the areas of conflict.
Those are the prerequisites for any progressive irnprovement in the situation.

and understanding that they extended to me and which so
greatly facilitated my task during that month.
54. The issues involved in the situation prevailing in
South-East Asia which have preoccupied members of the
Council during the past week are ditlicult and complex and
contain elements of great danger. Developments over the
past two months have placed the region once again in the
focus of world attention, as we have witnessed the unfolding
of a deepening crisis in that area. The passions, conflicting
interests and antagonisms that are elements in the evolution
of the present situation give cause for grave apprehension.
As fighting in the area continues to escalate, the prospects of
a widening of the confhct have become more real. It is
therefore necessary and desirable that the Security Council,
as the guardian of international peace and security, should
exert all efforts to promote stability, harmony and peace.

59. The Council must exnlore all ontions in its efforts to*
realize these objectives. My deiegatibn will participate in
any effort by the Council to deal constructively with this
ditTicult situation. In this respect we welcome the offer by
the Secretary-General of his good off&s and would encourage any other constructive measure which might be
proposed.
60. I should like to underline and endorse the statement
made by the representative of Zambia to the effect that it
is imperative that the Council should be allowed to take a
clear-cut concrete decision on these issues and one which
will contribute positively to the solution of the problems
of the area.

55. Last month, the Council met to deal with a serious
conflict that had broken out in South-East Asia. Today we
are faced with the fact of a further outbreak involving a
major conflict between two countries in the area. In January, my delegation drew attention to the fact that the countries of the area have in the.past been subjected to great
hardship and suffering. At that time, we were deeply concerned at the danger of a widening of the conflict. It is clear
that some of our fears have been realiied, and Jamaica is
deeply disturbed at the continued trend towards friction
and confrontation among the peoples of the area with
whom we have friendly relations and share common hopes
and aspirations.

61. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Democratic Kampuchea. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
62. Mr. THIOUNN
PRASITH (Democratic Kampuchea) (interpretationfrom
French): Mr. President, permit
me first of all to congratulate you most warmly on your
assumption of the important post of President of the
Security Council for this month. Whether during the war
of national liberation from 1970 to 1975, or for the three
and a half years of national reconstruction or even now in
the course of the present struggle for the survival of the
nation and people of Kampuchea, my country, Democratic Kampuchea, has always found in the people and
Government of Kuwait a sympathy and support which
have never failed. The friendship which has been develop
ing over these years of struggle between our two peoples
and our two non-aligned countries, is based on solid
foundations, namely, the sacred principles of nonalignment and the Charter of the United Nations, of
which Democratic Kampuchea and Kuwait are among
the most earnest defenders. Accordingly, we appreciate
most highly your presence as the President of the Council
in this debate.

56. In approaching these problems facing South-East
Asia, it is not the intention of my delegation to engage in
recrimination and acrimonious charges. Rather, we seek to
assist in promoting an atmosphere of accommodation, conciliation and harmony in accordance with the principles of
the Charter, which lays down the basic norms that must
govern the behaviour of States in their relations with each
other,
57. In January, when the Council met to consider the
situation in Kampuchea, my delegation underscored the
relevant principles of the Charter applicable to that situation. In particular we stressed the need for strict adherence
to the principles of non-intervention in internal affairs and
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all States. Now that there has been a new
outbreak of hostilities involving the armed invasion of the
territory of Viet Nam on 17 February, we once again must
assert the validity of the relevant principles of the Charter.
Those principles specitically reject the resort to the use of
force and the violation of the territorial integrity of States.
My delegation therefore deeply regrets the resort to the use
of force in this instance, as we believe that, whatever differences may exist between States, they should be settled by
negotiation and peaceful means.

63. I should also like to express my profound and sincere gratitude to you, Sir, to the Secretary-General and to
all the other members of the Security Council who have
been kind enough to allow me to speak here today to
present the present situation of my country, after two
months of aggression, invasion and Vietnamese occupation of the most cruel kind. That is one more expression
of the sympathy and encouragement which the Security
Council and ail countries that love peace, justice and
independence have always accorded to the just struggle of
the people of Kampuchea under the leadership of the
Government of Democratic Kampuchea against aggression, invasion and occupation by Viet Nam, aided and
abetted by the Soviet Union.

58. That is the only valid method for the settlement of
differences or disputes between States. We therefore call
upon the parties involved to bring about an immediate
cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of all troops from
foreign territories in the region and to observe strict respect
for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all States in the area. We believe that further aggravation of
the situation must be prevented and therefore urge restraint
on all outside interests to minimize the risk of a general

64. The Security Council met from 11 to 15 January last
at the request of the Government of Democratic Kampuchea to examine the problem of the aggression and massive invasion of Democratic Kampuchea by the armed
forces of Viet Nam which was launched on 25 December
6

1978 by the Le Duan-Pham Van Dong clique. Except for
the Soviet bloc, to which Viet Nam belongs and with
whose old refrain we are all familiar, all‘the representatives of countries which spoke in the debate in the Council denounced Viet Nam’s aggression and invasion of
Democratic Kampuchea and called for the withdrawal of
all Vietnamese forces from Kampuchea. After that
debate, 13 out of the 15 members voted for a draft resolution (S/23027] submitted unanimously by the nonaligned countries members of the Council calling for the
immediate cessation of the Vietnamese aggression and
the withdrawal of all Vietnamese forces from Kampuchea. The debate and the vote in the Council expressed
the will of all peoples and countries that love peace,
justice and independence to defend the Charter of the
United Nations and : the principles of non-alignment
governing relations between States and also their determination to defend peace, security and stability in SouthEast Asia, in the Pacific, in Asia and throughout the
world. Nevertheless, relying on the Soviet veto, Viet Nam
continues obstinately and with unparalleled arrogance to
trample underfoot the Charter and the principles of nonalignment. Scornful of world condemnation, Viet Nam
has not only pursued its aggression and invasion of
Democratic Kampuchea but has even intensified them in
all respects in a most barbarous and Fascist manner.

silver from the Royal Palace, from the Silver Pagoda and
from other pagodas of Phnom Penh, the statues and basreliefs of Angkor as well as other objects which testify to the
high level of the ancient Khmer civilization and which were
on exhibition in the National Museum of the capital. In the
short time they were able to occupy the monuments of
Angkor, the national heritage of the people of Kampuchea
and also a universal heritage, they stole bas-reliefs and other
sculptures from those monuments.
68. Wherever they go, the Vietnamese hordes sow devastation, death and suffering. They massacre members of
village and district councils and destroy wherever they can
the structure of the apparatus of the Democratic Kampuchea State. At Phnom Penh they have installed an administration of which the head, the arms, the legs and the very
body are wholly Vietnamese. That administration is Khmer
in name only, a name given to it by Viet Nam to camouflage
its aggression, its invasion and its occupation of Kampuchea and to mislead world public opinion. That administration survives thanks only to the presence of the Vietnamese
occupation forces.
69. Viet Nam is thus in the process of pursuing a deliberate policy of genocide against the people of Kampuchea,
which categorically refuses to collaborate with the Vietnamese invaders. The Vietnamese occupation forces in
Kampuchea control neither the population nor the countryside. They have installed themselves in only a few areas of
the main highways and in empty towns which are in any
case encircled by the troops of the revolutionary army of
Kampuchea and the people of Kampuchea. The present
population of Phnom Penh, for example, is made up of 90
per cent Vietnamese invaders and 10 per cent Soviet and
Cuban advisers.

65. In order to camouflage its aggression and invasion of
Kampuchea, Viet Nam has attempted to undertake the
“Khmerization” of its war of aggression by trying to recruit
Khmers to tight Khmers. But that attempt was a resounding
failure because the people of Kampuchea know only too
well the Vietnamese invaders who have oppressed, exploited and repeatedly massacred them in the past. The
people of Kampuchea absolutely refuse to become the
slaves of the Vietnamese and certainly refuse to serve as
cannon-fodder for the Vietnamese against their own compatriots. On the contrary, in close unity with the revolutionary
army of Kampuchea, they have inflicted and continue to
intlict upon the Vietnamese invaders heavy losses in men
and material. During January 1979 more than 10,000 Vietnamese invaders were eliminated and 1,000 tanks and military vehicles destroyed.
66. The failure of the “Khmerixation”
of the war of
aggression and the heavy losses inflicted by the people of
Kampuchea and the revolutionary army of Kampuchea
prompted Viet Nam to send to Kampuchea three additional
divisions to reinforce its 14 divisions already there and to
intensify its aggression against Kampuchea and its crimes
against the people of Kampuchea.

70. But, barbarous and perfidious as they are, the Vietnamese continue to carry out raids against villages and the
people who live around the towns. They aim systematically
to destroy the Kampuchean nation and people and to eliminate the national identity of Kampuchea so that they can
subsequently swallow it up all the more easily. They already
dealt in this way with the Kingdom of Champa in the
seventeenth century, which they swallowed up and transformed into Vietnamese provinces of the present central
Vit Nam. They did the same with the former territories of
Kampuchea located in the Mekong delta, which they transformed into the present Vietnamese provinces of southern
Viet Nam. Now they want to do the same with Kampuchea
by integrating it by force into an”Indo-Chinese federation”
under the guardianship of Viet Nam.

67. At the present time, 150,000 Vietnamese invaders with
considerable amounts of Soviet military equipment and
supported by hundreds of Soviet military advisers are occupying Kampuchea. The Vietnamese air force is without any
good reason bombing and destroying towns which contain
no people and still less any military targets. Wherever the
Vietnamese hordes go, they destroy and bum villages, fields
and rice paddies; they massacre the people and rape the
women before killing them; they have seized land to give it
to Vietnamese who are sent from Viet Nam; they are plundering the harvests and taking the crops away to Viet Nam to
attempt to fend off the famine which is raging there. They
are eliminating the national culture and the civilization of
Kampuchea. They have stolen and taken away to Viet Nam
the statues of Buddha and other art treasures of gold and

71. Recently, the members of the Le Duan-Pham Van
Dong clique went to Phnom Penh to inspect and encourage
the Vietnamese hordes in Kampuchea, a country which
they believe they have already conquered. Along with the
installation of the Vietnamese administration, they have
mounted a masquerade of talks and treaties in the hope of
legalizing their invasion, their occupation and their genocide in Kampuchea, as well as the permanent stationing in
Kampuchea of 150,000 Vietnamese invaders. The aim of
the so-called treaties is to enable Viet Nam: first, to continue
to carry out aggression against Democratic Kampuchea, to
massacre the people of Kampuchea and to sow everywhere
devastation, death and suffering, in accordance with its
policy of “destroying everything, burning everything and
massacring everyone’* and its objective of exterminating the
7

nation of Kampuchea so as to make it into a Vietnamese
province; secondly, to continue to steal the rice of Kampuchea in an attempt to reduce the famine which rages in Viet
Nam, to steal all the possessions of the people of Kampuchea and all the important economic resources of Kampuchea-land resources, sea resources, the resources of the
sea-bed and the sub-soil thereof; thirdly, to take over Kampuchea and transform it into a colony, to incorporate it into
an “Indo-Chinese federation”, under the rule of Viet Nam,
and subsequently to swallow it more easily.

76. Although it is stepping up its aggression against and
invasion of Democratic Kampuchea in all respects and
proceeding to absorb that country, Viet Nam wishesto have
world public opinion believe that in Democratic Kampuchea resistance bv the ueonle and the revolutionary army
has ceased. It is mt.tltiplyingits acts of provocation along the
frontiers with the People’s Republic of China and making a
great hue and cry with the perfidious goal of blotting out the
memory of the aggression against and the invasion and
occupation of Democratic Kampuchea by 150,000 Vietnamese soldiers and to conceal the intensification of its
crimes against Democratic Kampuchea and the people of
Kampuchea. It is like the murderer who, in order to hide his
crime, cries out that his neighbour to the left is hitting
him-and giving welldeserved blows, by the way-when
he himself is actually cutting the throat of his neighbour on
the right. Incidentally, if everything was really going so well
for Viet Nam in Kampuchea, one might wonder why Viet
Nam needs to station its armed forces in Kampuchea indefinitely. Why does it need to stage this masquerade of ‘a
“friendship treaty’?

72. In its statement of 19 February 1979/seeS/13204], the
Government of Democratic Kampuchea, through its Prime
Minister, Pol Pot, denounced and categorically rejected all
those “agreements” and “treaties” invented and put
together by the Le Duan-Pham Van Dong clique. The
signing of the so-called “treaty of friendship” which was
staged recently in Phnom Penh is of the same nature as that
of the “treaty of friendship” between Viet Nam and Laos
signed in July 1977. It clearly exposes the fact that the goal
of the Vietnamese aggression against and invasion of
Democratic Kampuchea is to compel Kampuchea by force
of arms to enter the “Indo-Chinese federation*’ so that it
can subsequently be swallowed up. It reveals once again the
hypocrisy and perfidious nature of Viet Nam which has
always claimed that is has abandoned the idea of such an
“Indo-Chinese federation”.

77. In fact, the United Nations, the non-aligned movement and the peoples and the countries that love peace,
justice and independence have come to understand and
recognize the arrogance and perfidiousness of Viet Nam,
particularly since it launched its blitzkrieg against Kampuchea and since it has been arrogantly denying the presence
of Vietnamese troops in Kampuchea when the whole world
is perfectly aware that there are 150,000 Vietnamese invaders in Kampuchea. Lastly, after the invasion of Kampuchea by Viet Nam, the impudent and deceptive
commitment of the Vietnamese leaders, and particularly of
the Vietnamese Prime Minister, Pham Van Dong, made
before all the leaders of the South-East Asian countries
according to which Viet Nam would respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all neighbouring countries has clearly shown that Viet Nam is engaged in
lying and hypocrisy, which are the foundations of its international relations.

73. With that “Indo-Chinese federation**, the Le DuanPham Van Dong clique will extend its expansion in SouthEast Asia and create provocations-as it is doing on its
frontiers with China-to
destroy peace and security in
South-East Asia, in the Pacific, in Asia and throughout the
world, in accoidance with Viet Nam’s own strategy, but
also in conformity with the strategy of its Soviet masters.
74. Whether thev be feudal lords or so-called “revolutionaries”, the Vietnamese have one thing ‘in common; they,
have always been and still are inveterate annexationists and
swallowers of the territory of small neighbouring countries.
In the twentieth century, at a time when we are talking of the
elimination of colonialism and of the decline of imperialism, Vietnamese colonialism and imperialism are without
any doubt the worst kind of colonialism and imperialism
that has every existed, because their aim is totally to swallow
up the conquered countries, as they are now attempting to
do to Kampuchea, so that after a certain number of yearsif, of course, the people of Kampuchea do not resolutely
oppose them-there will no longer be either a people or a
nation of Kampuchea, just as today there is no Cham
people or nation.

78. Viet Nam is trampling underfoot the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of non-alignment, resorting to the law of the jungle in its international relations,
conducting itself with unbounded arrogance as a regional
expansionist and displaying scornful disregard of the international community, the United Nations, the non-aligned
movement and all countries throughout the world that love
peace, justice and independence. Viet Nam is the only country in the world capable of combining arrogance, perfidiousness and criminality to a degree which far transcends
the level achieved by Nazi fascism.
79. Along the frontiers with the People’s Republic of
China, Viet Nam has been engaged in incessant acts Of
provocation, seeking every possible pretext to gnaw away at
Chinese territory, on land and on sea, just as it did with
regard to Kampuchean territory before its current maSSiVe
invasion. For a long time now the people of Kampuchea
have been suffering from these cruel and savage acts Of
aggression committed by Viet Nam; they have accumulated
some very bitter experience of this at the price of their Own
blood. That is why the Government and the people Of
Democratic Kampuchea understand perfectly well and resolutely support the just measures taken by the People’s
Republic of China to put an end to the arrogant PrOVoCations of Viet Nam. These measures are without IUIY doubt

75. The activities of the delegation of the Le Duan-Pham
Van Dong clique in Phnom Penh are those of a central
authority in a Vietnamese province. So true is it that the
administration installed at Phnom Penh is nothing but a
Vietnamese provincial administration. However, it is that
Vietnamese administration which Viet Nam is frantically
seeking to have recognized by the United Nations, the
non-aligned movement and all countries which love peace,
justice and independence, and consequently to obtain the
endorsement of the invasion, occupation and absorption of
Kampuchea by Viet Nam. The United Nations, the rionaligned movement and all countries which love peace, justice and independence, have rejected that Vietnamese
eriminal manoeuvre. We thank them most warmly for that.
8

making an active contribution to the defence of iudependence, territorial integrity, peace and stability in South-East
Asia, the Pacific, Asia and throughout,,the world.
-1

throughout the world, to cease and to continue to withhold
all financial,’ economic, military and material assistance to
Viet Nam and to halt even all humanitarian assistance,
because the Vietnamese authorities, which do not even
hesitate to make a profit out of the departure of their
nationals who are fleeing their country every day by the
thousands, are in fact using this humanitarian assistance
not for the improvement of the living conditions of the
Vietnamese people but to promote their expansionist and
annexationist ambitions and their policy of aggression in
South-East Asia; fourthly, to give all aid and assistance to
the just struggle of the people of Kampuchea being waged
under the leadership of the Government of Democratic
Kampuchea for the survival of the nation and the principles
of non-alignment against Vietnamese colonialism and
expansionism.

80. The same cannot be said for the Vietnamese aggression against and invasion of Democratic Kampuchea in
order to colonize and transform it into a Vietnamese province. These acts constitute a grave threat to the peace,
security, stability and independence of all the countries of
South-East Asia, the Pacific, Asia and the world. They are
not merely an isolated or regional phenomenon, because
Viet Nam does not act alone but with the considerable
assistance of Soviet global expansionism. In fact, they mark
a new step towards the intemationalization
of the war,
which is liable to engulf the whole world in flames. If the
crimes of Viet Nam against Kampuchea remain unpunished, Viet Nam’s expansionist and annexation& appetite
will be whetted and it will seek to satisfy it by springing upon
other countries in the area. Furthermore, that would open
the door to other regional or global expansionist Powers
which would inevitably follow the criminal example of Viet
Nam. We should still like to believe that the lessons of
Munich and the crimes of Hitler, in which the Vietnamese
have shown themselves to be the most well versed, have not
already been forgotten.

83. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
84. Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President I would fmt of all congratulate you
on your accession to the presidency of the Council. I greet in
you the eminent representative of the State of Kuwait, a
country with which mine has excellent friendly relations,
both on a bilateral level and in the non-aligned movement.

81. The people of Kampuchea, for their part, absolutely
refuse to become the slaves of the Vietnamese, for whom
they have an age-old ancestral hatred. After having
struggled for scores of years and made so many sacrifices to
win their liberty, independence and territorial integrity, our
people will never allow Viet Nam to impose upon them its
colonialist yoke, to annihilate the nation and to destroy its
civilization and its national identity. Under the leadership of
the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, the whole
people of Kampuchea, united in a broad national, democratic and patriotic front, and the revolutionary army of
Kampuchea are in the process of eliminating hundreds of
Vietnamese invaders every day, and they will persist in this
resolute and unswerving struggle until the Vietnamese
colonialist occupiers have been totally driven out of the
national territory and the national independence, national
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Democratic Kampuchea have been restored.

85. The issue before the Council without a doubt is one of
special importance since there is a serious threat to peace
and security in the region of South-East Asia, brought
about by the open large-scale aggression of China against
Viet Nam, an independent and sovereign country. In the
last few days Chinese aggression against Viet Nam has
caused serious concern in all circles of world opinion. We
feel that the Council, because of its great responsibility to
the international community for maintaining the peace and
security of peoples, has the obligation to examine the situation and take appropriate decisions to condemn the Peking
authorities, to demand of them the withdrawal of all their
armed forces from the territory of Viet Nam. To our mind,
any attempt to divert world opinion by lmking the problem
of China’s aggression against Viet Nam to other issues can
only help to encourage the Chinese aggressors.

82. In order to help in putting an end to this Vietnamese
aggression and invasion which are becoming ever more
intense against Democratic Kampuchea, in order to thwart
Vietnamese ambition to swallow up Kampuchea and eliminate the increasingly grave threats to world peace, we call
upon the Security Council to be good enough: first, to
condemn the aggression against and the invasion, colonization and absorption of Democratic Kampuchea by Viet
Nam and to call upon Viet Nam immediately to put an end
to its war of aggression and its invasion and colonization of
Democratic Kampuchea, to withdraw totally, unconditionally and immediately all its armed forces, all its military and
civilian elements from the territory of Kampuchea and to
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Democratic Kampuchea as well as the right of the
people of Kampuchea to decide their own destiny; secondly,
to invite all Governments to reject the Vietnamese manceuvre aimed at obtaining recognition for the Vietnamese
administration installed in temporarily occupied Phnom
Penh; thirdly, to invite all the specialized agencies of the
United Nations and other international organisations connected with the United Nations, as well as Governments

86. In the last few days we have addressed to the
Secretary-General and td the President of the Security
Council notes and documents from the Government and
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam-General
Assembly and Security Council documents [S/23077, S/Z3093 and S/Z30971 to inform them of
the serious situation brought about by Chinese aggression
and to call upon them to take the appropriate measures to
put a stop to that aggression.
87. Acting on instructions from my Government, I should
like to inform the Council of the position of the Govemment of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on the war of
aggression waged by China against Viet Nam.
88. The Chinese authorities have openly begun a war of
aggression against Viet Nam. This is in no way a frontier
war; it is an outright war of aggression involving extremely
dangerous and unforeseeable consequences, for which
China must assume full responsibility.
9

89. Since the morning of 17 February 1979, the Chinese
authorities have mobilized live army corps of some 25
divisions, several armoured divisions and heavy artillery
divisions, with air force back-up, for their mass attacks on
six Vietnamese provinces, all along 1,400 kilometres of the
Chinese-Viet Nam frontier, from Mong Cai to Phong Tho.
The Chinese aggressors have made deep inroads into Vietnamese territory, getting as far as 40 kilometres from the
frontier, the aim being to take over the major points along
the frontier provinces. They have endeavoured to seize the
main places in the provinces of Lao Cai and Cao Bang and
have occupied the urban centres of Dong Dang, Muong
Khuong and Dong Khe, several regions of the districts of
Dinh Lap, Trang Dinh, Lot Binh and Van Lang in the
province of Lang Son, Tra Linh, Ha Quang and Quang Ha
in the province of Cao Bang, Moung Khuong and Bat Xat
in the province of Haong Lien Son, Phong Tho in the
province of Lai Chau, and Binh Lieu in the province of
Quang Ninh.
90. The invading troops have destroyed several economic
facilities, cultural centres and public service centres; they
have bombarded with their artillery the apatite mines of
Cam Duong, the power plants of Lao Cai, the tin mines of
Tinh TUC, and the sugar refineries of Phuc Hoa. They have
destroyed everything in their path, burned everything,
killed old people and children, raped women and perpetrated crimes of the utmost barbarity against the Vietnamese people. At bayonet point they have forced the
inhabitants to show them the way, and killed those people
as soon as they reached their destination. The army of
invasion has caused serious losses in human life and assets
among the Vietnamese.
91. The Vietnamese army and people have in their turn
inflicted heavy losses on the invaders, thus slowing their
advance. However, they continue to bring up fresh reinforcements of troops, war equipment and resources and are
preparing for new attacks. According to foreign information sources, several hundred military aircraft and seven
Chinese army corps are concentrated very close to the
Chinese-Viet Nam frontier. It is clear that the Chinese war
of aggression against Viet Nam is becoming increasingly
cruel and there is a threat of its expansion, which would
entail extremely serious consequences for peace and stability in South-East Asia and in the world at large. This is an
undeniable fact. None the less, the Peking authorities are
continuing their campaign of lying propaganda. They are
trying to make everyone believe that these are only defensive counter-attack military operations near the frontier,
involving only frontier forces, that the fighting is going on
solely on Chinese territory, that the Vietnamese armed
forces are having to withdraw, and so on. Yesterday, the
representative of China repeated the same story, giving us to
believe that he is deliberately underestimating the common
sense of the Council. For who could believe that 25 divisions, backed up by several armoured divisions and artillery
and supported by the air force could be frontier forces or
that occupation by the Chinese army of several urban centres and Vietnamese villages, some of which are 40 kilometres within Vietnamese territory, could be no more than a
defensive counter-attack?

93. In the past few decades the Chinese authorities have
made great efforts to subjugate Viet Nam, in order to attain
their expansionist designs in South-East Asia. But Viet
Nam has persisted in its independent, sovereign policy,
which is an obstacle to the Chinese designs.
94. I could place before the Council many facts to bear
out what I have said about this policy of the Peking leadership but, because of lack of time, I shall limit myself to
mentioning but a few.
95. In 1965, Teng Hsiao-ping made a secret visit to Viet
Nam and had interviews with our leaders. During that visit,
he proposed that Viet Nam should stop receiving assistance
from the USSR and said that China was ready to assume
responsibility for all the assistance necessary for Viet Nam
in its resistance to the Americans. We refused that offer
because it was contrary to our people’s independent, sovereign foreign policy and their policy of international solidarity. That was why the Chinese authorities subsequently
created all sorts of difficulties to prevent assistance from the
Soviet Union and other socialist countries from reaching
Viet Nam. That delayed the supplying of our war front and
to some extent restricted our capacity to fight at that time.
96. In 1968, the Peking leaders opposed our policy of
negotiating with the United States because, to use the words
of an American journalist at that time, “they wanted to fight
the Americans to the last Vietnamese”. It was also their
policy during that period that Viet Nam’s war against the
United States should continue so that difficulties in the way
of Soviet-American detente would be created and so that
the Peking leaders could pursue, in all tranquillity, their
cultural revolution without fear of being disturbed by the
United States. We explained to them that the strategy of
“fighting and negotiating’* at the same time was based on
Chinese experiences. To win us over, they said that this
strategy had been a mistake on their part. Chen-yi, who was
then Deputy Prime Minister, went so far as to threaten us
with breaking off relations between the Chinese Cornmunist Party and our Party if we persisted in negotiating with
the Americans. Despite those threats, we.conducted negotiations with the United States until 1973.
97. We have not made those two facts public up to now
because despite the ever-increasing provocation of the Peking leaders, we have always sought to safeguard the traditional friendship between our two peoples. Today, at this
series of meetings, faced with the grave danger to the life of
our nation and aware of our people’s reponsibility towards
history and towards the safeguarding of peace in SouthEast Asia and the entire world, we believe that the time has
come to bring to light these facts-which we have selected
from among many others-so that the Security Council and
world opinion may understand the truth about the hostile
policy practised by the Peking leaders towards Viet Nam for
several years now and, at the same time, the truth about the
independent and sovereign policy, the policy of international solidarity of the Party, Government and people of
Viet Nam.
98. Until the mid-197Os, Peking had been accentuating its
hostile attitude towards Viet Nam. In 1974 the Chinese
authorities seized the Paracel Islands of Viet Nam and laid
unjustified claim to other islands in the Eastern Sea. They
fomented incidents on the land frontiers with Viet Nam,
even though the Sine-Vietnamese frontiers had been clearly

92. In launching the war of aggression against Viet Nam,
the Chinese authorities have laid completely bare their hostile policy towards Viet Nam, as well as their ambitions for
annexation and hegemony as a major nation in South-East
Asia.
10

,-

delimited by the 1887 and 1895 conventions between the
Government of France and Tsing Court, and the two parties, Vietnamese and Chinese, had agreed in 1957 and 1958
to maintain the status quo.

105. While they brazenly launch aggression against Viet
Nam, the Peking authorities are changing black into white;
they have fabricated lies ‘and spread calumnies about Viet
Nam in order to trick international opinion and their own
people and in order to hide their perfidy and their criminal
acts against the Vietnamese people.

99. At the very beginning of 1978, the Chinese authorities,
in accordance with a premeditated, organized plan, tricked
several hundreds of thousands of Hoa and forced them to
leave Viet Nam. They incited those who remained to foment
subversion.

106. First of all, they are inventing wholesale the so-called
Vietnamese aggression. They accuse Viet Nam of being
“destined to destroy the four modemizations of China”,
which in their eyes obliges them to take reprisals in order to
“punish’* Viet Nam witha view to establishing “a frontier of
peace and stability”.

100. Peking took advantage of the difllculties faced by the
Vietnamese people as a result of natural disasters in order to
cut off economic assistance and withdraw experts, in the
fierce hope of being able to subjugate Viet Nam. They went
so far as to exert pressure on other countries and on international organizations to stop their assistance to Viet Nam,
thereby breaching resolutions of the General Assembly and
the non-aligned movement with regard to assistance to Viet
Nam for post-war reconstruction.

107. The picture drawn by the representative of China
yesterday for the Council concerning the so-called acts of
provocation by Vietnamese armed forces on the Viet NamChina border is just a tissue of lies by which they seek to
pass off as ours their own violations of the frontier and their
crimes against our frontier population.

101. They used the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique as an instrument to make the people of Kampuchea submit to their
r&ime of slavery, to launch a war against Viet Nam and to
foment contlicts with other neighbouring countries, thus
endangering peace and stability in South-East Asia. They
spared no effort to sow discord between the countries of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations and Viet Nam
and to set the countries of South-East Asia at each other’s
throats.

108. It takes but a little good political common sense to
recognize that, after 30 years of war involving unprecedented loss and sacrifice, the Vietnamese people need peace
and stability as never before in order to rebuild the country.
To provoke a vast country such as China, to have an
anti-Chinese policy, such as the Peking leaders accuse us of,
would be madness. In view of the traditional friendly relations between the two peoples, any Government, however
little concerned for the national interest, would have to seek
to develop and strengthen those links.

102. All that clearly proves that Peking’s aim is to encircle
Viet Nam from four sides and to coordinate the war
fomented by the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique on our southwestern borders with its own military pressure on our northem borders, with its provocations inside Viet Nam and with
economic strangulation, in order to try to subjugate us.
Having suffered one defeat after another in their antiVietnamese policy, the Peking authorities have now
embarked on an even more dangerous path: that of an open
war of aggression against Viet Nam.

109. The Peking leaders accuse us of being supported by
the Soviet Union, of depending upon the Soviet Union.
They say that we are encouraged by that friendly country in
our “hostile policy” against China. This is just a calumny. It
is a shameless falsification of the policy of independence,
sovereignty and international solidarity of the Vietnamese
people. It is a slight to our national honour. Socialist Viet
Nam still follows a policy of proletarian internationalist
solidarity with the Soviet Union and the other socialist
countries, a policy of peace, friendship and co-operation
with the national liberation forces working for peace and
justice in the world. On the basis of this Leninist foreign
policy the Soviet Union has been giving us constant support
and effective assistance in our previous war of resistance
and in the post-war national reconstruction effort, on the
basis of reciprocal respect for independence and sovereignty. It is precisely the Peking leaders who, following their
policy of hegemony and large-nation expansionism, have
not accepted the aforementioned foreign policy of Viet
Nam and who wish to subject us to an anti-Soviet policy.
This leads them to pursue a systematic policy that is increasingly hostile towards our people and the culmination of
which is a war of open aggression against Viet Nam.

103. This act of war reveals expansionist and hegemonistic aims of a large nation and the reactionary policy of the
Peking authorities. They constantly try to make the world
believe that the threat of war comes from the USSR, but in
fact it is Peking and Peking alone that calls for war and is
trying to push the world to the edge of the precipice. Shamelessly, those authorities declare themselves to be the NATO
of the East, incite the NATO countries to oppose the Soviet
Union and spare no effort to strengthen their collusion with
imperialist and reactionary forces against the socialist countries, the national liberation movements and all peaceloving forces.
104. It is necessary to stress the fact that the Peking
authorities launched the war of aggression against Viet
Nam after the signing of the Sine-Japanese peace treaty2
and the normalization of diplomatic relations with the United States, and immediately after the return of Teng Hsiaoping from the United States and Japan, where Teng publicly
called for war against Viet Nam. Information has come to
light showing that Washington and Tokyo gave their consent, if not their encouragement, to Peking in its aggression
against Viet Nam.

110. During his recent trip to the United States and Japan,
Vice Premier Teng constantly called for “a lesson such as
Viet Nam deserves”. This is the propaganda formula for
“reprisals” used in the time of the Johnson administration
to justify the war of escalation against the people of Viet
Nam.
111. As for the Chinese Government’s slogan of “establishing a frontier of peace and stability”, we recognize in it
the slogan of the “need for secure and guaranteed borders”
used by the aggressor Israel in its occupation of a part of the
Arab territories.

2 Treaty of Peace and Friendship between the People’s Republic of

China and Japan,_._~.._.
done at Peking on 12 August 1978.
.--..-___~

11

112. We must here stress the fact that when China used
military force to occupy the Paracel Islands in 1974 it was
certainly not to “punish” anyone but simply to achieve its
aim of occupying that part of Vietnamese territory in perpetuity with a view to being the sole master of the whole
Eastern Sea.

trary that every inch of Vietnamese territory is more than
precious for the Chinese leaders, and we can say so with the
fullest sense of our responsibility before history. That is
why, behind the so-called offers of negotiation by the Pcking leaders, we see a clever move to bestow legality on the
territorial occupation carried out by the invading forces.

113. Secondly, to defend themselves against and to distract public opinion throughout the world, the Peking leaders are striving through propaganda to play down the scope
and seriousness of their war of aggression against Viet Nam.
They say that the war they have launched “is confined to the
frontier” and that Chinese troops will withdraw once the
goal has been achieved. In fact, they have in their war of
invasion used a force of more than 20 divisions, that is,
more land force divisions than were used by the United
States in its war of aggression against Viet Nam when that
war was at its peak. So it is certainly not a frontier war that
the Peking leaders have launched. If we bear in mind all
their machinations and their hostile actions towards Viet
Nam in recent years, we can say that their war of aggression
is intended to bring Viet Nam to subjection. History shows
that aggressors usually employ the phrase “limited war” to
mask their true intention. The Johnson administration,
when it began the war of aggression against Viet Nam, also
used the same expression “limited war’*. But what really
took place was one of the bloodiest wars of aggression that
history has ever witnessed. War has its own laws. One
cannot say that the war of aggression unleashed by China
against my Country caNlot lead to a war of aggression on a
grand scale. The only way to limit and remove the danger of
the extension of such a war of aggression which seriously
threatens the peace of the world is to tie the hands of the
aggressor.

117. There is reason to believe that the criminal intention
of the Peking leaders is so dangerous that they have had to
endeavour by every means available to hide it from their
own people, even by means of restraint and restriction of
the fundamental human freedoms. This is borne out by the
facts published in The Chrirfiun Science Monim of 23 February 1979, which reads as follows:
“There are also signs that Peking fears an outburst of
criticism at home against the Viet Nam war. A directive
from the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist
Party has forbidden all wallposters, meetingsand demonstrations about Viet Nam. It was also reported that itwas
forbidden to listen to foreign radio broadcasts. Some
Chinese officials in Peking mentioned differences among
the Chinese leadership regarding the Viet Nam issue.
Some observers think that broad sections of Chinese
youth are reluctant about a policy that might oblige them
to fight on the field of battle.”
118. Men of good will throughout the world should certainly wonder why the Peking authorities have tried to hide
this war even from the Chinese people. To our mind it is
because it is a war of aggression, absolutely contrary tothe
morality and aspirations of the people of China. It is
because the Peking authorities are afraid of the truth, just as
the owl fears the light. It is because they have hazarded an
unjust war. It is for that reason that they have had to resort
to lies in order to try to deceive their own people and to
mislead world public opinion and even the members of the
Security Council.

114. Thirdly, the Chinese leaders in launching the war of
aggression against Viet Nam say that they are ready to
negotiate through peaceful means.
115. The world is witness to the fact that before their
armed attack against Viet Nam they refused any proposal
for negotiations made by Viet Nam. In former times, when
they were occasionally forced to sit down at the negotiating
table, they strove by every means to sabotage the negotiations. Now that they are calling for negotiations while they
are launching their armed attack, this also reminds us of the
tactics of the former Johnson administration when it was
stepping up its war of aggression against Viet Nam. It is just
sheer trickery. History shows that China has always used
force to resolve frontier and territorial disputes. Peking used
military force to occupy the Paracel Islands, a territory of
Viet Nam; it used war to encroach on the territory of India
and it provoked a frontier war with the USSR.

119. In order to cover their policy aimed at subjugating
the Cambodian people in slavery, they seek to slander Viet
Nam. In their war of aggression against Viet Nam, they
have used all the lies and calumnies we have just summarized for members here. They seek to turn the victim of
aggression into the aggressor, truth into falsehood, to distort the truth without giving thought to public opinion so
long as they can serve their evil ends. The history of every
age has shown us how far the leaders of peoples who have
had to resort to lies like those used by Goebbels can lead
mankind, and what fate is reserved for them.
120. Peoples who prize peace and justice, men of conscience throughout the world, cannot remain indifferent in
the face of a war game such as that currently being played by
the Peking leaders. Energetic and timely action will be
required to foil their acts of aggression and their warmongering policy. This, we feel, is the lofty responsibility incumbent upon the Security Council and on the States Members
of the United Nations.

116. Yesterday the Chinese representative said “magnanimously” that China did not want one inch of Vietnamese
territory, thus repeating the words of his Government. As
Vietnamese, after the experience of being China’s neighbour for 20 years, in other words, since the agreement of
1958 between the Chinese and Vietnamese communist parties concerning the srutusqtto of the frontiers drawn between
the two countries, we who have suffered gradual encroachment on our territory, sometimes inch by inch and at the
price of more than 2,000 armed provocations all, without
exception, caused by the Chinese side and spread over four
years, according to the memorandum issued by our Ministry of Foreign Affairs /S/13093], can say quite to the con-

121. After more than 30 years of war, the people of Viet
Nam, more than any other people, ardently long for peace
in order to rebuild their country. The people of Viet Nam
have great respect for the Vietnamese-Chinese friendship,
which was built jointly by the two peoples in their struggle
against imperialism and for independence and freedom. In
recent years, particularly since last year, in view of growing
12

‘”

‘.,,

provocation and threats from the Peking leaders, the people
and Government of Viet Nam have striven to show patience
by holding back and trying to find other means of resolving
by negotiation all the problems between the two countries.
But, scorning reason, Peking has opted for war in order to
realize its expansionist ,and hegemonistic ambitions as a
large nation. The people of Viet Nam had no alternative but
to defend themselves, as is their right, against the aggressor.

(i

.

the Charter of the United Nations and is an act of arrogant
defiance to all peoples of the world that love peace and
justice.
127. We hope that the Security Council will severely condemn the Peking leaders for their crime of aggression
against an independent and sovereign country and will
,demand that they should immediately end their war of
aggression against Viet Nam, immediately and totally withdraw all their troops from Vietnamese territory and respect
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Viet Nam.

122. Taking their example from the old feudal Chinese,
the imperialists and the colonialists, the Chinese leaders
believed that they could use bombs and guns to force the
people of Viet Nam to submit and that they could use the
tricks of propaganda to mislead world public opinion. But
they were seriously mistaken. Loyal to the teaching of our
venerated President, Ho Chi Minh, that “nothing is more
precious than independence and freedom*‘, the people of
Viet Nam, united as a single man, calm and sure, overcoming dilEculties and making sacrifices, are resolved to defend
every inch of their sacred native soil, to safeguard independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and the gains
made by the building of socialism in our dear country, and
will thus contribute to safeguarding peace and security in
South-East Asia and throughout the world.

128. We followed attentively the introduction of the draft
resolution sponsored by the Soviet Union and the Socialist
Republic of Czechoslovakia [S/131171. We wholeheartedly endorse the views expressed therein and give our
full approval to the measures there contained for putting an
end to the Chinese war of aggression against Viet Nam. We
hope that the members of the Council, aware of their
supreme responsibility before the international community,
will give their support to that draft resolution.
129. We believe that it is necessary to stress that, in his
statement, the representative of the United States Govemment [2ll#th meet&J intentionally sought to sow confusion about the problem in an attempt to act as advocate of
Chinese aggression against Viet Nam. There is no problem
that can properly be described as the “South-East Asian” or
“Indo-Chinese” problem. What public opinion in the world
is condemning is precisely the war of aggression of the
Chinese authorities against Viet Nam. If there is anything to
be debated in the situation in this region, it is only Peking’s
war of aggression, which must be condemned for the simple
reason that that aggression has violated the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Vietnamese people and that it has seriously violated the peace and stability
of South-East Asia and of the rest of the world. The fact that
the United States has linked the Chinese aggression against
Viet Nam with the Kampuchean problem proves its complicity with the Chinese aggressors whom they wish to
encourage to redouble their efforts in their pursuit of this
criminal war.

123. Once again, as a matter of national duty and for the
sake of peace, independence and social progress, all the
people of Viet Nam have risen up to tight against the
expansionist aggressors in collusion with the imperialists,
the common enemy of all peoples. It is precisely for that
reason that the war of the people of Viet Nam for its just
cause immediately benefited from the broad and firm support of the Soviet Union and the socialist countries, the
peoples, Governments and countries that love peace, independence, freedom and justice and the whole of progressive
mankind. Ten years ago the whole of mankind demanded
that the Government of the United States should end its war
of aggression against Viit Nam, that American troops
should leave Viet Nam. Today, once again, the whole planet
is resounding with the angry cry: “Chinese expansionist,
hands off the soil of Viet Nam; end the war of aggression,
withdraw all your troops from Vietnamese territory’*. Only
this morning some of us who are sitting here saw with our
own eyes thousands of Americans in the streets of New
York demonstrating, carrying slogans of the most expressive kind condemning Chinese aggression and expressing
solidarity with Viet Nam.

130. We must draw a clear-cut distinction between the
two problems. On the one hand, we have the open and
deliberate war of aggression waged by China against Viet
Nam and the occupation of part of Vietnamese territory by
Chinese troops; on the other hand, there is the support and
assistance of our people for the armed revolutionary struggle of the people of Kampuchea for the achievement of their
right to self-determination as recognized by the Charter of
the United Nations. That assistance is being provided at the
request of that fraternal people and to the extent of our
means, on the basis of mutual respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of each country. It is
directed against the neocolonial type regime in Kampuchea, the product of the hegemonistic and expansionist
policy of the Peking authorities. There can be no possible
trade-off between the withdrawal of Chinese troops from
Viet Nam and the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from
Kampuchea. To link these two problems is to defend the
expansionist and aggressive policy of the Peking authorities
and, in actual fact, it is tantamount to encouraging them to
intensify and extend their war of aggression against Viet
NlMl.

124. From this seat, on behalf of the people of Viet Nam
and the Government of the Social& Republic of Viet Nam,
permit me to express our profound gratitude for that firm,
immediate and valuable support accorded to us by the
world.
125. The people of Viet Nam are f&y convinced that
with determination and the strength of a whole nation
which has routed all aggressors, and with the firm support
of our brothers and friends from all continents, they will
inevitably win final victory against the war of aggression
launched by the Peking leaders.
126. In starting a war of aggression against Viet Nam, the
Chinese leaders have shown themselves to be enemies of the
socialist system and the national independence movement,
and dangerous saboteurs of peace in South-East Asia and
throughout the world. That aggression has spumed the
most elementary principles of international relations and
13

13 1. With regard to the problem of Kampuchea, we have
already had occasion to explain the true situation in that
country at the most recent series of meetings of the Security
Council. Furthermore, the Council has already rejected that
problem. The Kampuchean people have overthrown the
Pol Pot-Ieng Sary r&ime, and consequently that clique no
longer represents anyone.

others of more recent vintage, but all well known to the
members of the Council. What is more important, and what
made it imperative for the Security Council to meet, is that
the Charter of the United Nations, in its very first Article,
declares as one of the main purposes of the Organization:
“to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity
with the principles ofjustice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations
which might lead to a breach of the peace”.

132 In his message of 8 January 1979 addressed to the
President of the Security Council /S/13013, annexli7, President Heng Samrin, Chairman of the People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea, stated that any meeting of the
Security Council on the problem of Kampuchea not convened at the request of the People’s Revolutionary Council
of Kampuchea, or any meeting at which the People’s Revolutionary Council was not represented, was totally illegal.
Consequently, if there is anything to be said here about the
problem of Kampuchea, it is that we must condemn the
Chineses authorities who continue to transport arms and
ammunition for what remains of the routed army of the Pol
Pot-Ieng Sary clique in an attempt to revive that political
corpse, to interfere in the internal affairs of the Kampuchean people, to impede the efforts of the Kampuchean
people to rebuild their country, and to sabotage peace and
stability in South-East Asia. All this is further proof of the
persistent expansionist ambitions and hegemonistic greatPower aims of the Peking authorities in that area.

The Charter also makes clear that it is the Security Council
which bears the primary responsibility in this regard.
137. It is, therefore, the duty of the Council not only to
review the facts of the present crisis but-what is more
important-to
consider practical measures that can help to
defuse the situation and, in time, restore peace in that
long-alflicted region. The facts are well known. The military
movements across international borders and the continued
armed confrontations between large forces are not denied.
The resulting human suffering and economic losses are
self-evident.
138. My country deplores the increasing resort to the use
of force that we have been witnessing in the attempt to settle
disputes in South-East Asia, and we call here, as we have
publicly and through diplomatic channels, for the exercise
of restraint on the part of all those involved.

133. .The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Canada. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

139. Beyond that, it should be evident that the first essential step to be taken by the Council must be a call for an
immediate cessation of hostilities in the entire region.
Secondly, this must be followed as rapidly as possible by the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from the territory of Cambodia and from the territory of Viet Nam. And thirdly, it is
equally clear to my Government that we must move the
treatment of these differences from the military to the political level. In other words, it is our earnest hope that the
Council may be able to proceed beyond the essential first
steps of a military cease-fire and withdrawal to a considcration of practical ways and means of developing, in an
orderly fashion, a climate conducive to peace, security and
stability not only for the nations directly involved in the
conflict but also for their neighbours and the world at large.

134. Mr. BARTON (Canada): First of all I should like to
thank the members of the Council for their courtesy in
allowing me to appear before it this afternoon and to make
a statement on this current and important question. I
should also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assump
tion of the presidency of the Council for this month. Last
year I had the honour and pleasure of serving under your
presidency and therefore know how well the affairs of the
Council will be handled during the remainder of the month
of February.
135. It is a measure of Canada’s deep concern over the
current situation in South-East Asia that we joined with
Australia and New Zealand in what for us was an unusual
step, namely, that of supporting, in a letter addressed to the
President on 23 February [S/231141, the request for an
urgent meeting of the Council. That we have also now
sought to address the Council is again indicative of the
importance Canada attaches to this debate. While Canada
is neither a party to the many-sided disputes now disrupting
the peace in South-East Asia nor an immediate geographical neighbour, we regard ourselves as a member of the
Pacific Community and Canadians are deeply troubled by
the far-reaching consequences which the perpetuation of
the present conflicts could bring about. We are concerned
too, because of our 20-year exposure, as members of supervisory and control mechanisms author&d by the international community, for the aspirations of the peoples of Viet
Nam, Laos and Cambodia for justice. After a quarter of a
century of strife, those aspirations have still not been fulfilled. And tinally, we are disturbed by the evident failure of
existing international machinery to prevent the recurrence
of violence and warfare.

140. But it would be a serious mistake to concentrate only
on the current outbursts of violence and ignore the other ills
that have plagued this region for so long. Canada hasraised
its voice before to deplore the denial of human rights in
parts of that region. Canada, like many other nations, and
in particular the countries neighbouring that region, has
been shocked by the continuing exodus of thousands of
refugees who have been forced for a variety of reasons to
flee their homelands, We have tried, and are continuing to
try, to alleviate this problem. But more sweeping measures
must be taken if we want to stop violence, prevent the denial
of human dignity, and alleviate the conditions which have
driven human beings to join in the flow of refugees. The
peoples and Governments of Viet Nam, Cambodia and
Laos must be given more than sympathy or remonstrance.
They must be helped to develop the political framework
within which they will be able to live in peace and security.
The peoples of the ASEAN countries must be given more
than ad hoc humanitarian assistance and vague reassurances. They are entitled to long-term stability and the international community would be well advised to help them to
achieve it.

136. I do not wish to rehearse in any detail the causes of
the current confrontation, some of which am centuries old,
14

141. In Canada’s view, therefore, the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole must urgently consider
what modalities might best be established to achieve these
long-term objectives. We know of past efforts to bring
peace to the area. We also know of past failures, and we
would be the last to underestimate the difficulties that will
lie in the path of such a conciliation endeavour. But thii
effort must nevertheless be undertaken and, with will and
determination, the countries directly involved, the neighbouring nations directly afTected and other interested Powers should be able to assemble in an appropriate fashion in
order to create conditions of peace and security for the
entire region. In our view, the Secretary-General is well
placed to play a useful role in this process, and we urge the
parties to take advantage of his offer to assist.

to the peace and stability of the whole region should the
conflict in Indo-China widen. Unfortunately, our efforts
and those of others were of no avail. In the last few days
China’s forces have crossed the border and entered Viet
Nam. Fighting is still continuing between the two
countries.
148. China’s action in invading Viet Nam is clearly a
response to the invasion of Cambodia by the Vietnamese
early in January. But the existence of a causal link provides no justification. We cannot condone in any way
China’s action, any more than we could condone Viet
Nam’s earlier violation of Cambodian sovereignty. The
remedy for both must be the same. In both cases the
forces must be withdrawn immediately. It is my delegation’s hope that the Council will adopt a resolution insisting upon the withdrawal of Chinese forces from Viet
Nam and of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia and reaffirming the fundamental principles on which the Organization and the survival of international order are based.

142. Against the background of what I have said already,
we entertain the hope that the Council may invite the
Secretary-General informally to explore possibilities that
may be open and acceptable to those most directly involved
for a political meeting which would aim at translating into
mutually acceptable political realities the issues of contention which are to&y the basis of unacceptable military
action, which must come to an end.

149. It is not often that events show us so clearly and so
quickly that a violent act contains the seeds of further
violence. The actions of Viet Nam earlier and now of
China have created a very tense and dangerous situation
in the region with the potential for almost unlimited
escalation. Viet Nam has recently signed a treaty of
friendship with the Soviet Union [S/Z29201 which makes
mandatory consultations between the two Governments in
the event of an attack on one of the parties. Further escalation leading to a conflagration in Asia must be avoided
through statesmanship and restraint on the part of world
leaders. It is our hope that they will exhibit that
statesmanship.

143. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of New Zealand. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
144. Mr. FRANCIS
(New Zealand): I thank the
members of the Council for allowing me to address them.
I should also like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of your high office. It is good to know in
these troubled times that we are in such capable hands.

150. Hand in hand with the avoidance of further escalation and the immediate withdrawal of forces must go efforts
to resolve the situation in the region peacefully and permanently. In the view of my Minister for Foreign Affairs, the
cardinal principle is the following:

145. For the second time since the beginning of the
year, my delegation has asked to be allowed to speak
before the Security Council on a matter of the utmost
gravity. For the second time this year the troops of one
country have crossed the border of another country in the
South-East Asian region. In a world crying out for peace
and for sanity in human affairs, the resort to force by one
nation against another is simply unacceptable. As my
Minister for Foreign Affairs said last week-end: “New
Zealand deeply regrets the widening of the conflict in
Indo-China”.

“There can be no stability in South-East Asia until
every country in that area is prepared to respect the
independence of its neighbours. Our aim must be to find a
road to a peaceful settlement based on that principle.‘*
151. My Government has noted with interest suggestions
that an international conference might be held to reach
agreement on guaranteeing the independence and neutrality of Cambodia. We feel that serious attention should be
given by members of the Council to promoting discussions
between the parties involved, whether in a conference or
under the aegis of the Security Council or through the very
timely offer of his good offices by the Secretary-General or
in any other appropriate manner, with a view to resolving
the ‘Cambodian problem. For, until the situation in Kampuchea is resolved, the cause of the tension which has contributed to the grave situation before us today will continue. We
appeal to the parties concerned-Viet Nam and China-to
begin this process of finding a peaceful solution by ceasing
their military activities and withdrawing their forces
immediately.

146. In January the Council was faced with clear evidence that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Democratic Kampuchea had been violated by forces of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. At that time we
expressed the view that Viet Nam’s action was contrary to
the central principle of the Charter of the United Nations.
We joined other countries in calling on Viet Nam to
withdraw its forces from Cambodia and to respect that
country’s independence. That call, supported by 13
members of the Council who voted for the moderate draft
resolution /S/13027] introduced by your country, Mr.
President, has not yet been heeded. Regrettably, the draft
resolution itself was defeated by the negative vote of the
Soviet Union.
147. Since then we have watched with growing concern
the deterioration
of relations between the People’s
Republic of China and Viet Nam and the increase of
tension along the border between the two countries. We
joined other countries in the region and elsewhere in
urging restraint on both parties, for we sawgrave dangers

152. My Government will remain in close contact with
other Governments and give its full support to measures
designed to secure a withdrawal of forces and to ensure that
real efforts will be made to work for permanent peace and
stability in the region.
15

Taiwan? The reply is very clear and obviously it has nothing
to do with the people of China, who thus far are unaware of,
this act of aggression against their neighbours in Viet Nam.
Shamelessly, the band now in power is misleading the peaple, alleging that the Chinese frontier guards are defending
their people against Vietnamese aggression on Chinese territory. The truth, it seems, would endanger the precarious
internal stability of the new mandarins’ r&ime-those mandarins .who are afraid of being purged in their turn by
another band.

153. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
154. Mr. ROA KOURI (Cuba) (interprerationf?om Spanish): Mr. President, I would first of all convey the warmest
congratulations of the delegation of Cuba on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council. With our
awareness of your extraordinary qualities and your broad
diplomatic experience, we are sure that you will most ably
conduct the deliberations on this thorny and difficult
matter.

160. Mr. Teng Hsiao-ping discovered, it would seem, a
number of devious possibilities of collusion in America, in
contempt for the achievement of Marco Polo and Christopher Columbus. Bewitched by the almighty dollar, he
came with an empty purse to take his 30 pieces of silver, all
ready to bend the knee. He adopted the Jupitarian pose and
intoned: “Viet Nam must be punished”. He added, in
parentheses, that Cuba should be punished too: “We have
to teach them a lesson’*. And having said that, he began to
abuse the Soviet Union and the socialist camp and to speak
of the terrible danger threatening the world because his
protEg& Pol Pot-he of the 3 million murders-had been
justly and finally consigned by the people of Kampuchea to
the rubbish-heap, perhaps to some dark palace, in Tien An
Men Square in Peking.

155. The history of treason goes back a long way. It is
really unnecessary to remind this international body about
it since it certainly does not suffer from arteriosclerosis. I
shall therefore only refer to a major recent act of betrayal: a
betrayal by the new mandarins of the cause of socialism and
communism. There is no other name to describe the aggression carried out by the present governors of China against
the heroic people of Viet Nam.
156. The struggle against foreign aggression is an insoluble part of the history of Viet Nam. From time immemorial,
the Vietnamese people have, with proverbial courage, stood
fast against repeated attempts at foreign domination. They
never wavered in their patriotic loyalty. They were never
vanquished by their .cowardly aggressors. Neither the
ancient Chinese dynasties nor the French colonialists,
neither the Japanese militarists nor North American imperialism could bring the indomitable fatherland of Ho Chi
Minh to submission. JosC Marti. the founder of our independence, referred with great admiration to that valiant and
self-sacrificing people, that people of such high culture, such
delicate courtesy of manner, such unswerving conduct, such
noble-mindedness in friendship and generous dedication.
With a vision that went beyond his time, he defined the
inherent characteristics of the Vietnamese people and held it
up as an example in the struggle for freedom.

161. The language used by the new mandarins is curious.
But it is not original. Yesterday, Adolf Hitler was similarly
preaching German superiority. Hi compatriots in other
parts of the world-like the citizens of Chinese origin who
to&y live in various countries of Asia and even on this side
of the ocean-,were regarded as “‘ethnic Germans” and
therefore citizens of the Third Reich. Peking is emulating
the German Fascists and is also beginning to incite the
populations of Chinese origin abroad to follow its chauvinist and domineering line, as they did at Ho Chi Minh City
itself in Viet Nam.
162. The reasons underlying the actions of the new mandarins in attacking Viet Nam are paper thin. For some time
they have been claiming to have made themselves masters of
Asia. They thought, when they set up Pol Pot and Ieng Sary
in Kampuchea, that they could extend their hegemony to
Laos and Viet Nam, and that thereby, using the Chinese
colonies in South-East Asia, they could ensure theirdomination over the whole area. To achieve, that however, they
needed the assent of the imperialists. Indeed, it is impossible
to conceive of this adventure being carried out by the new
mandarins without the tacit approval of the North American Government. What other explanation could there be
for the fact that, immediately after his return from the
United States, Teng convened the Chinese Communist Party’s Military Committee, which he himself leads, and,after
several days of meetings, the decision wastaken to strengthen the Chinese forces on the border with Viet Nam in order
thereafter to launch the invasion? On the other hand, the
strategic plans of the two coincided: to stifle Viet Nam, to
prevent the progress of socialiim in Laos and Kampuchea,
For the present Chinese leaders, who have betrayed the
cause of the peoples, it is a matter of eliminating an example
that is too close to them; for the imperialists-who suffered
an ignominious and historic defeat in Indo-China-it
is a
matter of regaining lost ground.

157. For Cuba, which has suffered the scourge of imperialism and even now is subjected to the immoral blockade
imposed by the North American Government, the heroic
struggle of Viet Nam is a daily example. For years the
people of Viet Nam suffered in its o.wn flesh the lash of
Yankee imperialism. With its resolution to stand fast it
helped to prevent further aggression and death in the world.
Its extraordinary victory in 1975 dealt a severe blow to
warmongering circles of imperialism and was a decisive
contribution to world peace and security.
158. Today, yet again, the people of Viet Nam is defending its independence and its sovereignty. Harking back to
Nazi Germany, on 17 February the new band in power in
Peking undertook a large-scale aggression all along the
frontier of Viet Nam, making massive deployments of
troops and engines of war and penetrating deeply into the
territory of Viet Nam. From the fmt moment they met with
the resolute resistance of local forces and Vietnamese militia, which have inflicted heavy losses, both human and
material, on the invading troops.
159. What are the reasons for such a crime? What aim is
the neo-Fascist Peking clique pursuing? Whence did the
new mandarins derive such nerve, such foolhardiness,
which they certainly have not shown in regard to the European colonial enclaves on Chinese territory, and even lessto

163. Basically, despite apparent differences, both agree
and act in unison. The little excursions to the Wall of China
16

and the anti-Soviet outbursts of Mr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
were not pure sham. There is in all this a deepseated
reactionary identity, as there is in the unseemly utterances
of Mr. Teng Hsiao-ping in an interview he gave Time magazine on 5 February. Scoundrels and knaves are always
drawn to each other, as Don Quixote would have said.

Viet Nam become accomplices of its miserable designs. For
many years now, since the beginning of the so-&lid pingpong policy and the visits of Kissinger and Nixon to
China-in the very midst of the criminal escalation of the
Yankee aggression in Viet Nam-the present treason of the
new mandarins has been in the making. Recently, all kinds
of aggression and provocation against the Socialist Repub
lit of Viet Nam have been taking place. Comrade Fidel
Castro recalled, in his speech of 21 February before tens of
thousands of Cubans how the new band had invaded the
Paracel Islands of Viet Nam, islands that had never been
touched when they had been occupied by the American
imperialists. That is typical of the execrable, cowardly
behaviour of the new mandarins.

164. The Chinese neo-Fascist clique is proclaiming that
Viet Nam, with its “repeated attacks on the frontier”, has
tried its patience and that, therefore, it has been forced to
take “punitive action”. Who could imagine that Viet Nam
would be interested in a conflict with China? How is it
possible to believe that a country laid waste by imperialist
aggression, engaged in the difficult task of national reconstruction, deeply peace-loving, would seek a war with a
friendly people? The Vietnamese leaders, throughout 30
years of struggle against the colonialist and imperialist
aggressors, demonstrated their prudence and their wisdom.
If ever they wavered in the face of threats and aggression,
they never lost an opportunity, however small, to spare their
people suffering and to avoid the loss of precious lives. To
claim that Viet Nam-little
Viet Nam, heroic Viet Nam,
which spilt its blood for mankind-has attacked China is to
take us for fools,

168. It is important to take note of the duplicity, the
perfidy that are characteristic of the behaviour of the Chinese ruling class. Allies of the monstrous Pinochet regime,
they have not hesitated to help the enemies of the Angolan
people when their independence was threatened by the
South African racists and other forces that are allies of
imperialism. They have been and continue to be bitter
enemies of the Ethiopian revolutionaries; they facilitated
the invasion of their territory; they envisage the maintenance of the blockade against my country and the illegal
perpetuation of the United States naval base at Guantinamo; they clamour for a larger imperialist resence in the
Pacific and encourage the United States and !v estem European war-mongering circles to continue the arms race and
the policy of aggression against the Soviet Union and the
socialist camp. In brief, they are enemies of peace and the
interests of the peoples, whom they wish to confuse by their
pseudo-revolutionary jargon.

165. Yesterday we listened to a curious, surrealistic
account by the representative of the Teng H&o-ping band.
Using arguments which certainly defy the imagination, he
tried to paint a picture of a terrible Viet Nam, which, in the
midst of the brutal Yankee escalation in 1974, was already
senselessly provoking the vast and powerful China by
attacking its frontier guards. I have never eaten-with or
without chopsticks-mushrooms
that give one hallucinations, but I am sure that the effect of such mushrooms
cannot be any greater than that of the statements by this
worn-out imitator of the Great Helmsman. A schizophrenic
vein seems, indeed, to be a constant of the Fascist mind. But
such an interpretation of history has no parallel in the
annals of the literature of lunacy. I am certain that the
Peking man of Chou-Kou-Tien would reject such a vile
descendancy, just as he. would loathe the famous “red
book” from which no one quotes any longer-I do not
know whether that is because the prologue was signed by
Lin Piao or because some thoughts in it demonstrated the
unspeakable felonies of the new mandarins.

169. The revolutionary
movement throughout the
world-Fidel
stated-has never known greater treason.
The Chinese soldiers, who during the imperialistic aggression in Korea fought with the courage and dignity-as is
always the case when a just cause is being defended-have
no moral justification today for fighting against the Vietnamese. They have in effect launched a dastardly aggression
without explaining the motivations of the Fascist clique of
Teng H&o-ping. The Vietnamese people and troops have
eliminated thousands of invading troops and have destroyed more than 100 tanks and other means of combat,
and they will undoubtedly defeat the forces of aggression.
Teng’s clique is learning important lessons from a people
that has never surrendered or sold out to the enemy, a
people that is willing to fight for centuries in defence of its
country.

166. But, in a desire to be sincere, I must recognize an
element of truth in the monster that the champion of the
assassin Pol Pot attempted to present to us. According to
him, Cuba and Viet Nam are one and the same. There he is
right. Both of us faced foreign domination for many years
without weakening in our struggle, without making any
concessions to the colonialist or imperialist enemy, without
selling ourselves for a dish of beans or for new technology
acquired at the cost of dignity and principles. Both of us
have inflicted bitter defeats on our enemies, and we shall not
hesitate to bring about as many defeats as may be necessary
in the future. Remember that there are already appearing in
Peking-despite the rigid censorship and concealment of
facts-some akibao asking why a friendly neighbouring
people is being attacked, instead of attempts being made to
improve the tattered Chinese economy and raise the standard of living of the great masses of the country.

170. As was stated by our commander-in-chief on a memorable occasion, Cuba is willing to shed its own blood for
Viet Nam. No one who does not rush to the defence of the
Vietnamese people at this time can without blushing maintain his selfesteem. In the country of President Ho Chi
Minh the destiny of mankind is today at stake. To quote
Comrade Fidel Castro:
“It is necessary for world public opinion to rise up and
halt an adventure that could lead the world into a catastrophic war. This is the turning-point for’anyone who
calls himself a revolutionary, for anyone who considers
himself to be progressive, for anyone who is peace-loving,
because this is not a time for vacillation, for ambiguity.
The time has come to see the difference between Viet
Nam and China. Throughout this vast world this is a time

167. Thii is an extremely serious time for the peoples.
Those who would disregard the fact of the flagrant,
cowardly aggression by the ruling clique of China against
17

to define who is who, because no revolutionary, no one
who considers himself a world revolutionary can do anything but condemn in the most vigorous and categorical
fashion thii criminal venture by the Chinese Govemmerit.”

fateful moment, because not only do you possess diplomatic experience of a high order and a keen senseofjustice
but also your country pursues a policy of non-alignment,
the utility of which for peace is being reaffirmed at present.

171. Those who try to fuh in troubled waters, arguing
with fallacious and ambiguous. concern over the destiny of
the peoples of South-East Asia, actually aspire to subject
them to exploitation and their own rapacious rule. The mea
&pas of the imperialists, those who only five years ago were
unleashing the most barbarous war against the peoples of
Indo-China, are nothing but siren calls intended for naive
ears. The real aim is once again to encircle Viet Nam from
the south, by reestablishing the genocidal Pol Pot regime in
Kampuchea, and to keep up the siege from the north by the
neo-Fascist Peking clique.

178. The Council was doubtless aware of the statement
made by the Secretary-General on 18 February, expressing
his deep concern about the current hostilities and his waming that the vicious circle of violence could have unforeseeable consequences. The Secretary-General called for an end
to the hostilities and for a peaceful settlement with full
respect for the territorial integrity and political independence of all the States involved. My delegation would like to
congratulate the Secretary-General for his prompt and
timely reaction of seven days ago, His appeal should have
been immediately reinforced by the Council. Article 24 of
the Charter envisages prompt and effective action by the
Council.

172. The mendacious justifications of the new mandarins
are a miniscule fig-leaf that cannot conceal the shameless
alliance between them and imperialism and their aggressive,
expansionist Hitlerite policy. Those who to&y stand up for
the defence of Viet Nam for ever stand for the defence of
justice, truth, independence and the sovereignty of peoples.

179. Mr. President, why-has it taken the Council so long
to convene to discuss a situation that the Secretary-General
felt obliged to take notice of immediately7 Perhaps you
know the answer. Non-members of the Council have a right
to know the answer, because this delay is indeed a sad
reflection on the functioning of the Council. Quibbling over
the formulation of the agenda at a time like this cannot fail
to remind one of the historic fiddling when Rome was
burning.

173. In spite of this we must remain calm. Precisely at the
moment of the greatest danger for the world we must act
with utmost serenity and composure. It is the responsibility
of all socialist States and the progressive peoples of the
world to act with the utmost serenity. This is not the time to
lose our heads. After certain events take place, they may be
irreversible. This adventure must be defeated, this insanity
must be defeated. We must prevent these mad neo-Fascists
in China from plunging the world into nuclear war.

180. My country is deeply committed to the fundamental
principles on which the policy of non-alignment is based
and which are enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. I refer, in particular, to the principle of respect for
and preservation of national independence and sovereignty
and to the principle of non-intervention in the internal
affairs of other States. Member States are also obliged by
the Charter to settle their disputes by peaceful means in a
manner that does not endanger international peace and to
refrain in their relations from the threat or use of force.
These are the principal reasons why newly independent
countries have sought the sanctuary of United Nations
membership. Indeed, the United Nations itself might not
have come into being but for the universal acceptance of
these principles. My delegation would emphasize that these
principles are of universal applicability, that there are no
exceptions, and that no deviations from them may be permitted to any Member State or group of States. Strict and
scrupulous adherence to these basic principles is vital to the
maintenance of international peace and, ipso facro, their
violation must necessarily pose a serious threat to world
peace. It is for these reasons that my country has consistently opposed the use of armed force across established
frontiers as well as interference of any sort in the internal
affairs of other States.

174. Cuba is certain the aggressors will be defeated. As
always, our people are prepared for every contingency, as
they were during the October crisis. They are prepared, alert
and ready to undertake whatever action may be necessary.
The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam does not stand alone,
just as it did not stand alone in its gigantic feat against
American aggression. The peoples of the world, progressive
forces in all countries, the. fatherland of Lenin and all States
‘in the socialist camp support it in its just struggle against the
foreign invader. The members of the Council are in duty
bound to condemnthe aggressor, to express~solidarity with
the victims of aggression, to demand the immediate withdrawal of the troops sent in by Teng Hsiao-ping’s neoFascist clique andto punish it as.it deserves. But, whatever
may be the decision of its members, history will surely
record, the inevitable victory of the people of Viet Nam.
175. The PRESIDENT: The nextspeaker is the reprcscntative of India. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.

181. The last few days have Seen a flagrant violation of
these principles. The unfortunate victim is a non-aligned
country which is once again gallantly defending itself
against tremendous odds. The Prime Minister of India
expressed his profound shock and distress at the outbreak
of hostilities between China and Viet Nam, hostilities that
could escalate and endanger world peace. He called for the
immediate restoration of peace and, as a first step towards
peace, he urged the withdrawal of Chinese forces from
Vietnamese territory. The President of India, at a joint
session of Parliament, also expressed hi grave concern at
these developments, which also have the potential for

176. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. President, I wish first of all
to express my delegation’s thanks to. you and to the other
members of the CounciI for granting us this opportunity to
express our views on the-important question now engaging
the Council’s attention,
177. I should like also to extend to you my delegation’s
and my own warm felicitations on your assumption of the
duties and responsibilities of the presidency of the Council
for this month and wish you every success.If1 may say so,
the Council is fortunate in having you as President at this
18

endangering international peace and stability. He too called
for the cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of China’s
armed forces, as a first step.

involving outside forces; We hope the Security Council will
take steps to ensure the independence and territorial integrity of the States of Indo-China, free from external
interference.

182. The Minister for External Affairs of India, by an
unfortunate coincidence, happened to be on a visit to
China, and he took the opportunity immediately to convey
personally hi serious concern to the Chinese authorities
and underlined the overriding need to solve the problem
peacefully through negotiations. Similar concern has been
expressed all over the world by so many countries and
peoples that it is regrettable that the response so far has been
a steady deterioration of the situation, despite the obvious
danger of escalation that is implicit in the continuation of
the contlict.

187. A carefully balanced draft resolution, calling on the
parties involved to observe a cease-fire, to vacate foreign
territory occupied during the conflicts, to observe mutual
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
States concerned, to refrain from interference in the internal
affairs of other States and to accept the good offices of the
Secretary-General for the purpose of estabishing a process
for a negotiated settlement of outstanding disputes in an
atmosphere of peace, could conceivably form an appropriate basis for the restoration of peace in stages. But a
decision of this kind by the Council will be an empty gesture
unless the States concerned can be persuaded to implement
it in good faith. The Powers gathered around this horseshoe
table possessthe capacity to persuade them in the direction
of peace. They have stopped active hostilities in the past,
and we believe that they have both the political will and the
practical capacity to do so again now.

183. It is a well-known axiom of peace that the aggressor
shall not retain the fruits of aggression, and therefore peace
cannot be restored unless there is total and complete withdrawal from all occupied territory. China is reported to
have declared its intention of withdrawing, and we see no
reason why there should be any delay in translating this
intention into reality. It is imperative that the withdrawal
should commence before the concerned Powers are relentlessly drawn into the tangled web of a chain reaction.

188. The PRESIDENT
The next speaker is the representative of Australia and I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

184. My country is totally opposed to the concept of
punitive military action, which is fraught with great peril for
stability and international relations. As my Minister for
External Affairs stated in the Indian Parliament, the days of
punitive expeditions and gunboat diplomacy are over. It is a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations for one State
to take punitive action against another and to usurp the
powers and functions of the Security Council when the
Council is inhibited by the veto from taking action. If such
punitive action is condoned, international law and order
will be in the hands of self-appointed policemen, and that
would be the end of the Council. The system of collective
security envisaged by the Charter does not permit unilateral
punitive action, and the exercise of the right of self-defence
cannot possibly extend to punitive measures.

189. Mr. ANDERSON (Australia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council for
allowing me this opportunity to participate in this debate. I
should like also to express the gratification of my delegation
at the fact that the Council has the benefit, at this critical
time, of your diplomatic experience, skills and wise judgement in guiding its deliberations, thereby maintaining the
high standard of leadership which was set during January
by your distinguished predecessor, Ambassador Mills of
Jamaica.
190. Australia, with its neighbours in the Asia-Pacific
region, is directly affected by the matters now before the
Council. We believe it essential that the international community should act promptly on these critical issues.Accordingly, the Australian Government, in company with the
Canadian and New Zealand Governments, in a letter
[S/13114] to you, Mr. President, of 23 February, expressed
the view that the situation in South-East Asia and its implications for international peace and security should be a
matter for urgent consideration by the Council.

185. The present conflict has been going on for nearly a
week and the casualties are reported to be heavy. It has now
become a matter of grave and urgent concern for the entire
international community. The Security Council should
meet this challenge to peace and take decisive and meaningful steps to end the hostilities immediately and demand the
total withdrawal of Chinese forces from Vietnamese territory, to be followed by the establishment of a negotiating
process for settling the problems in a climate of peace. In
this connexion we hope that the Council will take into
account the offer of good offices by the Secretary-General.

191. Australia thus strongly supports the initiative taken
by the Governments of Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom and the United States in calling for this meeting. My
Government firmly believes that the Security Council, acting in accordance with the basic principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, has a vital part to play in bringing an
early end to the conflicts.

186. Stability and co-operative relations in South-East
Asia can be maintained only on the basis of mutual respect
for national sovereignty and territorial integrity. Viet Nam,
Laos and Kampuchea belong to the group of non-aligned
nations and are all sovereign States Members of the United
Nations with independent and distinctive personalities of
their own. They have the right to fulfil their legitimate
aspirations in their own way free from any external interference. The history of outside involvement in the internal
affairs of the States of Indo-China should be brought to an
end if there is to be enduring peace with honour. It cannot
but be a matter of concern and regret that Viet Nam and
Kampuchea should have been subjected to armed conflicts

192. In my statement on 15 January to the Council
meerin~, at meetings called toconsider the invasion
by Viet Nam of Kampuchea, I drew attention to my
Government’s deep concern about the grave dangers that
that action posed for the widening and escalating of conflict
in the region. I further expressed the view that a peaceful
solution of that conflict should be based in the first instance
on the establishment of a cease-f& and the withdrawal of
all foreign forces.
plllrh

19

These must be based on respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and the right of
peoples to choose their own Governments.

193. These objectives were central to the draft resolution
[S/13027] then under consideration. An overwhelming
majority of the members of the Council, representing wide
international opinion, gave it their full support. Regrettably, it was vetoed.

201. In those endeavours we warmly endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal in his statement of 22 February for the
protagonists to reach a peaceful solution of their differences
and we welcome his readiness to make his good offices
available, should the parties involved wish to make use of
them.

194. It is with deepening concern that the Australian
Government has followed the swift and increasingly ominous course of events since that time: the continuation of the
bloody conflict in Kampuchea, the subsequent deterioration of the situation along the Sine-Vietnamese border,
intermittent armed clashes and, most recently, the entry of
substantial Chinese forces into Viet Nam. Those are grave
developments with the most serious implications for peace
and stability in the South-East Asian region. They carry
with them the risks of widening conflict, with incalculable
consequences.

202. The PRESIDENT: The last speaker is the representative of Poland. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
203. Mr. JAROSZEK (Poland): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you and the other members of the Council for having
afforded the Polish delegation this opportunity to present to
the Council the position of my country on the question now
under discussion. I cannot fail at the same time to convey to
you personally our sincere congratulations on yourassumption of the presidency of the Council. I do so with all the
more satisfaction as I have long known you as an able and
experienced diplomat and an eminent representative of the
State of Kuwait, with which my country maintains friendly
relations of constructive cooperation.

195. The wars which have engulfed the Indochina States
over the past 30 years have brought untold human suffering
and misery. When hostilities finally ceased, the world
looked forward hopefully to a long period of peace in which
the well-being of all the peoples of the -region could be
advanced and ensured. We deeply regret this fresh bloodshed and suffering and we believe that all efforts must be
made without delay to restore peace to the area.

204. The delegation of Poland has come to the Council, as
in fact all those present here have done, to discuss the gross
violation of international peace and security brought about
by the aggression of China against the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam. The attitude of my Government towards the
aggressor’s action was clearly spelled out in its statement of
18 February /see S/13108]. In condemning as it does with
profound indignation the aggression against the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, the Government of Poland regards it
as a violation of the basic principles of international law and
as an expression of the dangerous policy of expansionism
and hegemonism pursued by the Chinese leadership.

196. Australia seeks an environment which would enable the countries of the region both individually and
collectively to pursue policies designed to enhance political stability, economic advancement and social welfare
and cohesion.
197. Australian foreign policy is based on full support
for the principle that, whatever their cause, disputes
between countries ought to be settled by peaceful means
in accordance with the principles of the Charter. In this
context we noted and we warmly endorse the objectives
of the joint appeal of the ASEAN countries in the statement made by the Chairman of the ASEAN Standing
Committee, the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, on 20
February /S/13106].

205. That being the case, the subject of the Council’s
deliberations is not the situation in South-East Asia or in
Indo-China, for it is not that situation which has produced
the serious threat to world peace. We am dealing here with a
premeditated and ruthless armedattack against a sovereign
State. It is precisely that attack which has broken the peace
in South-East Asia and thus created a serious threat to
international peace and security.

198. The Australian Government has for some time
identified the position in the Indochina
States as deteriorating and as potentially dangerous not only for our
immediate region but for the world at large. We have
made that concern known at the highest political level to
many nations throughout the world. As my Prime Minister said on 22 February: “We seek to contribute to containing the actions of the protagonists and to relieving
tensions in the area”.

206. The danger of Chinese aggression against Viet Nam
has been imminent for quite a time now. It actually started
when the Chinese ruling circles embarked upon their policies of big-Power chauvinism towards their neighbours and
the world at large.

199. We would urge all members of the Council to
reflect upon the seriousness of the issues and the need for
the utmost restraint in this fragile and dangerous situation, and to heed the calls that have come from all sides
for the adoption of measures leading to the restoration of
peace and stability in the region.

207. In recent months the Government and the people of
Viet Nam kept warning the international community that
the Chinese authorities were intensifying their armed activities at the Vietnamese frontier and had undertaken feverish
preparations for a war against Viet Nam. The leaders in
Peking openly boasted that “‘Viet Nam must be taught a
necessary lesson”, that “Viet Nam must be punished”. They
advanced the invented pretexts that China was ‘driven
beyond forbearance’* and that, fn order to develop, it
needed “a peaceful international environment*‘. Appalling
as those clumsy arguments may sound, to us they have an
ominous familiarity. Precisely such reasoning was used by
Nazi Germany to attack Poland 40 years ago. The differ-

200. It is the firm view of the Australian Government
that there should be immediate cease-fires in the conflicts. We call on Viet Nam to withdraw its forces from
Kampuchea and on China to withdraw its forces from
Viet Nam. That would bring about an immediate reduction of tension and so provide opportunities for concerted effort to find solutions leading to lasting settlements.
20

ence uerhaps was in semantics-the present one-sided, arbitraryjudgement as to what a State, especially an aggressive
one, conceives to be its “peaceful international environment”, at that time, 40 years ago, was expressed in terms of
iebensraum. Indeed, few have been misled by arguments of
that sort and they will deceive no one, since aggression can
neither be justified nor tolerated. Sooner or later an aggressor has to end up in disgrace and contempt. The history of
previous invasions against Viet Nam is an ample illustration
of that undeniable truth.

Chinese troops should.be immediately withdrawn from its
territory and that it should be paid compensation for all the
damages and losses it has suffered as a result of China’s
unprovoked aggression against it, We are of the opinion
that all supplies of arms and military technology to the
Chinese aggressor should be halted. My delegation, therefore, lends its full support to the draft resolution submitted
to the Council by Czechoslovakia and the Union of the
Soviet Socialist Republics and contained in document
s/13117.

208. Students of international relations will certainly have
much to reflect upon and wonder about when they study the
present aggressive policies of China towards its neighbours
against the background of the utterances of that country’s
delegation when the United Nations adopted the historic
Definition of Aggression [General Assembly resohtion 3314
(XXry)l in 1974. It is also much clearer to all now why
China has been so vehemently opposed to the conclusion of
a world treaty on the non-use of force in international
relations.

212. In the case before us, the Security Council can prop
erly exercise its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security only if it condemns the
aggression in unambiguous terms and adopts effective
measures to end it forthwith and eliminate all its consequences.
213. It is regrettable that, in the face of the dangerous
situation brought about by the aggression against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, both in this chamber and
outside it, attempts have been made to divert attention
form the crux of the matter by linking the problem with the
internal situation in another country, in this case Kampuchea. If only some of the exponents of that artificial and
unfounded linkage were eager to apply the same criteria to
the present action by China against Viet Nam as those by
which they tended to judge developments in Kampuchea,
we would have witnessed fewer examples of a double standard and political convenience. Once on this subject, I could
not stress more strongly that the only legal representative of
the People’s Republic of Kampuchea is its new Government
headed by President Heng Samrin. Political outcasts paid
and supported by those who have attacked Viet Nam carry
no political, legal or moral credibility.

209. Any aggression must give rise to most resolute opposition and condemnation. The case before us, however,
brings to mind special connotations. A sovereign State,
Member of the United Nations and member of the nonaligned movement, has been invaded by an outside Power
which claims to have its own, exclusive right of passing
judgement upon’and punishing others, even without any
attempt at recourse to the well-established international
machinery. A permanent member of the Security Council,
which lets slip no occasion to stresshow great a friend it is of
the non-aligned and developing countries, subjects one of
them, representing the symbol of struggle for liberation,
independence and sovereignty, to pressure and blackmail
and, finally, launches an armed aggression against it. I
hardly have to elaborate on the dangers to world peace
posed by such precedents of the use of force.

214. In the circumstances surrounding the present case
before the Council, we cannot accept attempts at putting
the aggressor on an equal footing with the victim of aggression. In this context, appeals to “parties concerned” cannot
be viewed without surprise, as there is only one party to be
sanctioned for the aggression against the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam. Those inclined to overlook that important
factor seem to suggest that, instead of being interested in
genuine peace and d&ente in the world, they would rather
prefer to play a strange game of cards to achieve their own,
narrow interests. Connivance at aggression or the shunning
of effective action to counteract it in fact encourages the
aggressor. Such an attitude is dangerous and indeed inadmissible. Never have methods like this worked in the past.
They are doomed to fail again.

210. For dozens of years Viet Nam has been capturing the
admiration of the whole world for its heroic stand against
all kinds of aggressors and imperialisms. It has always been
victorious in repudiating their invasions. We have no doubt
that this time, too; it will be triumphant in repelling the most
recent manifestation of Chinese expansionism and hegemonism. But while the just struggle of the people of Viet Nam
continues, the international community cannot remain idle
in the face of the most flagrant violation of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. To do so would be tantamount to sanctioning aggression and big-Power chauvinistic aspirations. It would be tantamount to inviting similar
actions vis-a-vis other neighbours of China.

215. The PRESIDENT
I thank the representative of
Poland for the warm and kind words that he addressed to
me and for the kind reference that he made to the cordial
relations that exist between his country and mine.

211. Therefore, in offering its full solidarity and support
to the Government and people of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam, Poland strongly demands that an end should be
put to all military operations against Viet Nam, that the

Z5e meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

21
.

. _ ._

,

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LE.5

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and
distributors
Nations.
Sales

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sent
en vente
dans
les librairies
depositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vow
aupres
de irotre
libraire
a : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes,
New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOIIYVZiTb

EIBAAHHR

OPl-AHHBAUHU

OIi-bEAUHEHHhIX

HAUUH

MJA~HHR
Ooraw~sauu~
06~eamxemnm
HaunA
nomno
xynurh
mmax
w arewrcreax
ao acex
panonax
nazipa.
Hseoanre
cnpasxn
aamebr
xnnmno~
r4arasrine
wnw nmnwre
no anpecy:
Oprana3anna
HaqnR.
Cercunn
no nponame
nrnannR,
Hbw-Hopx
HUH Xefreaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las pubficaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Section
de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estan
de1 mundo.
ConsuIte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price:

$U.S.

et les agences
ou adressea-vous

NACIONES

s KHH)I(HLIX
Mara06 nsaannax
a
06~enanennb:x

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerfas
a su librero
o dirfjase

2.50

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-December

1981-2.250
