no

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

9. Requests the Special Committee to keep the situation in the Territory under continuous review and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

applied within a framework that will guarantee the
inhabitants of the Sahara under Spanish domination
free and authentic expression of their wishes, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions on
the subject;
4. Repeats its invitation to the administering Power
to determine, in consultation with the Governments of
Mauritania and Morocco and any other interested party,
the procedures for the holding of a referendum under
United Nations auspices to enable the indigenous
population of the Sahara to exercise freely its right
to self-determination and independence and, to this
end, invites the Government of Spain:
(a) To create a favourable political climate for the
referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic and impartial ba~is by permitting, inter alia, the
return of political exiles to the Territory;
( b) To take all the necessary steps to ensure that
only the indigenous inhabitants exercise their right to
self-determination and independence, with a view to the
decolonization of the Territory;
( c) To receive a United Nations mission and provide
it with all the necessary facilities so that it can participate actively in the implementation of measures
making it possible to put an end to the colonial
situation in the Territory;
5. Invites all States to comply with the resolutions of
the General Assembly on the activities of foreign
economic and financial interests and to refrain from
helping to perpetuate the colonial situation in the
Territory by means of investments;

3162 (XXVIII). Question of Spanish Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory of the Sahara under Spanish domination,67
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also the relevant provisions of its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the
programme of action for the full implementation of the
Declaration,
Taking into consideration the relevant resolutions
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its tenth
ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 27 to
29 May 1973, and by the Fourth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at Algiers from 5 to 9 September 1973,68
Having regard to the decisions of the two summit
conferences of Heads of State of the countries concerned relating to the Sahara under Spanish administration,
Noting the statement by the representative of Spain
in the Fourth Committee, 69 in which he renewed the
commitment of his Government to respect the right of
the people of the Sahara to self-determination,
Deploring, however, the fact that the special mission
provided for in earlier resolutions on the so-called
Spanish Sahara has not yet been able to visit the Territory in order to carry out the task entrusted to it,
Further reaffirming its previous resolutions on the
so-called Spanish Sahara,
1. Declares that the continued existence of the
colonial situation in the Territory is endangering stability
and harmony in north-west Africa;
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of colonial
peoples and expresses its full solidarity with the people
of the Sahara under Spanish administration;
3. Reaffirms its attachment to the principle of selfdetermination and its concern to see that principle

6. Reaffirms the responsibility of the United Nations
in all consultations intended to lead to the free expression of the wishes of the people;

7. Urges the administering Power to respect and to
implement scrupulously, under the auspices and guarantee_ of the United Nations, the provisions of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly relating to
the decolonization of the so-called Spanish Sahara;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, to appoint the special
mission provided for in paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 2229 (XXI) of 20 December 1966 and
to expedite its dispatch to the Sahara in order to
recommend practical steps for the full implementation
of the relevant resolutions and, in particular., to confirm United Nations participation in the preparation
and supervision of the referendum and to submit a
report to the Secretary-General for transmission to the
Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
9. Calls upon the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its twentyninth sessfon.
2202nd plenary meeting
I 4 December 1973

67 Ibid.,

Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/
Rev. I), chaps. IV and XII.
68 A/9330 and Corr.I, p. 44.
0 9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Fourth Committee, 2066th meeting.

*

*

*
