38

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

23. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia with the necessary resources for the performance
ofthe responsibilities entrusted to it by the United Nations
Council for Namibia as the co-ordinating authority for the
implementation of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia, as well as other assistance programmes.
59th plenary meeting
6 Navember 1987

42/15.

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security",
Recalling its resolutions ES-6/2 of 14 January 1980,
35/37 of 20 November 1980, 36/34 of 18 November 1981,
37/37 of 29 November 1982, 38/29 of 23 November 1983,
39/13 of 15 November 1984, 40/12 of 13 November 1985
and 41/33 of 5 November 1986,
Reaffirming the purposes and principies of the Charter
ofthe United Nations and the obligation ofall States to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use
of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of any State,
Reaffirmingfurther the inalienable right of all peoples to
determine their own form of government and to choose
their own economic, political and social system free from
outside intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of
any kind whatsoever,
Grave/y cancerned at the continuing foreign armed intervention in Afghanistan, in contravention of the above
principies, and its serious implications for international
peace and security,
Nating the increasing concern of the international community about the continued and serious sufferings of the
Afghan people and about the magnitude of social and economic problems posed to Pakistan and Iran by the presence on their soil of millions of Afghan refugees, and the
continuing increase in their numbers,
Deeply cansciaus of the urgent need for a political solution of the grave situation in respect of Afghanistan,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-GeneraJ,58
and the status of the diplomatic process initiated by him,
Recognizing the importance of the initiatives of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the efforts of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for a political solution of the situation in respect of Afghanistan,
1. Reiterates that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and nonaligned character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful
solution of the problem;
2. Reaffirms the right of the Afghan people to determine their own form of government and to choose their
economic, political and social system free from outside intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind
whatsoever;
3. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Afghani\lan:
58 A/42/600-S/19160. For the printed text, see Officia/ Records ofthe
Security Council, Forty-sffond Year. Supp/emrnt (or Ju/y. August and
September /987, dornmcnl S/1'1160

4. Calls upan ali parties concerned to work for the urgent achievement of a political solution, in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution, and the creation of the necessary conditions which would enable the
Afghan refugees to return voluntarily to their homes in
safety and honour;
5. Renews its appeal to ali States and national and international organizations to continue to extend
humanitarian relief assistance with a view to alleviating
the hardship ofthe Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
ó. Expresses its appreciation and suppart for the efforts
and constructive steps taken by the Secretary-General,
especially the diplomatic process initiated by him, in the
search for a solution to the problem;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue those efforts with a view to promoting a political ~olution, in accordance with the provisions ofthe present resolution, and
the exploration of securing appropriate guarantees for the
non-use offorce, or threat offorce, against the political independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and security
of ali neighbouring States, on the basis of mutual guarantees and strict non-interference in each other's internal affairs and with full regard for the principies of the Charter
of the United Nations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council concurrently informed of
progress towards the implementation of the present resolution and to submit to Member States a report on the
situation at the earliest appropriate opportunity;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
security".
62nd plenary meeting
10 November 19/17

42/16.

Zone of peace and co-operation of the South AtIantic

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/11 of 27 October 1986, in
which it solemnly declared the Atlantic Ocean, in the region situated between Africa and South America. the
"Zone of Peace and Co-operation of the South Atlantic",
1. Commends the efforts undertaken by States of the
zone of peace and co-operation of the South Atlantic to
promote peace and regional co-operation pursuant to
resolution 41/11. as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General: 59

2. Urges the States of the region to continue their actions aiming at fulfilling the goals of the declaration of the
zone of peace and co-operation of the South Atlantic, in
particular through the adoption and carrying out of concrete programmes to that end;
J. Takes note ttíth appreciatio11 ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General;
4. Calls upan ali States to co-operate in the promotion
of the objectives of the zone;
5. Ca/Is upon ali States to refrain from any action inconsistent with the Charter and relevan! resolutions of the
United Nations and which may create or aggravate situations of tension and potential conflict in the region;
