II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of the illegal occupation regime aimed at frustrating the
legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people, under the
leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization, for self-determination and national liberation as
well as negating the achievements of their just struggle;
24. Solemnly calls once again upon the Security
Council to convene urgently to impose comprehensive
and mandatory sanctions against South Africa, as provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, in order to ensure South Africa's immediate
compliance with the resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations relating to Namibia.
I 00th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
34/93.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa 57
A
SITUATION IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 68
Recalling and reaffirming the Programme of Action
against Apartheid adopted by the General Assembly in
its resolution 31/6 J of 9 November 1976,
Taking note of the conclusions of the United Nations
Seminar on Nuclear Collaboration with South Africa,
held in London on 24 and 25 February 1979, 59 and of
the International Seminar on the Role of Transnational
Corporations in South Africa, held in London from 2 to
4 November 1979,60
Gravely concerned about the situation in South Africa,
and in southern Africa as a whole, resulting from the
policies and actions of the apartheid regime, in particular
its efforts to perpetuate and consolidate racist domination in the country, its policy of "bantustanization", its
brutal repression of opponents of apartheid and its constant acts of aggression against neighbouring States,
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity,
Reaffirming further that the policies and actions of the
apartheid regime constitute a threat to international
peace and security,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations
and the international community to secure the elimination of apartheid and the liberation of the South
African people,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3411 C (XXX)
of 28 November 1975 in which it proclaimed that the
United Nations and the international community had a
special responsibility towards the oppressed people of
South Africa and their national liberation movements,
Reaffirming that any collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa constitutes a hostile act against
the oppressed people of South Africa and a contemptuous defiance of the United Nations and of the international community,
Considering that such collaboration strengthens the
racist regime, encourages it to persist in its repressive
67
See also sect. I, foot-note 7; sect. X.B.l, decision 34/404;
and sect. X.B.3, decision 34/423.
68
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/34/22).
69 See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fourth
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1979, document S/13157.
eo See A/34/655, annex.

29

and aggressive policies and seriously aggravates the
situation in South Africa, thereby constituting a threat
to international peace and security,
Reiterating its firm conviction that mandatory economic sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations are essential to facilitate the speedy
eradication of apartheid,
Concerned that the major Western and other trading
partners of South Africa continue to collaborate with
the racist regime and that their collaboration constitutes
the main obstacle to the liquidation of the racist regime
and the elimination of the inhuman and criminal system
of apartheid,
A /armed at the continued collaboration of certain
Western States and Israel with the racist regime of South
Africa in the nuclear field,
Recognizing that utmost priority must be accorded to
international action to secure the full implementation of
the resolutions of the United Nations for the eradication
of apartheid and the liberation of the South African
people,
Convinced that it is incumbent on the international
community to provide all necessary assistance to the
national liberation movement and its legitimate struggle,
Recalling the launching by the United Nations on 21
March 1979 of the international mobilization against
apartheid, with particular emphasis on the cessation of
all collaboration with the apartheid regime and full support of the national liberation movement of South Africa,
1. Strongly condemns the illegitimate minority racist
regime of South Africa for its criminal policies
and actions;
2. Again proclaims its full support of the national
liberation movement of South Africa, as the authentic
representative of the South African people, in its just
struggle for freedom;
3. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa and their national
liberation movement-by all available and appropriate
means, including armed struggle-for the seizure of
power by the people, the elimination of the apartheid
regime and the exercise of the right of self-determination
by the people of South Africa as a whole;
4. Commends all States which have provided assistance to the national liberation movement of South
Africa and urges them to increase such assistance;
5. Appeals to all States to provide all necessary assistance to the national liberation movement of South
Africa in this crucial stage of its struggle;
6. Condemns the plan of the apartheid regime for
the creation of a "constellation of States" in southern
Africa as a scheme for the establishment of its hegemony
in the region and the perpetuation of racist domination
and exploitation;
7. Reaffirms the commitment of the United Nations
to the total eradication of apartheid and the destruction
of the racist regime, rather than so-called reforms by the
apartheid regime;
8. Declares that any collaboration with the racist
regime and apartheid institutions is a hostile act against
the purposes and principles of the United Nations and
constitutes a threat to international peace and security;
9. Condemns the continuing political, military, nuclear, economic and other collaboration of certain States
with the racist regime of South Africa in disregard of
United Nations resolutions-in particular the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the

30

Genenl ASlembly-1blrty-fourth Session

United States of America, the Federal Republic of
Germany, France, Japan, Belgium, Israel and Italyand the transnational corp<>rations and other institutions
which assist the racist regime;
10. Invites all States and organizations to take all
appropriate measures to persuade those Governments,
transnational corporations and other institutions which
continue to collaborate with the racist regime of South
Africa to abide by the resolutions of the United Nations;
11. Appeals to all States which have not yet done so
to accede to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid;61
12. Calls upon all Governments concerned:
(a) To sever diplomatic, military, nuclear, economic
and other relations with the racist regime of South Africa;
(b) To take measures to prevent transnational corporations, banks and all other institutions under their
Jurisdiction from collaborating with the apartheid regime;
(c) To take all necessary action to terminate credits
by the International Monetary Fund and other bodies to
South Africa;
(d) To prohibit the sale of krugerrands;
(e) To deny any facilities to airlines or ships travelling to and from South Africa;
(J) To terminate all government promotion of, or
assistance to, trade with or investment in South Africa;
(g) To support effective international sanctions
against the racist regime of South Africa;
13. Requests all States which have not yet done so
to terminate visa-free entry privileges to South African
nationals;
14. Requests the Security Council urgently to consider mandatory economic sanctions against the racist
r6gime of South Africa and take action, under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, to bring about
the total cessation of:
(a) Any military or nuclear collaboration with South
Africa;
(b) Supplies of petroleum, petroleum products or
other strategic materials to South Africa;
(c) Loans to, and investments in, South Africa;
(d) Guarantees or other inducements for investments
in South Africa";
(e) Tariff and other preferences for imports from
South Africa;
(J) All trade with South Africa;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, as well as all
agencies and organizations within the United Nations
system:
(a) To withhold any facilities from, or investment
of any funds in, banks, :financial institutions and corporations which continue to invest in or give loans to the
South African regime;
(b) To refrain from any purchase, direct or indirect,
of South African products;
(c) To prohibit any official travel by South African
Airways or South African shipping lines;
16. Requests States members of international agencies and organizations, particularly the members of the
European communities, the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade and the International Monetary Fund,
to take the necessary steps to deny all assistance and
commercial or other facilities to the racist regime of
South Africa;
81 Resolution 3068 (XXVIll), annex.

17. Appeals to the youth of South Africa to refrain
from enlisting in the South African armed forces, which
are designed to defend the inhuman system of apartheid,
to repress the legitimate struggle of the oppressed people
and to threaten, and commit acts of aggression against,
neighbouring States;
18. Invites all Governments and organizations to
assist, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
33/165 of 20 December 1978, persons compelled to
leave South Africa because of a conscientious objection
to assisting in the enforcement of apartheid through
service in military or police forces;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
B
UNITED NATIONS TRUST FUND FOR SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa, 62 to
which is annexed the report of the Committee of Trustees
of the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,
Reaffirming the importance of humanitarian assistance
by the international community to those persecuted
under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South
Africa, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia,
Gravely concerned at the continued and increased
repression against opponents of apartheid and racial
discrimination in South Africa, and the institution of
numerous trials under arbitrary security legislation, as
well as continued repression in Namibia and Southern
Rhodesia,
Recognizing that increased contributions to the Trust
Fund and to the voluntary agencies concerned are necessary to enable them to meet the greatly increased needs,
1. Commends the Secretary-General and the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for
South Africa for their efforts to promote humanitarian
assistance to persons persecuted under repressive and
discriminatory legislation in South Africa, Namibia and
Southern Rhodesia, as well as assistance to their families
and to refugees from South Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies engaged in
rendering humanitarian assistance to the victims of
apartheid and racial discrimination;
3. Appeals for generous and increased contributions to the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies
concerned.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
C
INTERNATIONAL CoNFERENCE ON SANCTIONS
AGAINST SoUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned about the situation in South Africa,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid,68
62 A/34/661 and Corr.1.
68 Official Records of the

General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/34/22).

II.

Resoludom adopted without reference to a Maio Committee

Recalling its resolutions affirming its conviction that
economic and other sanctions against South Africa,
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
universally applied, are essential to resolve the grave
situation in South Africa and avert a wider intemational conflict,
Noting with regret that the Security Council has thus
far failed to take such action under Chapter VII of the
Charter,
Considering that urgent action must be taken by
Governments and organizations towards the imposition
and full implementation of such sanctions,
N oting that the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, at its thirty-third ordinary session,
held at Monrovia from 6 to 20 July 1979,64 and the Sixth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979,6 ~ have endorsed the proposal of the Special
Committee for the organization of an international conference for sanctions against South Africa,
1. Decides to organize in 1980, in co-operation with
the Organization of African Unity, an International
Conference on Sanctions against South Africa;
2. Authorizes the Special Committee against Apartheid to take all necessary steps for the organization of
the Conference and preparatory meetings, in accordance
with the recommendations
contained in paragraphs 277
63
to 280 of its report;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
necessary assistance to the Special Committee in the
organization of the Conference and to appoint a Secretary-General of the Conference;
4. Invites all appropriate United Nations organs,
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations to co-operate with the Special Committee in the implementation of
the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979

D
ARMS EMBARGO AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on military collaboration with
South Africa, as well as Security Council resolutions 418
(1977) of 4 November 1977 and 421 (1977) of 9 December 1977,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 66
Considering that the full implementation and reinforcement of the arms embargo against South Africa is
an essential first step in international action against
apartheid,
Noting with serious concern and regret that some
Western and other Governments and transnational corporations continue to co-operate with the racist regime
of South Africa in the military field, especially by restrictive interpretations of the arms embargo,
1. Again requests the Security Council to declare
that any military or nuclear collaboration with South
Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and
security and urgently to take mandatory measures, under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, to
end all military and nuclear collaboration with the
64
See A/34/552, annex I, resolution CM/Res.734 (XXXIII).
6 5 See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 47.
66 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth

Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/34/22).

31

apartheid r6gime and all supplies of materials or technology to or from South Afnca which may be used for
military purposes or for the development of nuclearweapon capability;
2. Again requests the Security Council to take mandatory measures to ensure that all States:
(a) Shall revoke all licences granted to South Africa
for the manufacture of arms and equipment;
(b) Shall prohibit corporations under their jurisdiction from any involvement in the manufacture in South
Africa of arms and related equipment for the use of the
military and police forces, and in the transfer of technology and capital for that purpose;
(c) Shall terminate the exchange of military, air,
naval and scientific attaches with the apartheid regime;
(d) Shall prohibit the supply of aircraft, aircraft engines, aircraft parts, electronic and telecommunications
equipment and computers to South Africa;
(e) Shall take effective legislative and other measures
to prevent the recruitment, training and transit of mercenaries for assistance to the apartheid r6gime, and to punish such mercenaries;
3. Requests all States to assist the Security Council
Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) conceming the question of South Africa and the Special
Committee against Apartheid in monitoring the arms
embargo against South Africa and in promoting its full
implementation and reinforcement;
4. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
against Apartheid:
(a) To undertake missions to Governments of countries exporting arms to South Africa in order to consult
on means of reinforcing the arms embargo;
(b) To continue its efforts to publicize all developments concerning military and nuclear collaboration
with the racist regime of South Africa;

(c) To lend its full co-operation to the Security
Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977)
concerning the question of South Africa and to organize
joint hearings and seminars with that Committee as
appropriate;
(d) To consult with experts, to hold hearings and to
encourage conferences and campaigns in order to promote a total cessation of military and nuclear collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979

E
NUCLEAR COLLABORATION WITH SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions concerning the denuclearization of the continent of Africa and nuclear collaboration
with South Africa,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 418 (1977)
of 4 November 1977, in which the Council decided,
inter alia, that all States should refrain from any cooperation with South Africa in the manufacture and
development of nuclear weapons,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid61 and the report of the United
Nations Seminar on Nuclear Collaboration with South
Africa, held in London on 24 and 25 February 1979,88
61 Ibid.
68

See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fourth
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1979, document S/13157.

General Auemb)y-Tldrty-founb Session

32

Taking note of the conclusions of the United Nations
Seminar on Nuclear Collaboration with South Africa
and of the International Seminar on the Role of Transnational Corporations in South Africa, held in London
from 2 to 4 November 1979,69
Gravely concerned at the reported detonation of a
nuclear device in an area of the Indian Ocean and South
Atlantic, including the southern part of Africa, in September 1979,
Noting with concern the supplies of materials, technology, equipment and other forms of assistance in the
nuclear field furnished to the racist regime of South
Africa by France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Israel,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America,
Considering any detonation of a nuclear device by the
racist regime of South Africa, and the acquisition of
nuclear-weapon capability by that regime, as a grave and
unprecedented threat not only to the continent of Africa
but also to international peace and security as a whole,
1. Requests the Security Council urgently to consider mandatory measures to prevent the racist regime of
South Africa from detonating, developing or acquiring
nuclear weapons, and to warn that the acquisition or
testing of nuclear weapons by it would be met with enforcement action under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations;
2. Calls upon all States which have not yet done so,
in particular France, Germany·, Federal Republic of, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America:
(a) To cease forthwith all collaboration with the
racist regime of South Africa in the nuclear field and to
terminate all supplies of nuclear materials and equipment or components thereof, transfer of nuclear technology, training and exchange of nuclear scientists and
financial, technical or other assistance to the nuclear
programme of South Africa, including the uranium enrichment facilities;
(b) To refrain from purchasing uranium or enriched
uranium from South Afnca;
(c) To take measures to prevent such collaboration
and purchases by corporations, institutions and other
bodies and individuals under their jurisdiction;
(d) To convey to the Secretary-General all information available to them on the efforts of the racist regime
of South Africa to acquire nuclear-weapon capability;
3. Requests all States and international organizations to co-operate fully in the implementation of the
present resolution and to act in accordance with its
purposes;
4. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid to take all appropriate measures to promote the
implementation of tlie present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979

F
OIL EMBARGO AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions 32/105 G of
14 December 1977 and 33/183 E of 24 January 1979
on an oil embargo against South Africa,
Noting with appreciation the decision of the Government of Iran to stop the supply of oil to South Africa
ee See A/34/655, annex.

and the measures taken by the Government of Nigeria,
in particular, for an effective implementation of the
oil embargo,
Considering that an embargo on the supply of petroleum, petroleum products and other strategic materials
is an essential complement to the arms embargo against
South Africa,
1. Commends all Governments which have imposed
an oil embargo against South Africa and have taken
effective measures to implement the embargo;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that an embargo on the
supply of petroleum, petroleum products and other
strategic materials is an important measure in international action for the total eradication of apartheid;
3. Requests the Security Council to consider urgently a mandatory embargo on the supply of petroleum
and petroleum products to South Africa under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Requests all States:
(a) To enact legislation to prohibit:
(i) The sale or supply of petroleum and petroleum
products to any person or body in South Africa,
or to any other person or body for the purpose
of eventual supply to South Africa;
(ii) Any activities by their nationals or in their territories which promote or are calculated to
promote the sale or supply of petroleum or
petroleum products to South Africa;
(iii) The shipment in vessels or aircraft of their
registration, or under charter to their nationals,
of any petroleum or petroleum products to
South Africa;
(iv) The supply of any services, including inter alia
technical advice, spare parts and capital, to the
oil companies in South Africa;
(v) The provision of facilities in their ports or airports to vessels or aircraft carrying petroleum or
petroleum products to South Africa;
(vi) Any investments in, or provision of technical or
other assistance to, the petroleum industry in
South Africa;
(b) To include in all contracts for the sale of petroleum and petroleum products provisions prohibiting
direct or indirect resale to South Africa;
(c) To take effective legislative and other appropriate measures to prevent petroleum companies and
shipping companies, as well as banks and other financial
institutions, from giving any assistance to the South
African regime in circumventing the oil embargo, including the seizure of vessels which violate the embargo
and their cargoes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a
small group of experts to prepare a report with proposals
on means of enforcing an effective oil embargo against
South Africa and submit the report to the Security
Council and to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session;
6. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
against Apartheid:
(a) To undertake studies and take all other appropriate steps, in co-operation· with the Organization of
African Unity, to enhance and intensify world-wide support for an effective arms and oil embargo against
South Africa;
(b) To undertake missions to oil-exporting countries,
to the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and other appropriate bodies and to the home

Il,

Resolutlo111 adopted without reference to a Main Committee

countries of transnational oil corporations for consultations on enforcing an effective oil embargo;
1. Requests all Governments and organizations to
co-operate with the Special Committee in the impte.:.
mentation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979

G
BANTUSTANS

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions 31 / 6 A of
26 October 1976 and 32/105 N of 14 December 1977,
Condemning the racist regime of South Africa for
continuing its policy of "bantustanization" and for proclaiming the so-called "independence" of V enda on
13 September 1979,
Considering that the policy of "bantustanization" and
the creation of tribal armies to foment fratricidal conflict aggravate the situation in the region,
Taking note of the statement made by the President
of the Security Council on 21 September 1979, 70
1. Again denounces the establishment of bantustans
as designed to consolidate the inhuman policy of apartheid, to destroy the territorial integrity of the country,
to perpetuate white minority domination and to deprive
the African people of South Africa of their inalienable
rights;
2. Denounces the declaration of the so-called "independence" of the Transkei, Bophuthatswana and
Venda, and any other bantustans which may be created
by the racist regime of South Africa, and declares them
totally invalid;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable rights of the African
people of South Africa in the country as a whole;
4. .Declares its firm support for any State which may
be subJected to threats and pressures by the racist regime
in the pursuit of its bantustan policy;
5. Again calls upon all Governments to continue to
deny any form of recognition to the so-called "independent" bantustans, to refrain from any dealings with
them and to reject travel documents issued by them;
6. Again requests all States to take effective measures to prohibit all individuals, corporations and other
institutions under their jurisdiction from having any
dealings with the so-called "independent" bantustans.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979

H
POLITICAL PRISONERS IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its past resolutions concerning political prisoners in South Africa, in particular
resolution 33/183 F of 24 January 1979,
Noting with grave concern the continued and escalating repressio~ !n South Africa, including executions,
torture and killing of opponents of apartheid, and the
institution of numerous trials under arbitrary laws providing for death sentences,
Recognizing the great contribution of the opponents
of apartheid in South Africa to the purposes of the
United Nations,
70 Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fourth
Year, 2168th meeting, para. 1.

33

Taking into account the provisions of Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949, relating to the protection of victims of international armed conflicts, 71 which recognized that wars of
national liberation, like those being waged in southern
Africa by movements recognized by the Organization of
African Unity, are subject to the Geneva Conventions,
1. Again demands that the racist regime of South
Africa end violence and repression against the black
people and other opponents of apartheid, release all
persons detained, imprisoned, restricted or charged
under arbitrary repressive laws for their opposition to
apartheid and abrogate the bans on organizations and
news media opposed to apartheid;
2. Expresses its solidarity with the national liberation movement of South Africa and all those struggling
for the elimination of apartheid and racial discrimination;
3. Condemns the racist regime of South Africa for
its execution of Solomon Mahlangu;
4. Declares that freedom fighters captured during the
struggle for liberation must be entitled to prisoner-ofwar status and treatment in accordance with the relevant
Geneva Conventions;
5. Urges the Secretary-General and Member States
to take appropriate measures to save the lives of all
persons threatened with execution in trials staged by
the illegitimate racist regime on charges of high treason
and under the obnoxious Terrorism Act;
6. Encourages the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other appropriate bodies to obtain access
to visit political prisoners and detainees in South Africa;
7. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid to continue to take all appropriate measures to
promote the world campaign for the release of political
prisoners in South Africa in co-operation with the Governments and organizations concerned.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979

I
ASSISTANCE TO THE OPPRESSED PEOPLE OF SoUTH
AFRICA AND THEIR NATIONAL LIBERATION MOVEMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/183 K of 24 January
1979,
Reaffirming the legitimacy of the struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa for freedom and equality,
Recognizing the need for increased humanitarian,
educational, economic and other forms of assistance to
the oppressed people of South Africa and to refugees
from South Africa,
Further recognizing the importance of the provision
of all appropriate assistance to the national liberation
movement of South Africa in the present crucial stage
of its struggle for the eradication of apartheid and the
establishment of a non-racial society,
Considering that the international community has a
duty to assist the African States subjected to threats
an~ _acts of aggression because of ~e1r support of the
legitimate s_truggle of th~ South Afnc~n people in accordance with the resolutions of the Umted Nations and
the Organization of African Unity,
1. Appeals to all States to provide increased humanitarian, educational, economic and other forms of
assistance ·to the oppressed people of South Africa, as
11

A/32/144, annex I.

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

34

well as all appropriate assistance to the national liberation movement of South Africa in its legitimate struggle
for the exercise of the right of self-determination by the
people of South Africa as a whole;
2. Draws attention, in particular, to the necessity
of assisting the educational and self-help projects of the
liberation movements recognized by the Organization of
African Unity and of meeting the special and pressing
needs of refugee women and children;
3. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
against Apartheid, with the assistance of the Centre
against Apartheid of the Secretariat, to take all appropriate steps to promote greater assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and their national liberation movement;
4. Decides to concretize its resolution 31/6 I of 9
November 1976, in which it declared that the South
African people and their liberation movements were a
special responsibility of the United Nations and the international community, by authorizing adequate financial
provision in the budget of the United Nations for the
purpose of maintaining the offices in New York of the
national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity-the African National Congress of South Africa and the Pan Africanist Congress
of Azania-in order to ensure the due and proper representation of the South African people through their
national liberation movements.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
J
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON apartheid
The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions on the dissemination of information on apartheid, in particular
resolution 33/183 I of24 January 1979,
Noting with appreciation the progress made by the
United Nations and several specialized agencies in the
dissemination of information on apartheid,
Considering the importance of public information in
support of the international mobilization against apartheid, in view of the nefarious propaganda of the racist
regime of South Africa with the assistance of transnational corporations and racist groups in other countries,
Commending the efforts of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, with the assistance of the Centre
a~ainst Apartheid of the Secretariat and in co-operation
wtth Governments and organizations, to expand the
dissemination of information on apartheid,
Endorsing the relevant recommendations in the report
of the Special Committee, 72
1. Requests all Governments and organizations to
co-operate with the Special Committee against Apartheid
and the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat towards the production and widest possible dissemination
of information material on apartheid;
2. Appeals to all Governments and organizations
to contribute generously to the Trust Fund for Publicity
against Apartheid;
3. Requests the Special Committee and the Centre
against Apartheid to utilize the Trust Fund particularly
for:
(a) Production and widest possible dissemination of
publications and audio-visual material in all languages;
12 O!Jicial

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth

Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/34/22), paras. 294-298.

(b) Assistance to appropriate organizations for the
production and dissemination of such material in cooperation with the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat
shall give utmost priority to the dissemination of information on apartheid and that all United Nations
offices shall maintain the closest liaison with organizations engaged in action against apartheid;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to issue United
Nations postage stamps against apartheid and encourage
Member States to issue such stamps;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Special Committee, to continue, on a regular basis, the radio programmes for broadcast to South
Africa and to provide the broadcasting stations of Member States with programmes on the situation in South
Africa;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide
funds to assist the liberation movements to undertake
studies and research with a view to enabling them to
counter effectively the racist regime's distortion and
propaganda;
8. Appeals to all States to provide facilities to the
South African liberation movements recognized by the
Organization of African Unity for broadcasting programmes to South Africa;
9. Requests the Special Committee to provide all
appropriate assistance to the South African liberation
movements recognized by the Organization of African
Unity in disseminating information;
10. Invites all Governments, information media and
organizations to counteract the propaganda of the apartheid regime and to co-operate with the Special Committee in exposing the activities of groups which assist
in such propaganda;
11. Commends the specialized agencies, particularly
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the International Labour Organisation and the World Health Organization, for their cooperation with the United Nations in the dissemination
of information on apartheid;
12. Invites all Governments and organizations to
pub1icize the declarations of the South African liberation
movements in accordance with paragraph 296 of the
report of the Special Committee.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979

K
WOMEN AND CHILDREN UNDER apartheid
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid7 8 and the conclusions and recommendations of the International Seminar on Children
under Apartheid, held in Paris from 18 to 20 June
1979, 74
Recalling its resolution 34/4 of 18 October 1979,
Concerned about the inhuman oppression of millions
of women and children under apartheid, resulting in the
killing, detention and torture of school-children protesting against discrimination, the enforced separation of
1s Ibid., Supplement No. 22 (A/34/22).
74

A/34/512, annex.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

women from their husbands and mass starvation in the
reserves,
Concerned further about the special needs of women
and children forced to flee South Africa and live as
refugees,
Recognizing the urgent need for humanitarian and
other assistance to women and children oppressed by
apartheid,
Noting with admiration the heroic resistance of
women and children in South Africa against apartheid
and racial discrimination,
l. Commends the Special Committee against Apartheid for giving special attention to the plight of women
and children under apartheid;
2. Requests Governments and organizations to take
all appropriate action in pursuance of the conclusions
and recommendations of the International Seminar on
Children under Apartheid;
3. Appeals to all Governments and organizations
to contribute generously towards assistance to the special needs of women and children oppressed by apartheid, including refugees;
4. Requests- the Special Committee and all other
United Nations organs and organizations to publicize
the oppression of women and children under apartheid
and their heroic resistance against that inhuman system
and thereby mobilize world opinion for action against
apartheid;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
encourage Governments and non-governmental organizations to promote solidarity with women and children
under apartheid through conferences, seminars and other
activities.
I 00th plenary meeting
12 December I 979

L
ROLE OF THE MASS MEDIA IN INTERNATIONAL ACTION
AGAINST apartheid
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the vital role of the mass media in
informing world opinion of the evils of apartheid and
the legitimate struggle of the oppressed people of
South Africa for freedom, self-determination and racial
equality,
Noting the successful observance of the International
Anti-Apartheid Year under the aegis of the United Nations and the urgent need for a further intensification of
the international mobilization against apartheid in South
Africa,
Taking into account the provisions of the Declaration
on Fundamental Principles concerning the Contribution
of the Mass Media to Strengthening Peace and International Understanding, to the Promotion of Human
Rights and to Countering Racialism, Apartheid and Incitement to War75 adopted on 28 November 1978 by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Conscious of the need for combating the propaganda
of the apartheid regime, including the utilization of
secret and illegal projects designed to deceive world
7
•
~ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference, Twentieth Session,
vol. 1, Resolutions, pp. 100-104.

35

opinion and disrupt international action against
apartheid,
Realizing that the abuse of the mass media and their
use in the interest of the racist regime of South Africa
are detrimental to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and impede the eradication of apartheid in South Africa,
Condemning the numerous restrictive laws and regulations to which the South African press is subjected and
the constant persecution of journalists opposed to
apartheid,
1. Urges all States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to take all necessary measures to use effectively all the mass media for mobilizing
world public opinion with a view to eliminating the
criminal system of racial domination and exploitation
pursued by the white minority regime of South Africa;
2. Urges all States to promote in every way possible
the use of all the mass media for a wide dissemination
of information on questions such as the following:
(a) Activities of the United Nations and the specialized agencies designed to eliminate the system of
apartheid in South Africa and to support the just struggle
of the oppressed people of South Africa for their
liberation;
(b) Terror and repression carried out by the racist
regime of Pretoria against the national liberation movement of South Africa and all those who are fighting for
the elimination of racial discrimination and the system
of apartheid;
(c) Acts of a~ression committed by the racist
regime of South Afnca against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the neighbouring African States;
(d) Manoeuvres of the racist regime of South Africa
intended to consolidate the system of apartheid, in particular by creating the so-called bantustans;
(e) Co-operation with the racist regime of South
Africa as the main obstacle to eliminating racial discrimination and the system of apartheid in South Africa;
(/) Legitimate and just strug~le of the oppressed
people of South Africa and their national liberation
movement;
3. Urges all States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to take effective measures to
prevent the racist regime of South Africa and its supporters from using the mass media in the interest of that
regime as well as to counter actively the propaganda
activities of the racist regime of South Africa and its
supporters;
4. Appeals to all the media to co-operate with the
United Nations in the dissemination of objective and
truthful information on the situation in South Africa
with a view to promoting the elimination of apartheid
and the establishment of a non-racial society;
5. Further appeals to all journalists and others to
demonstrate their solidarity with their colleagues persecuted by the racist regime of South Africa for their
opposition to apartheid and to denounce the restrictions
on the freedom of the press;
6. Requests the Centre against Apartheid of the
Secretariat to publicize information on:
(a) Detention, imprisonment and banning of writers
and journalists in South Africa;
(b) Restrictions on the press and censorship of publications in South Africa;

General Asaembly-Tblrty-fourth Selllion

36

(c)

Propaganda in favour of apartheid;
(d} International solidarity with the journalists in
South Africa;
7. Requests the specialized agencies to take appropriate measures to implement the present resolution;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the implementation by States of the present resolution.
I 00th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
M
;...

ROLE OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS IN
INTERNATIONAL ACTION AGAINST apartheid

,..._,he General Assembly,
Conscious of the important role of world public opinion in international action for the eradication of
apartheid,
,,:Y" 1 Commending the activities of anti-apartheid and
~ 1 -solidarity movements and other non-governmental organizations in support of the resolutions of the United
Nations and in co-operation with the Special Committee
against Apartheid and the Centre against Apartheid of
. the Secretariat,
·. ·considering that the international mobilization against
apartheid requires concerted action by anti-apartheid
and solidarity movements, trade unions, religious bodies,
student and youth organizations and other non-governmental organizations in isolating the apartheid regime,
assisting the national liberation movement of South
Africa and educating world public opinion,
1. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid, the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat
and other United Nations bodies concerned, as well as
the specialized agencies, to continue and further develop
co-operation with all non-governmental organizations
active in opposition to apartheid;
Invites all Governments to take appropriate steps
'Tencourage and assist such non-governmental organizations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee, to ensure the closest contact by all United Nations offices with such non-governmental organizations.
100th plenary meeting
12 December I 979

t~.

N
Apartheid IN SPORTS
The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions on apartheid
in sports, in particular the International Dec1aration
against Apartheid in Sports, 76
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid77 and the report of the Ad Hoe
Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against Apartheid in Sports, 78
Reaffirming the importance of a complete cessation
,all sports exchanges with South Africa,
Resolution 32/105 M, annex.
Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/34/22).
7 e Ibid., Supplement No. 36 (A/34/36).
1 Official

Rejecting aU manoeuvres by the racist regime of South
Africa and South African sports bodies to deceive world
opinion,
1. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting
of an International Convention against Apartheid in
Sports to continue its work with a view to completing
a draft convention in 1980;
2. Authorizes the Ad Hoe Committee to consult
with representatives of organizations concerned and experts on apartheid in sports;
3. Commends Governments, sports bodies and
sportsmen, as well as other organizations which have
taken action, in accordance with the resolutions of the
United Nations, to ensure an end to all sports exchanges
with South Africa;
4. Invites the Special Committee against Apartheid
to continue its activities to promote the implementation
of the resolutions of the United Nations and to encourage appropriate action against those who promote
or participate in sports exchanges with South Africa.
I 00th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
0
DECLARATION ON SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against the
conscience and dignity of mankind,
Convinced that the United Nations must take the
lead in concerted international action for the elimination of apartheid,
Noting with concern the continued intransigence of
the South African regime, which has defied and disregarded numerous resolutions of organs of the United
Nations for a just, peaceful and lasting resolution of the
situation, including unanimous resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council,
Noting that the South African regime, by its arbitrary
laws and repression, has deprived the oppressed people
of avenues of peaceful and legal action to secure their
inalienable rights,
Condemning the military build-up of South Africa and
the series of acts of aggression committed by the South
African regime against neighbouring States,
Gravely concerned about the plans of the South African regime to divide and dispossess the African people
through "bantustanization" in order to perpetuate apartheid and deprive the African people of their citizenship,
Denouncing all plans for the dismemberment of South
Africa through "bantustanization" as invalid,
Recognizing the significant contribution of the struggle
for freedom and equality in South Africa to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling that the great majority of the South African
people have been deprived of the right to participate in
the determination of the destiny of the country,
Reaffirming that all the people of South Africa, irrespective of race, colour or creed, should be enabled to
exercise their right of self-determination,
Convinced that the establishment of a non-racial society in South Africa, based on the Universal Declara-

II.

37

Resoludons adopted without reference to a Main Committee

tion of Human Rights, 79 would be a significant contribution to international peace, security and co-operation,
Adopts the following Declaration:
Declaration on South Africa
1. All States shall recognize the legitimacy of the
struggle of the South African people for the elimination of apartheid and the establishment of a non-racial
society guaranteeing the enjoyment of equal rights by
all the people of South Africa, irrespective of race,
colour or creed.
2. All States shall recognize the right of the oppressed people of South Africa to choose their means
of struggle.
3. All States shall solemnly pledge to refrain from
overt or covert military intervention in support or
defence of the Pretoria regime in its effort to repress
the legitimate aspirations and struggle of the African
people of South Africa against it in the exercise of
their right of self-determination, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration
on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 80
or in its threats or acts of aggression against the African States committed to the establishment of a democratic government of South Africa based on the will
of the people as a whole, regardless of race, colour or
creed, as the imperative guarantee to lasting peace
and security in southern Africa.
4. All States shall take firm action to prevent the
recruitment, financing, training or passage of mercenaries in support of the apartheid regime of South
Africa or the bantustans created by it in South Africa.
5. All States shall take appropriate measures to
discourage and counteract propaganda in favour of
apartheid.
6. All States shall respect the desire of African
States for the denuclearization of the continent of
Africa and refrain from any co-operation with the
South African regime in its plans to become a nuclear Power.
7. All States shall demonstrate international solidarity with the oppressed people of South Africa and with
the independent African States subjected to threats or
acts of aggression and subversion by the South African regime.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979
p

military, nuclear, economic and other fields in violation
of the resolutions of the United Nations,
Recalling the report of the World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, held at
Geneva from 14 to 25 August 1978,82
Taking note of the report of the United Nations
Seminar on Nuclear Collaboration with South Africa,
held in London on 24 and 25 February 1979,88
Considering that such collaboration is a serious hindrance to international action for the eradication of
apartheid, as well as an encouragement to the South
African regime to persist in its criminal policy of apartheid, and a hostile act against the oppressed people of
South Africa and the entire African continent,
l. Again strongly condemns Israel's continuing an~,
increasing collaboration with the racist regime of South"
Africa;
2. Demands that Israel desist from and terminate
all forms of collaboration with the racist regime of
South Africa;
3. Requests the Special Committee against Ap111t•
heid to keep the matter under constant review
report to the General Assembly and the Security Council
as appropriate.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979

and"°P

Q
INVESTMENTS IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/ 183 0 of 24 January 1979,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, 84
Convinced that a cessation of all new foreign investments in, and financial loans to, South Africa would
constitute an important step in international action for
the elimination of apartheid, as such investments and
loans abet and encourage the apartheid policies in that
country,
Welcoming the actions of those Governments which
have taken legislative and other measures towards that
end,
Noting with regret that the Security Council has not
yet taken steps towards that end, as requested in General
Assembly resolutions 31/6 K of 9 November 1976,
32/105 0 of 16 December 1977 and 33/183 0 of 24
January 1979,
Again urges the Security Council to consider the
matter at an early date with a view to taking effective
steps to achieve the cessation of further foreign investments in, and financial loans to, South Africa.

RELATIONS BETWEEN ISRAEL AND SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolution 33/183 D of
24 January 1979,
Having considered the special report of the Special
Committee against Apartheid, 81
Gravely concerned at the continuing collaboration of
Israel with the racist regime of South Africa in political,
79 Resolution 217 A (III).
80 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
81 Official Records of the General

Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 22A (A/34/22/ Add.I).

100th plenary meeting
12 December 1979

R
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE
AGAINST Apartheid

The General Assembly,
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.2.
.
See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fo'!.l.~
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1979, ~B"
ument S/13157.
·
84 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/34/22).
82
88

38

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 85
Commending the Special Committee for its activities
in the discharge of its mandate and in promoting the
international mobilization against apartheid,
Noting with appreciation the work of the Centre
against Apartheid of the Secretariat in assisting the
Special Committee,
. Considering the urgent need for more effective international action in support of the national liberation
movement of South Africa,
1. Endorses the recommendations of the Special
Committee against Apartheid on its programme of work,
contained in paragraphs 303 to 305 of its report;85
2. Requests the Special Committee to continue and
intensify its activities, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and with particular
reference to:
(a) Reviewing all aspects of the policy of apartheid
in South Africa and its international repercussions;
(b) Promoting the widest possible dissemination of
information on the evils of apartheid and the legitimate
struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa;
(c) Encouraging full implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations by all Governments
and organizations;
(d) Promoting public action and campaigns supporting the national liberation movement of South Africa, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations;
(e) Promoting concerted action by Governments and
intergovernmental organizations in the international
mobilization against apartheid;
3. Requests all United Nations organs, as well as
specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system, to co-operate with the Special
Committee towards greater co-ordination of efforts and
to avoid any undue duplication;
4. Authorizes the Special Committee:
(a) To send missions to Member States and to the
headquarters of the specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations, as required, to promote international action against apartheid;
(b) To intensify co-operation with the movement of
non-aligned countries, the Organization of African
Unity and other appropriate organizations;
(c) To participate in conferences concerned with
action against apartheid;
(d) To organize, or participate in the organization
of, symposia and other events in the home countries of
transnational corporations with a view to educating the
general public on the activities of those corporations in
South Africa;
(e) To invite representatives of the South African
liberation movements recognized by the Organization of
African Unity and those of other organizations active in
opposition to apartheid, as well as experts, for consultations on various aspects of apartheid and on international action against apartheid;
(f) To associate representatives of the South African liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity with the missions of the Special
Committee;
as Ibid.

(g) To send representatives to attend meetings of
United Nations organs, as well as specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system, as appropriate;
(h) To commission expert studies on all aspects of
apartheid and its international repercussions;
(i) To hold sessions away from Headquarters as
necessary;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
necessary assistance and resources to enable the Special
Committee to discharge its responsibilities and, in particular, urgently to strengthen the Centre against Apartheid
of the Secretariat in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee;
6. Requests the President of the General Assembly,
in consultation with the regional ~oups, to expand the
membership of the Special Committee, bearing in mind
the principle of equitable geographical distribution; 80
7. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
to co-sponsor and promote the organization of conferences and seminars against apartheid in co-operation
with Governments and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations;
8. Authorizes the Special Committee to hold a number of fixed sessions annually, as well as additional
meetings as necessary;
9. Decides to make a special annual allocation of
$150,000 to the Special Committee, from the budget of
the United Nations for the biennium 1980-1981, for
special projects to be decided on by the Committee to
promote the international mobilization against apartheid,
in particular:
(a) Co-sponsorship of and assistance to national and
international conferences and seminars against apartheid;
(b) Promotion of the widest observance of international days against apartheid;
(c) Expert studies on apartheid;
10. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Special Committee, to seek and receive
voluntary contributions for the special projects referred
to in paragraph 9 above.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34 / 94.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, 87
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolu86 The composition of the Special Committee will be announced subsequently.
81 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rcv.1).
