S/PV.9162

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9162nd meeting

Monday, 24 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Jardim Oliveira
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-64873 (E)
*2264873*

S/PV.9162

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Bathily.
Mr. Bathily: It is a great honour for me to brief the
members of the Security Council for the first time since
assuming my functions as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya on 25 September. I look
forward to working closely with the Council and trust
that I will be able to count on members’ support.
Prior to my arrival in Libya on 14 October, I
engaged with a broad range of representatives of
Member States in New York, including members of
the Security Council and representatives of regional
organizations, to hear their thoughts on the situation in
Libya and ideas about how to overcome the country’s
challenges. I stressed the importance of ensuring that
the international community will support Libyan
efforts in a coordinated manner, rally behind the United
Nations lead and refrain from taking any action that
could further deepen divisions.
The political deadlock persists with no clear end
in sight to the prolonged stalemate over the executive.
Furthermore, efforts to resolve the remaining
outstanding issues related to the constitutional basis
for elections do not appear to be resulting in concrete
action on the part of the relevant actors, further delaying
the prospects for the holding of inclusive, free and fair
elections aimed at ending the transition and restoring
the legitimacy of institutions.
2/15

24/10/2022

In order to design a response to those daunting
political challenges, I have decided to give priority
to consultations with Libyan institutional, political,
security and civil-society actors from across the
country, including the south, east and west. Since my
arrival in Libya, I have therefore embarked on a series
of consultations with a broad range of Libyan political,
security and economic actors, as well as representatives
of civil society from every region of the country, in order
to gain a better understanding of the current challenges
and possible solutions and of the aspirations of the
Libyan people. I am grateful to my interlocutors, who
without exception have welcomed me and expressed
their high hopes for the work of the United Nations in
mediating and providing its good offices.
More specifically, I exchanged views with the
President of the Presidential Council and members of
the Government of National Unity, including Prime
Minister Abdulhamid Al Dabiba, Minister for Foreign
Affairs Najla El Mangoush and other Cabinet members.
I also met with the Chief of General Staff, Lieutenant
General Al-Haddad, and with the western members of
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC).
I consulted with the High National Elections
Commission, the National Oil Corporation and the
Central Bank of Libya. I also exchanged views with the
President of the High State Council, Khaled Al-Mishri,
over the phone, as he had to travel out of the country
the day after my arrival. I travelled to Al-Qubbah to
meet the Speaker of the House of Representatives,
Aguila Saleh Issa. The day before yesterday, I travelled
to Benghazi, where I met with Field Marshal Khalifa
Haftar, General Commander of the Libyan National
Army; the eastern members of the Joint Military
Commission; and the Prime Minister designated by the
House of Representatives, Fathi Bashagha.
I also met with representatives of women
organizations. Yesterday in Tripoli, I received civil
society organizations, women candidates for the
parliamentary elections and representatives of women’s
civil society organizations.
There remain significant differences on how
Libyans want to overcome the current crisis. In
response to the near unanimous condemnation across
the spectrum of the presence of mercenaries, foreign
fighters and foreign forces in Libya and the incessant
foreign interference in the country’s affairs, I stressed
to all my interlocutors that the solution to the crisis
must come from inside Libya, on the basis of the will of
22-64873

24/10/2022

The situation in Libya

the Libyan people. I urged the country’s leaders to hear
the people’s aspirations for peace, stability, economic
development and a responsive leadership.
While the ceasefire continues to hold, the security
track needs to be reinvigorated, as it has been adversely
impacted by the protracted political impasse. The
violent clashes in Tripoli on 27 August resulted in a shift
in the power balance in the capital, which has deepened
tensions between eastern and western security actors
and led to fragile stability.
Despite the noticeable decrease in the mobilization
of armed groups and clashes among them, there are
reports of ongoing large-scale recruitment activities.
Fighting between armed groups in Zawiyah, west of
Tripoli, on 25 September, trapped dozens of families
for several hours and left at least three civilians killed,
including a 10-year-old girl.
Further to my engagements with security actors in
the east and the west, I am pleased to report that the 5+5
JMC has agreed to meet under United Nations auspices
in Sirte next Thursday to discuss the resumption of the
Commission’s activities to further the implementation
of the ceasefire agreement.
The two Chiefs of Staff met in Tunis on 12 October
on the margins of an air and defence exhibition. An
intended visit by the Chief of Defence Staff of the
Libyan Army to Benghazi is still pending. I encourage
regular exchanges between the two Chiefs of Staff to
give momentum to steps towards the reunification of
the military institutions.
Developments on the economic track include the
release of the annual reports of the national Audit
Bureau and the Administrative Control Authority
on the activities of public institutions, including
the Central Bank of Libya and the Government of
National Unity. In response to some of the findings and
recommendations of those reports, Prime Minister Al
Dabiba announced a series of corrective administrative
measures. Investigations were opened into the work
of Libyan officials, based on the observations and
recommendations in the reports.
Regrettably, the human rights situation in Libya
remains concerning. Violations against migrants and
asylum-seekers continue with impunity. Arbitrary
detention continues as a common practice.
On 7 October, in the aftermath of clashes between
rival human-trafficking gangs in the city of Sabratha,

S/PV.9162

11 charred bodies of persons believed to be migrants
were discovered in a docked boat, and four more bodies
showing evidence of wounds were found outside the
boat. I note the announcement by the Ministry of
Interior of an investigation, which should bring the
perpetrators to justice.
I call on the Libyan authorities to take immediate
and credible measures to address the dire situation
of migrants and refugees and dismantle the related
trafficking and criminal networks.
Official statistics received by the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) on 1 October
show that nearly 11,000 individuals, including 55
women, are serving sentences in prisons run by the
judicial police. In addition, nearly 6,000 individuals
are in pretrial detention, including 113 women, and 135
juveniles are behind bars. The total numbers represents
a 40 per cent increase relative to the numbers released
in August 2021. Many of those in pretrial detention,
representing one third of the total prison population,
are detained with no access to justice. Those numbers
do not include the approximately 3,243 migrants who
are arbitrarily detained in detention centres operated by
Government entities.
Libyan authorities should guarantee due process
and a fair trial for those detained on credible charges
and immediately and unconditionally release all
persons who are arbitrarily detained.
On 12 October, the co-Chairs of the working group
on international humanitarian law and human rights
of the International Follow-up Committee on Libya,
in collaboration with the Presidency Council and the
African Union (AU), organized a briefing on national
reconciliation, at which experts shared best practices
and other national experiences in that area. The meeting
highlighted the role of victims at the centre of effective,
rights-based reconciliation processes, the need to rebuild
trust in State institutions and the criticality of ensuring
inclusivity and women’s meaningful representation and
participation. The experts also stressed the importance
of ensuring that reconciliation efforts are effectively
linked to the political process.
On 18 October, I met the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of the Congo in his capacity as
representative of the Chairperson of the AU High-Level
Committee on Libya. He briefed me on the outcome of
the meeting that had just concluded, at which the AU

22-648733/15

S/PV.9162

The situation in Libya

discussed preparations for a national reconciliation
meeting with Libyan counterparts.
The situation in Libya calls for a consensus State
re-legitimation process. Legitimate institutions capable
of providing for the basic needs of the people must be
established on the basis of genuine political will. In
that process, the conduct of legislative and presidential
elections is paramount. I will intensify consultations
with relevant actors to progress towards an agreement
on the necessary parameters to reach that objective,
including at the upcoming summit of the League of
Arab States. It will be important for the Security
Council to coordinate messaging and stress upon Libyan
actors the need to work together towards elections in a
sincere and committed manner. The Council’s unified
call for greater coherence and coordination in the
action of international actors would also be precious to
UNSMIL’s endeavour.
In the coming weeks, I intend to undertake to
facilitate a meeting between the main leaders of the
House of Representatives and High State Council to
understand the commitments announced in Rabat
on 21October and agree on political, constitutional,
legal and security measures to advance preparations
for elections as soon as possible, in keeping with the
aspirations clearly expressed by the Libyan people. I
also intend to travel to Sirte on 27 October to resume
the 5+5 JMC work and revive the security track. On
that basis, we will also reinvigorate the political and
economic tracks. Finally, I will work to mobilize
the support of the international community to
ensure that we all coordinate in coherence with the
aforementioned approach.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Bathily for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Special Representative Bathily for his inaugural briefing
to the Security Council and congratulate him on taking
up his appointment. He has the full support of the
United Kingdom in the implementation of his mandate.
I also welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Libya in our meeting today.
It is regrettable that Libya’s political elite has made
no further progress to agree a basis on which to hold
free, fair and inclusive parliamentary and presidential
elections. I therefore welcome Special Representative
4/15

24/10/2022

Bathily’s efforts to engage with all Libyan parties across
the country, including civil society, women and youth
groups. As a Council we should now urge all Libyan
parties, in particular Libya’s political leaders, to work
constructively with Special Representative Bathily and
agree a road map to elections as soon as possible, which
is in the interests of all the Libyan people.
I would also like to highlight two areas that are
undermining prospects for free, fair and inclusive
elections. First, the United Kingdom is deeply
concerned by reports of increased restrictions on, and
a deteriorating operating space for, civil society in
Libya. In addition to the administrative impediments
they encounter, civil society organizations are facing
an escalation in the level and frequency of scrutiny of
their operations. A vibrant civil society is critical for
the holding of free, fair and inclusive elections. It is
an essential component of a functioning democracy,
leading to greater stability and prosperity. We therefore
urge all Libyan authorities to ensure a safe, secure and
unhindered operating environment for civil society
in Libya.
Secondly, we call on all Libyan parties to protect
the neutrality, integrity and reunification of public
institutions so as to ensure that Libya’s wealth is used
for the good of all citizens. Reports of the misuse
of public funds, set out in the recent Audit Bureau’s
report, damage the credibility of Libya’s institutions.
These institutions must be supported to serve the whole
of Libya and all Libyan people.
Finally, I would like to thank Council members for
their constructive engagement in negotiations to renew
the mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya for a year. We look forward to adopting the draft
resolution later this week.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
Bathily for his briefing. Norway welcomes his
appointment as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and we are pleased to see that he has started
work from Tripoli.
Libya faces a number of challenges. It is therefore
crucial that we have a strong and stable United Nations
presence in the country, first and foremost to support
the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process.
Norway strongly supports the role and the work of the
United Nations in Libya.
The recommendations from the strategic review
need to be implemented, and the United Nations Support
22-64873

24/10/2022

The situation in Libya

Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) must have the necessary
resources. A one-year extension of UNSMIL’s mandate
is necessary for the Mission to fulfil its role.
We welcome what Special Representative Bathily
has reported to us today, namely, that he is engaging
with the Libyan parties to get the political process
back on track. The priority should be to agree on a
constitutional framework for the holding of elections,
and a timeline should be established.
Norway urges all Libyan parties to work
constructively with the Special Representative on these
issues and heed the calls of the Libyan people to hold
elections. We also encourage all parties to show restraint
and avoid actions and rhetoric that could escalate
the situation. All parties must take responsibility for
avoiding a new escalation of violence.
Norway is concerned by the deteriorating situation
for migrants in Libya. We condemn the killing of 15
migrants in Sabratha and call on the Libyan authorities
to ensure a thorough investigation of these deaths. We
are deeply concerned by reports of violations and abuses
of international law, including conflict-related sexual
violence, arbitrary arrests, abductions and the reported
use of torture. Acts of violence in detention centres
against migrant and refugee children, who represent
18 per cent of the detainee population, also continue to
be reported. We call on the Libyan authorities to end
arbitrary detention, particularly of children; to release
those unlawfully detained; and to immediately put in
place measures to prevent torture, sexual violence or
other ill treatment in detention. Libyan authorities must
fulfil their obligations to protect human rights, and
the space for civil society, including women’s rights
groups, must be protected.
Let me finish by reiterating the need for the full
withdrawal of all foreign fighters, mercenaries and
foreign forces from Libya and the need to implement
an adequate disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme in close cooperation with
neighbouring countries.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank the Special Representative
of Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, for his briefing on the situation
in that country.
First and foremost, I wish to congratulate
Mr. Bathily on his appointment to his very important

S/PV.9162

position. For nearly a year, the Mission has had to
operate without a chief mandated by the Security
Council, and this has not had a positive impact on the
overall settlement process. We trust that Mr. Bathily
will manage to step up the United Nations mediation
efforts in the nearest future and engage with Libyan
stakeholders to relaunch the political process. For our
part, we reaffirm our support for United Nations efforts
geared towards seeking acceptable ways out of this
crisis. We shall spare no effort in facilitating this.
For the moment, the internal situation in Libya
is alarming. The ongoing de facto diarchy will
ultimately lead to nothing but further destabilization
of the situation. Evidence of this includes increasingly
frequent clashes between armed groups, mobilization
activity and large-scale demonstrations by citizens.
The main objective of the Security Council at present
is to prevent outbreaks of violence from transforming
into a civil war. We believe attempts to freeze the
internal political conflict in Libya without real steps
towards settlement and national reconciliation to be
very shortsighted.
One of the possible ways to resolve the current
impasse in Libya is agreement on a draft constitution
and the convening of inclusive nationwide elections.
We note tangible progress on the political track. During
the meeting in Morocco on 21 October, Speaker of the
Libyan House of Representatives Saleh and President
of the High State Council Al-Mishri agreed to conclude
efforts to unite executive structures and make senior
appointments within them by early 2023. We trust
that the parties will continue addressing problems
by strengthening confidence-building measures and
compromise solutions. At the same time, we stress that
setting artificial deadlines will only get in the way.
Inclusivity remains the cornerstone of national
reconciliation in Libya. In other words, the process
should involve all leading political forces, including
representatives of the former authorities. In that context,
we welcome the efforts of the African Union to organize
a Libya-wide national reconciliation conference.
Equally important is cooperation on the security
track. We share the Special Representative’s assessment
of the need to resume contacts between the Chiefs of
General Staff of Libya’s east and west in order to unite
Libyan military structures. The Russian position on
the issue of ending the foreign military presence in
Libya remains unchanged. We call for a synchronized,
balanced, gradual and phased withdrawal of all

22-648735/15

The situation in Libya

S/PV.9162

non-Libyan armed
without exception.

groups

and

military

24/10/2022

units,

lasting peace. That is what we sincerely wish for our
Libyan friends.

The success of the political process in Libya requires
coordinated action on the part of all international and
regional stakeholders aimed at seeking compromise
solutions to cut the Gordian knot in Libya for the benefit
of its people, rather than pursuing narrow political and
parochial agendas. Attempts to manipulate the Libyan
sides and unilaterally influence the situation on the
ground will not resolve the problem of Libyan diarchy,
but will instead entrench the divisions. Neither do we see
added value in attempts to create separate mechanisms
for Libyan settlement without Libyan participation,
as is usually the case. We need to heed the words of
the Libyan people, who have stated consistently that
ill-conceived external intervention does not foster the
country’s unification, but instead only hampers the
political process.

Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council, namely, Gabon, Ghana
and Kenya.

We continue to support the central role of the
United Nations and UNSMIL as its key instrument for
coordinating international mediation efforts in Libya.
We hope that the country’s leading political forces
stand ready to engage in substantive, constructive
engagement with those mechanisms. However, it is
the Libyans themselves who should play first fiddle
in reaching agreement on parameters for future
country arrangements.
UNSMIL’s mandate will expire this week, on
31 October. Previously, we insisted on its three-month
technical rollover, exclusively in the light of the
unacceptable situation regarding the Mission’s
leadership. Now the situation has improved, and we
therefore stand ready to consider renewing it for one
year and to discuss the content of a relevant Security
Council draft resolution.
Before I conclude, let me recall an unfortunate
commemoration that falls on this week. Eleven years
ago, on 20 October 2011, on the outskirts of Sirte, the
former head of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Muammar
Al-Qaddafi, was brutally murdered. That tragic
incident, resulting from NATO’s military intervention
against this North-African country, ushered in the
culmination of chaos. Some Western politicians were
pleased and even relished the incident. Now we all
understand that the military action of Western countries
plunged the country into chaos and lawlessness. The
Libyan people have yet to surmount the devastating
effects of that tragedy. We all need to draw lessons from
this and to help Libya embark on the path to sustained
6/15

We warmly welcome the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, and
thank him for the briefing. We congratulate him on
being appointed as Special Representative and Head of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and wish
him every success. We also welcome the participation of
Ambassador Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative
of Libya.
We thank the Secretary-General that we now have
a substantive Special Representative in Tripoli. His
presence in Libya and interaction with the Libyan
stakeholders is a strong signal of the Organization’s
commitment to their country’s peace and security. A
substantive one-year mandate will offer the Special
Representative and the Mission the necessary stability
to execute their mandate and will demonstrate the
Council’s continued commitment.
We are concerned about the persisting political
stalemate, fully aware that the longer it continues, the
deeper it entrenches divisions among the people. We
reiterate our call to Libyan leaders to embrace the
desire of the people of Libya for peace and stability and
for prosperity in unity. The continued mobilization and
movement of armed groups in and around Tripoli works
against that common purpose. We are also concerned
about the continued exchange of inflammatory rhetoric.
Military means are not the solution; they only bring
more suffering to civilians without winning peace.
We therefore call for dialogue and reconciliation in
a process owned by the people of Libya and lacking
external dictates. For that reason, we fully support the
Presidency Council’s efforts.
The joint communiqué of the sixteenth Annual
Joint Consultative Meeting between members of the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council on 14 October recognizes
the importance of collaboration, coordination and
cooperation in — among other things — national
reconciliation. That should be “guided by the principles
of national ownership and meaningful partnerships
with subregional and regional organizations”. We
welcome the support of the African Union to the
22-64873

24/10/2022

The situation in Libya

reconciliation process in Libya, and we look forward to
the implementation of practical steps already agreed to,
including the facilitation of a reconciliation meeting in
Tripoli in the coming months.
Using dialogue and a process of inclusive,
comprehensive national reconciliation, Libyans can
achieve a firm constitutional basis for elections. For that
to happen most effectively, the mediating leadership
of the Special Representative is critical. We therefore
welcome his initial focus in engaging with all Libyan
parties, including civil society, women and youth
groups. We call on all sides to utilize the mediation
support of the United Nations, as we recognize that
all international support is valuable but should be
coordinated by the United Nations for the sake of the
coherence of efforts. Such coordination is also critical
in preventing the negative external interference that
has been characteristic of the conflict in Libya. We
condemn such interference as also manifested through
the presence of foreign forces, foreign fighters and
mercenaries in Libya. We reiterate our demand for their
immediate withdrawal.
We commend the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
and support its work in helping sustain the ceasefire
agreement of October 2020. We urge it to continue the
implementation of the action plan of October 2021 for
the withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters and
foreign forces. Those efforts need to be supplemented
with close collaboration among Libya, the United
Nations, neighbouring countries and the African
Union in monitoring the withdrawal. They should also
incorporate deliberate corresponding disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration — not only in Libya
but also in the multiple countries of origin. That needs
to be done in order to avoid cyclic conflict and fragility
in the Sahel region, which is already facing the adverse
cross-border effects of the conflict in Libya.
The other disturbing regional dimension of
the conflict that we must keep mentioning is the
plight of migrants and refugees in Libya and in the
Mediterranean. This conflict continues to expose the
worst of humankind in the treatment of that vulnerable
group of people, who seek better and safer lives.
We demand the humane treatment of the refugees,
migrants and asylum seekers as a basic requirement
of international law and associated conventions. We
reiterate our call for closer monitoring by the United
Nations of the resources and information channels that

S/PV.9162

enable that mistreatment, as we did in our previous
statement on 30 August (see S/PV.9120)
Recognizing the gaps that long transitions can
create, we caution against the politicization and
manipulation of the Libyan oil sector by external
forces. We also recall that Libya’s frozen assets belong
to the Libyans and are protected and preserved for the
Libyans. Their administration should be done strictly
in consultation with the Libyan authorities.
Finally, we reaffirm our respect for Libya’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty and our support for
a truly Libyan-led and Libyan-owned peace process.
Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Abdoulaye
Bathily for his first briefing to the Security Council
under his new and delicate responsibility. I welcome
our colleague the Permanent Representative of Libya
to this meeting.
The Special Representative’s remarks tell us that
the situation remains volatile and that there are many
outstanding issues regarding the stabilization of Libya.
But we are confident that his arrival in Tripoli will
bring a new dynamic to the local political process
and that the process will move forward gradually, but
steadily. We take note of his first meetings with various
interlocutors in Libya, and we reiterate our full support
for him in carrying out his mandate.
We also welcome the recent meeting between the
President of the High State Council and the Speaker of
the House of Representatives in Morocco. We hope that
direct talks between those two bodies will overcome the
barriers to completing the transition period through an
inclusive process, with the full participation of women
and young people. I will focus briefly on three issues.
First, it is imperative that the international
community encourage and support the Libyan parties
to move forward in organizing elections and unifying
institutions. It is of concern that external actors are
fomenting divisions among Libyans to promote their
own geostrategic and economic interests. Such tactics
only reinforce the polarization of the parties to the
conflict and complicate the prospects for the political
process mandated by the Security Council. Moreover,
they give rise to regional tensions that threaten the
stability of the central and eastern Mediterranean.
Foreign interference in Libya must therefore cease,
in respect for the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the country.

22-648737/15

S/PV.9162

The situation in Libya

Secondly, we express our concern over the ongoing
human rights violations and abuses of migrants in
Libya. The report issued by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights this
month is a call for the Libyan authorities, together
with the countries of origin and destination, to assume
their responsibilities and work in a coordinated manner
to protect the rights of migrants. The situation is
particularly serious for migrants in detention centres.
We call on the authorities to cooperate with United
Nations agencies to provide mechanisms to guarantee
the human rights of all migrants, including the rights to
refuge and a safe and dignified return.
Thirdly, we urge the parties to the conflict to
refrain from actions that may lead to an escalation.
Recent calls by some actors to resume fighting
jeopardize the progress achieved through the ceasefire.
More than 10 years of conflict in Libya have shown
us that there will be no military solution. To prevent
further fighting and a worsening of the humanitarian
situation, Mexico stresses the need to scrupulously
respect the arms embargo. We recall that all Member
States have the obligation to comply with the measures
adopted by the Security Council to prevent the entry
of arms and ammunition into Libya. We hope that the
new mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) will strengthen the fight against illicit
flows of small arms and light weapons, in accordance
with resolution 2616 (2021).
In conclusion, I reiterate my country’s support for
UNSMIL. We hope that the new mandate will provide
for the necessary adjustments to the Mission in order
for it to meet the Council’s expectations and, above all,
the Libyan people’s hope for peace and stability.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We welcome Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily
to this meeting, and we wish him all the best in his
important task. I wish to assure him of our full support
for his efforts at this critical moment for Libyans. We
would like to believe that his arrival in Tripoli and his
engagement with the authorities, Libyan stakeholders
and civil society will inject a new momentum into the
stalled political process in the country. Libya needs
just that: a positive energy and a strong push towards
finding solutions instead of continuing to create new
problems and tensions, which, as we have so often seen,
rapidly lead to escalations.
We believe that inclusive and extensive
consultations to find a compromise that is acceptable
8/15

24/10/2022

to all parties will help to implement the independent
strategic review of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), which Albania supports. We
expect the Security Council to show its support and
ensure that the UNSMIL mandate, soon to be renewed
for one year, is truly effective and equipped with the
necessary resources. Getting Libya out of the current
deadlock is a challenging task, and it needs the best
and continued efforts of all those involved, primarily
the Council.
Albania strongly believes that elections are the
only way forward. Legitimacy can be secured only
through elections, and that is what the Libyans need,
what they want and what they deserve as the only way
forward to start establishing democracy in the country
and preserve its unity and integrity. It is therefore
imperative that the Libyan stakeholders come together
around an agreement on a constitutional basis to create
the necessary conditions for inclusive, free and fair
elections. That will open a new chapter, and the country
needs it desperately; it will create the conditions to
establish the Government and decide in fairness the
equitable allocation of national resources.
We welcome the resumption of dialogue between
the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the
President of the High Council of State in recent days.
In such key moments, filled with uncertainty and high
tension, as well as high stakes, time is of the essence.
Leaders should be aware of the immense power and
responsibility that they have. An agreement, which
everyone expects, will lead to another and a better
Libya, where everyone can be a winner. Instead, failure
will make everyone lose — lose hope and patience and
risk returning the country to chaos. Libyans deserve
better than an endless political impasse, filled with
heightened rhetoric in a zero-sum political game.
It is equally essential that all international efforts
in support of the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
stabilization process remain firmly anchored in the
United Nations leadership. That is the best way to
put an end to the long and destructive divisions and
polarizations that have afflicted the country for more
than a decade.
Efforts towards national reconciliation, and the
support provided by the regional actors in that regard,
should be maintained. A genuine and long-lasting
national reconciliation process must be based on the
principles of transitional justice, with respect for the
22-64873

24/10/2022

The situation in Libya

rights and needs of all Libyans, including victims of
violations and abuses.
Respect for human rights in Libya remains a
serious issue, including where limits on freedom of
expression are concerned. The free voices and active
participation of civil society, human rights defenders
and women and young people are essential elements for
healthy, open societies. We continue to be concerned
about the humanitarian situation in Libya, especially
that of migrants, refugees and internally displaced
persons, which the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General specifically mentioned. The recent
arrests of two key suspects for crimes against victims
of human trafficking and human smuggling in Libya
is the right approach and more should be done in that
respect. We therefore believe that UNSMIL should play
a stronger role in countering human rights violations
and abuses and in promoting respect for the rule of law
and humanitarian law, in accordance with last year’s
independent strategic review. We know that democracy
is a process that is neither easy nor quick. Without
respect for human rights and without institutions based
on law, an independent justice system and an open and
lively society as key pillars, it remains an empty word
and a theoretical concept. This is an issue of paramount
importance for a country whose people have suffered
so much in the past.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Representative for his briefing. At
the outset, I would like to reaffirm the key objective
of achieving a unified Libyan Government capable of
governing the whole territory of Libya and representing
all Libyans. The status quo makes Libya vulnerable
to foreign interference and to attempts to destabilize
and divide it. The gains of the ceasefire agreement
must be maintained and its full implementation
ensured. Other key priorities including implementing
the plan withdrawing foreign forces, foreign fighters
and mercenaries from Libya, as well as launching a
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration process
for militias. The violence this summer in the Tripoli area
has underscored those needs, while the reunification
of the Libyan armed forces is the best way to achieve
a sovereign and peaceful Libya. France will continue
to support the dialogue between the security actors in
the east and west, especially with the support of the
5+5 Joint Military Commission, in order to preserve
Libya’s unity.

S/PV.9162

The arms embargo must be fully respected. In
that regard, France will continue to act in support
of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI, and we call on all countries acting
in the Mediterranean to cooperate with it. France
calls on all Libyan and regional actors to respect the
sovereign rights of European Union member States. The
memorandum of understanding signed in 2019 between
Turkey and Libya’s Government of National Unity and
any other agreements resulting from it do not comply
with the international law of the sea. Such agreements
cannot have legal implications for third States.
Only the free expression of the will of the people
can restore indisputable legitimacy in Libya. In the face
of growing divisions fuelled by foreign interference, it
will be essential to work to establish a new political road
map. It is therefore urgent to steer Libya back towards
the holding of dual presidential and parliamentary
elections in the Tripoli, Cyrenaica and Fezzan regions.
Only a genuine dialogue among all Libyans will
make that possible. It should focus on achieving a
constitutional basis and its actors must make genuine
and sincere commitments to holding safe, transparent
and credible elections.
On the economic front, France calls for Libya to
establish a mechanism for the fair and transparent
redistribution of revenues for the benefit of the entire
population. It will be crucial to put an end to the
misappropriation of public funds, which benefits the
militias in particular and fuels tensions on the ground.
The human rights violations still being perpetrated
in Libya are deeply shocking, especially sexual and
gender-based violence and violations of the rights of
migrants and refugees. France calls for those responsible
to be brought to justice. We want to point out that the
primary responsibility in that regard is in the hands of
the Libyan authorities and encourage them to cooperate
fully with the International Criminal Court.
It is more important than ever for the Security
Council and the United Nations to help Libya and its
people tackle the challenges threatening its sovereignty,
security and unity. That is why France fully supports
the mediation of Special Representative Abdoulaye
Bathily and a one-year renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank Special Representative Bathily
for his briefing and update on the current situation in

22-648739/15

S/PV.9162

The situation in Libya

Libya. The United States welcomes his appointment as
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and offers its full support to him as he works
for peace and stability in Libya. His arrival in Tripoli
is an opportunity to reinvigorate the political process.
We encourage UNSMIL to take the lead on pressing
forward towards agreement on a constitutional basis
and a clear timeline for elections, the establishment of a
transparent mechanism for the allocation of oil revenues
and the resolute commitment of all parties to refraining
from the use of force. We continue to call on Libyans
to participate in the United Nations-led effort to settle
the constitutional basis for elections, an objective that
has been close to agreement on several occasions. We
encourage swift decisions on eligibility criteria for
presidential elections and careful thought as to how key
Libyan actors will interact after the elections.
It is imperative that a credible and realistic
electoral timetable be established quickly, including
arrangements for the independent organization,
oversight and observation of the electoral process by the
highly competent High National Election Commission.
There should be clear expectations about when any
sitting official seeking to run for office must step
down. We note that those who obstruct or undermine
the successful completion of Libya’s political transition
may be subject to United Nations sanctions. It must be
made clear to Libya’s leaders that the use of violence to
advance political goals is unacceptable.
The United States remains deeply concerned
about the potential for further fighting following the
clashes in Libya in August. All States have a clear
responsibility to discourage any Libyan actions that
destabilize the security situation and threaten the 2020
ceasefire agreement.
The non-transparent use of Libya’s oil revenues
for political and personal gain continues to prop up
rival political figures, who divert funds to consolidate
support, particularly among militias and foreign
fighters. We should work together with the Special
Representative to facilitate agreement among Libyan
leaders on a mechanism for the transparent oversight
and accountability of Libya’s oil resources. We welcome
the Special Representative’s broad consultations and
would like to see greater engagement with civil society,
as well as efforts to push back against attempts by
Libyan authorities and security actors to close civic
space. Consultations by UNSMIL with civil-society
members may crystallize for Libyan power brokers
10/15

24/10/2022

what the Libyan people seek from their leaders in a
newly elected Government.
Finally, we appreciate the work of the United
Kingdom on the draft resolution for the renewal of
UNSMIL’s mandate. We welcome the Security Council’s
constructive negotiations so far and call on all Council
members to continue productive engagement in order to
ensure that UNSMIL has the full one-year mandate that
it needs to accomplish its mission.
Mr. Jardim Oliveira (Brazil): We would like to
thank the newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily,
for his briefing and to ensure him of Brazil’s full
support. Brazil believes that Mr. Bathily’s appointment
has reopened a window of opportunity, particularly
in the first few months of his mandate, for the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to be
effective in its advisory role in support of a true Libyanled and Libyan-owned political process. We therefore
encourage the Special Representative to engage with
all Libyan stakeholders with a sense of urgency and to
build on existing agreements, including the principles
agreed on in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum.
We also encourage the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to follow through with
the recommendations of the UNSMIL independent
strategic review, including by strengthening the use
of strategic communications to support the Mission’s
activities. The organization of elections on a firm
constitutional basis constitutes one important step
towards unifying Government institutions in Libya.
We recall the importance of other steps to ensure peace
and stability in the country, as part of an integrated,
strategic and coherent approach to peacebuilding.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of armed groups should be a priority on the security
track, closely interlinked with the development
conditions and the human rights situation in Libya. We
acknowledge the contributions of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission as a platform for intra-Libyan dialogue
to tackle the structural conditions related to armed
violence. We also underline the importance of regional
coordination for the return of foreign fighters to their
countries of origin.
The Security Council has repeatedly acknowledged
the strong linkages between stability and security in
Libya and in neighbouring countries, particularly in the
Sahel. We therefore call for closer coordination between
22-64873

24/10/2022

The situation in Libya

UNSMIL and other United Nations missions operating
in the region. Brazil also highlights the involvement of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in the Sahel and
encourages an exchange of views between the Council
and the PBC on the Libyan file.
We welcomed the announcement by the Presidency
Council of the launching of a national reconciliation
strategy for Libya last June. We look forward to the
implementation of that strategy, while taking into
account the offer made by the African Union to support
Libyan efforts for national reconciliation. We also
thank Morocco for its efforts in support of intra-Libyan
dialogue, including most recently by hosting talks
between the President of the High Council of State and
the Speaker of the House of Representatives over the
past weekend. We are optimistic about the outcome of
the most recent talks.
Brazil remains concerned, however, that the
persistence of the political impasse risks being
instrumentalized to fuel a return to conflict and violence.
We recall that there can be no military solution to the
Libyan crisis. We highlight the importance of effective
accountability mechanisms to further dissuade attempts
to bring about political change by force.
Brazil also remains concerned about the impetus
to increase oil output from Libya to respond to
demands in the global oil market. In the absence of
a unified Government policy, including on fair and
transparent revenue distribution, the parameters for
the management of natural resources in Libya, as a
corollary of Libyan sovereignty, should remain for
Libyan national development and the well-being of
all Libyans, rather than a response to foreign-driven
interests and pressures.
We also note with concern the persistent active
management of Libyan assets frozen abroad, particularly
under policies that result in the erosion of frozen funds,
thereby contradicting the aim of the sanctions regime,
which is to preserve those funds for the benefit of the
Libyan people. Brazil recalls the conclusions of the
Panel of Experts on Libya of the Committee pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), which underscore that the active
management of Libyan frozen assets is not allowed,
according to paragraph 19 of resolution 1970 (2011).
Finally, my delegation observes that the Council’s
authorization for Member States to implement the arms
embargo on Libya continues to give rise to controversy.
We stress once again the importance of fully respecting

S/PV.9162

the arms embargo and implementing it in accordance
with the terms set out in relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Council must find unity as it calls on
the Libyan parties to put aside their differences and
move forward in a genuine Libyan-led and Libyanowned political process.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bathily for his briefing and welcome the Permanent
Representative of Libya to today’s meeting.
Taking a political approach is the only appropriate
way to resolve the Libyan issue. According to
Mr. Bathily’s briefing, the political process in the
country remains at an impasse. There has been
no progress in forming a constitutional basis for
elections, and that is worrisome. Both the House of
Representatives and the High State Council have
indicated their willingness to resume dialogue as soon
as possible, which China welcomes. We encourage all
parties in the country to step up consultations under
the auspices of the United Nations and, building on the
outcome of the previous dialogue, to reach agreement
quickly on the constitutional basis for elections so that
elections can be held and the current political impasse
be resolved as soon as possible.
The United Nations is the main channel of
mediation for the Libyan political process. China once
again welcomes the appointment of Mr. Bathily as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya and his assumption of duties. That will help the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
to fully resume its functions and strengthen the good
offices of the United Nations. China will actively
support Mr. Bathily’s work.
The international community should earnestly
abide by the Libyan-owned and Libyan-led principle,
respect Libya’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and
refrain from imposing solutions from the outside. Under
the current circumstances, all parties in Libya should
put the interests of the country and its people first,
exercise maximum restraint and avoid the resurgence
of violence.
China supports the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
in continuing its key role in maintaining the ceasefire
and promoting the withdrawal of foreign forces and
mercenaries. Foreign forces and mercenaries in Libya
should withdraw as soon as possible in a balanced
and orderly manner. Reconciliation is an important

22-6487311/15

S/PV.9162

The situation in Libya

way to silence the guns in Libya. China welcomes the
national reconciliation dialogue in Libya and supports
all parties in the country in steadily advancing the
strategic vision of national reconciliation in order to
provide a favourable environment for advancing the
political process.
The African Union (AU) has a wealth of experience
and successful practice in promoting reconciliation.
China appreciates its efforts and continues to support
the AU in helping with Libya’s reconciliation. Years
of conflict have wreaked havoc in Libya. Promoting
national reconciliation is the common aspiration of the
Libyan people and is also a crucial way to improve the
humanitarian situation. Oil is the main source of income
for the country and China hopes that the resumption of
oil production in Libya will spur the country’s economic
development and improve people’s livelihoods.
The UNSMIL mandate is about to expire. China
supports the adoption by the Security Council of a draft
resolution with substantive elements that will renew
the mandate for a longer term. We encourage UNSMIL
to continue to work in accordance with the relevant
Council resolutions, focus on its core mandate, promote
Libya’s political transition and support the holding of
elections in Libya.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing and assure him of India’s full support.
I also welcome the presence of the Libyan
Ambassador at today’s meeting.
The situation in Libya is indeed concerning, as we
heard from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. In the past, the Security Council expressed
its condemnation of the violent clashes in Tripoli. Last
month, we saw more clashes between armed groups in
Libya, leading to civilian casualties. As we have noted
previously, the political stalemate and the subsequent
mobilization of armed groups in Libya have the potential
to undermine the gains made since the signing of the
ceasefire agreement in October 2020. There can be no
military or armed solution to the issues facing Libya.
That point needs to be emphasized by the international
community, including by the Council.
The immediate priority is to resolve all outstanding
issues in arriving at a constitutional basis for holding
presidential and parliamentary elections. The holding
of elections at the earliest in a free, fair, inclusive and
credible manner is an urgent imperative.
12/15

24/10/2022

Violent clashes that recur regularly between
armed groups bring into focus once again the dangers
posed by the continued presence of foreign forces
and mercenaries in Libya, which is a violation of the
Libyan ceasefire agreement of 2020 and goes against
the pronouncements of the Security Council. Violations
of Council resolutions, especially of provisions
concerning the arms embargo, continue with blatant
disregard for peace and stability in Libya and the region.
I would like to reiterate what the Panel of Experts on
Libya established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011)
categorically pointed out in its final report:
“[t]he remainder of the training provided by
[Türkiye] to the Government of National Unity
Affiliated Forces is military or naval in nature and
thus a violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1970
(2011).” (S/2022/427, para. 77)
We remain concerned about the resurgence of
terrorist activity in Libya. We reiterate that terrorist
groups and affiliated entities must not be allowed to
operate unchallenged in Libya. Terrorism emanating
from Libya is bound to have cascading effects in
the Sahel region. It is therefore important that the
international community address the issue at this stage
so as to avoid its collateral consequences for the wider
African continent.
The political process in Libya should be fully
Libyan-led and Libyan-owned, with no imposition
or external interference. India, for its part, remains
committed to supporting Libya and the Libyan people
in their quest for lasting peace and stability.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): Let me begin by welcoming
our briefer, Mr. Bathily, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), in his first briefing
to the Council. The long-awaited appointment of a
Special Representative is a critical step towards peace
and stability in Libya and is very welcome. The Special
Representative has our full support for his efforts to
assist Libya on the pathway to elections and facilitate a
much-needed resumption of political dialogue. We call
on all actors in Libya to engage with him constructively
and in good faith. We also look forward to the full
implementation of the recommendations of UNSMIL’s
strategic review under his leadership. We believe that it
will equip the Mission to achieve optimum impact on
the ground.
22-64873

24/10/2022

The situation in Libya

As recently as September, in Zawiya, we were sadly
reminded that the hard-won gains since the signing of
the October 2021 ceasefire agreement are at risk. The
politically motivated violence witnessed in Tripoli in
August resulted in the deaths of almost 40 people, as
well as damage to critical civilian infrastructure. It is
unacceptable that Libya’s civilian population continues
to bear the brunt of fighting between rival armed groups
and administrations. We reiterate that all actors have a
responsibility to protect civilians and must be held to
account when they fail to do so.
To end the cycle of violence and to avoid a serious
escalation, a unified Government for all Libyans is
urgently required. The only way to achieve that is
through free, fair and inclusive elections. We urge the
Libyan parties to come together and renew momentum
towards agreeing on a constitutional basis for the
holding of elections as soon as possible. We urge them
to put narrow and self-serving interests aside, and to
refrain from inflammatory rhetoric and from politicizing
Libya’s natural resources. Furthermore, actions that
could undermine regional stability should be avoided.
At this precarious moment, we must not lose sight
of the increasingly troubling human rights situation in
Libya, including recent indications that death-penalty
sentences could be issued again. Civil-society space
is shrinking, and women are being expressly targeted
for their activism and political participation. The
vilification on social media of human rights defenders,
humanitarian workers and other civil-society actors is
reprehensible and comes at a steep cost to the broader
population. The figures on arbitrary detention are
shocking. Migrants, refugees and children are among
those held in dire conditions. We encourage the United
Nations, Member States and the Libyan authorities to
work for human rights-based alternatives to detention.
Finally, Ireland looks forward to the renewal
of UNSMIL’s mandate later this week, and we are
working closely with colleagues around the table to
that end. Most critically, we reiterate our full support
for a renewal of the mandate for the standard 12-month
duration. We firmly believe that it will provide muchneeded stability and predictability to the Mission at a
critical and sensitive juncture for Libya.
In conclusion, we reiterate our steadfast support
to the United Nations, as well as international efforts,
including the Berlin process, to overcome the current
political deadlock and reach a sustainable Libyan-led
and -owned solution.

S/PV.9162

Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, we welcome Mr. Bathily and
thank him for his valuable briefing, wishing him every
success in his task. We assure him of the United Arab
Emirates’ full support for his efforts and those of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
We look forward to the renewal of UNSMIL’s mandate
for one year at the end of this month. We also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Libya to today’s meeting.
In the light of the brutal attacks in Sabratha, where
at least 15 migrants and asylum seekers were killed, we
underscore the urgent need to dismantle cross-border
organized crime networks in all countries of origin,
transit and destination. We would like to focus on four
important points in our statement today.
First, the holding of parliamentary and presidential
elections is a legitimate demand of the Libyan people.
However, dialogue and consultations are essential
if that demand is to be met. We therefore welcomed
the recent meeting of various actors in Morocco and
commend the efforts of the Kingdom of Morocco to
that end. Paving the way for elections requires serious
measures aimed at achieving inclusive and large-scale
national reconciliation. In that regard, we welcome the
progress made by the Libyan Presidential Council on
national reconciliation with a view to providing common
ground for a lasting solution to the Libyan crisis. We also
await the convening of an inclusive conference with all
components of Libyan society, supported by the African
Union (AU). We call on the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to do his utmost to achieve
convergence among Libyan stakeholders and reach the
required understandings and consensus.
Secondly, we stress the importance of achieving
the desired results on the political front and the need
to adopt meaningful measures to unify the country’s
security and military institutions, as well as to ensure the
concurrent, phased, gradual and balanced withdrawal of
all foreign forces, foreign fighters and mercenaries from
Libyan territories. We also emphasize the importance
of maintaining the comprehensive ceasefire agreement,
which marked its second anniversary yesterday. We
look forward to the next meeting of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission under the auspices of UNSMIL.
We urge the Special Representative to work alongside
all stakeholders in Libya in order to address the root
causes of the country’s insecurity, which affects the
ordinary people of Libya worst of all.

22-6487313/15

S/PV.9162

The situation in Libya

Thirdly, particular attention should be paid to the
economic and humanitarian fronts. That requires the
decision-makers in Libya to prioritize responding to
the Libyan people’s basic needs and providing them
with basic services. Libya’s natural resources must
be properly utilized and the proceeds spent fairly and
transparently while respecting Libya’s independent
economic and financial institutions.
Fourthly, we stress that Libyan women must be
able to participate effectively in the decision-making
process and in the Libyan dialogue and negotiations. We
commend the efforts of the United Nations to advance
the role of women, in coordination with all Libyan actors
and institutions, in addition to the ongoing cooperation
between the United Nations and social media aimed at
countering misleading information and hate speech that
target women. We are also concerned about the reports
of acts of intimidation, violence and aggression against
women who participate in public life.
In conclusion, we hope that the Libyan people will
succeed in finding the necessary solutions to build a
unified and prosperous Libyan State and to realize their
legitimate aspirations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, and Gabon on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and on managing the Council’s meetings. I also
thank Mr. Bathily for his briefing and congratulate him
on his important appointment as Africa’s first Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya. We
look forward to seeing him succeed in his important
role at such a decisive time in my country’s crisis.
I would like to align myself with the joint statement
delivered by my Kenyan colleague on behalf of the
three African members of the Security Council.
We are encouraged by Mr. Bathily’s expeditious
work from Libya. We also welcomed his statements at
the very outset and his determination to communicate
with all Libyan parties without exception and to
listen to them on the political, economic and security
situations in the country. One of his priorities is to
establish a conciliatory approach in Libya, leading to
the holding of credible elections that reflect the will
of the Libyan people as soon as possible. We hope
that he will be able to build on the accomplishments
of his predecessors, while avoiding any repetitions of
14/15

24/10/2022

past experiences and mistakes, in order to ultimately
achieve different results. The Libyan people have high
hopes for Mr. Bathily and want to see an end to their
crises in which the will of nearly 3 million voters is
expressed through the holding of elections.
In that context, we commend the Security Council
on its current consensus on the possibility of appointing
a Special Envoy of the Secretary-General after nearly
a year. We also anticipate the impending extension of
UNMIL’s mandate through the adoption by consensus
of a draft resolution to renew support for the political
process, which will give us hope with regard to the
Security Council’s determination to resolve the political
crisis in Libya. We therefore call on Council members to
take additional constructive steps to support stability in
my country and end international division on the issue.
We also welcome the various efforts made recently
by many friendly countries that have met with Libyan
parties and their efforts to find effective solutions to
the current crisis. In that regard, we hope that all such
efforts can be focused and avoid disagreement in order
to achieve the sole goal of supporting a Libyan-owned
and Libyan-led solution.
The first step involves establishing a constitutional
basis for holding presidential and parliamentary elections
and ending all the transitional phases that Libya has
endured for more than 10 years. The Libyan people and
I attentively listened to Council members’ statements
today. It is clear that there is unanimous consensus on
the importance of holding such elections. Together, let us
show Libyans that the Council is serious about that issue.
We know that the crisis in Libya is complex and
complicated and will not be resolved only by holding
elections, but that will be an important step towards
reaching a solution and ending the crisis of legitimacy.
Thereafter, we will be able to work together to find
decisive solutions to other challenges.
We reiterate once again our request to the Council
to support the Government and the High National
Electoral Commission by sending teams as soon as
possible to assess our needs and to provide the logistical
and technical support necessary for advancing the
electoral process, in parallel with other political and
legal tracks. That will be an important indicator of the
international community’s seriousness in supporting
the elections and will restore the momentum that had
prevailed last December. The differences of opinion
22-64873

24/10/2022

The situation in Libya

among some parties on holding elections must not
prevent us from moving ahead.
We would also like to recall the efforts of the Joint
Military Commission, which despite the challenges
continues its attempts to implement the ceasefire
agreements. Supporting the Commission is therefore
very important, as it can play a pivotal role in unifying
military institutions, which have been divided, and can
also serve as the core of a unified army in Libya.
With regard to what we have heard today concerning
the regrettable events that took place in Sabratah,
which unfortunately led to several casualties among
migrants in their attempt to cross the Mediterranean
Sea in a death boat, we condemn that criminal act,
which we stress is an individual act. In the span of just
48 hours, the Attorney General and the Minister of the
Interior were able to detain the culprits, and we are in
the process of investigating the incident.
In that regard, we reiterate our call for the
international community to confront with us the
international networks of gangs involved in smuggling
and human trafficking, which is in the interests of all
countries of origin, transit and destination, as well as
Libya. All of us must work together to combat those
networks. That is why we would like to reiterate our call
on the Council once again to assume its responsibility
and place gangs and international criminal networks
involved in human trafficking on the sanctions lists
and to investigate such networks not only in Libya
but elsewhere.
We need support for national efforts to escape
the cycle of conflict and to end foreign interference,
division and fragmentation. That can be achieved only
through genuine national reconciliation that transcends
all interests and brings stability and prosperity to
the Libyan people. Such a reconciliation can greatly
contribute to breaking the current political deadlock.
We need to rebuild trust among all citizens of Libya,
regardless of their affiliations, and to turn the page of
the past in order to ensure transparency, accountability,
tolerance, amnesty and reparations.
The Presidential Council, as members know, has
taken practical and active steps by first establishing
the Supreme Commission for Reconciliation under the
chairmanship of Deputy Laffy. We have also established
a strategic vision for national reconciliation. A
commission of legal experts has been established to draft
a unified law on reconciliation and transitional justice.

S/PV.9162

In that context, the Presidential Council has held
many meetings with the different elements of Libyan
society in order to reconcile their positions and find the
best ways to move forward. The Advisory Committee
held its first meeting in Tripoli several days ago, which
the African Union attended, in order to pave the way for
the preparatory meeting to be held in mid-November,
with the participation of more than 80 members
representing all cities and regions of Libya, with their
diverse cultural, political and social affiliations, in order
to prepare for the national reconciliation conference
that is expected to be convened next year.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
African Union, which supports this dossier, and to thank
the Congo as Chair of the Supreme Commission on
Libya within the African Union. We hope that support,
with the help of the United Nations and through its
African Envoy, will be translated into concrete steps on
the ground in order to achieve the goals and objectives
of the desired Libyan reconciliation.
We are convinced that, although all the transitional
processes of the past had a technical nature based on
political, economic or security elements, the most
important element that has always been missing is
national reconciliation, which is the cornerstone for
supporting all other elements of the transition process.
That is why those previous processes over the years did
not succeed or were unsustainable. It is necessary to
start from scratch and support all transitional processes,
above all the process of national reconciliation and
confidence-building among Libyans.
In conclusion, and despite all those challenges, we
view the recent developments with optimism. We look
forward to international efforts to yield fruitful results,
the most important of which is to provide support for
Libya’s national determination and for meeting the
aspirations of Libyan citizens. We seek partnership
with all on the basis of reciprocity and respect for the
national sovereignty of Libya. We are fully confident
that our people will overcome this crisis. The Council
must not disappoint them once again.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

22-6487315/15
