S/2020/1076

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the draft resolution contained in document
S/2020/1054, submitted by the Russian Federation, in connection with the agenda
item “Women and peace and security”. In accordance with the voting procedure
agreed by the members and set out in the letter by the President of the Security
Council dated 27 March 2020 (S/2020/253) — a procedure agreed in light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic —
the draft resolution received five votes in favour (China, Indonesia, the Russian
Federation, South Africa and Viet Nam), none against and 10 abstentions (Belgium,
the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, the Niger, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America). The draft resolution has not been adopted, having
failed to obtain the required number of votes.
Pursuant to that procedure, I enclose herewith copies of the related documents.
My letter dated 29 October 2020, addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of Security Council members, putting to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/2020/1054 (annex 1 and enclosure);
Reply letters received from Security Council members indicating their
national positions on the draft resolution (annexes 2 to 16);
Statements subsequently submitted by Security Council members providing
explanations of their votes (annexes 17 to 28).
This letter and its enclosures will be issued as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
President of the Security Council

20-14609 (E) 031120 011220

*2014609*

S/2020/1076

Annex 1
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council
In accordance with the procedure agreed upon by the members of the Security
Council in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, as set out in the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of
the Security Council addressed to all members of the Council (S/2020/253), I would
like to draw your attention to the following.
The members of the Council have discussed a draft resolution, submitted by
the Russian Federation, in connection with the agenda item “Women and peace and
security”. That draft resolution, contained in document S/2020/1054 and enclosed
herewith, has been put into blue.
In my capacity as President of the Security Council, I hereby put the abovementioned draft resolution to a vote. The non-extendable 24-hour voting period
for this draft resolution will begin at 2 p.m. on Thursday, 29 October 2020. The
non-extendable 24-hour voting period will expire at 2 p.m. on Friday, 30 October 2020.
Please submit your vote (in favour, against or abstention) on the draft
resolution, as well as any possible explanation of vote, by sending a letter signed by
the Permanent Representative or Chargé d’affaires a.i. within the non-extendable
24-hour voting period set out above to the Director of the Security Council Affairs
Division in the United Nations Secretariat (egian@un.org).
It is my intention to circulate a letter listing the outcome of the vote within
three hours of the conclusion of the 24-hour voting period. I also intend to convene
a video-teleconference of the Security Council to announce the outcome of the
vote shortly after the conclusion of the voting period, on the afternoon of Friday,
30 October 2020.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
President of the Security Council

2/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Enclosure

S/2020/1054

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional
29 October 2020
Original: English

Russian Federation: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Reaffirming its commitment to the continuing and full implementation, in a
mutually reinforcing manner, of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009),
1889 (2009), 1960 (2010), 2106 (2013), 2122 (2013), 2242 (2015), 2467 (2019) and
2493 (2019) on Women, Peace and Security, and relevant statements of its Presidents,
Bearing in mind the Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the primary responsibility of the Security Council under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Reaffirming in this regard the importance to achieve sustainable peace and
security by dialogue, mediation, consultations and political negotiations to bridge
differences and to end conflicts,
Recognizing the importance of equal approach to the four pillars of the Women,
Peace and Security agenda, mainly participation, prevention, protection and relief
and recovery,
Expressing grave concern about the disproportionate negative impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic, notably the socio-economic impact, on women across the
world, especially those in countries ravaged by armed conflicts, or in post-conflict
situations, or affected by humanitarian crises,
Recalling the commitments of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
as well as the commitments contained in the outcome document of the twentythird Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly entitled “Women
2000: Gender Equality, Development and Peace for the Twenty-First Century”
(A/S 23/10/Rev.1), in particular those concerning women and armed conflict, and
reaffirming the obligations of State Parties to the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the Optional Protocol thereto, and
urging States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to them,
Reiterating the emphasis placed on achieving gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
reaffirming that women’s and girls’ empowerment and gender equality are critical
to conflict prevention and broader efforts to maintain international peace and
security, and further emphasizing that persisting barriers to the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) will only be dismantled through dedicated commitment
to women’s participation and human rights, and through concerted leadership,
20-146093/37

S/2020/1076

consistent information and action, and support, to build women’s engagement in all
levels of decision-making,
Reaffirming the primary role of Member States to implement fully all Security
Council resolutions on Women, Peace and Security, and the important complementary
role of United Nations entities and regional organizations, further recognizing that
States bear the primary responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights of all
persons within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction as provided for by
international law, and reaffirming that parties to armed conflict bear the primary
responsibility to ensure the protection of civilians,
Recognizing the need to address the gaps and strengthen links between the
United Nations peace and security in the field, human rights and development work
as a means to address root causes of armed conflict and threats to the security of
women and girls in the pursuit of international peace and security,
Recognizing the need for more systematic attention to the implementation of
women, peace and security commitments in its own work, particularly to ensure
the enhancement of women’s engagement in conflict prevention, resolution and
peacebuilding, and noting in this regard the need for timely and systematic reporting
on women, peace and security,
Welcoming the efforts of Member States, and regional and subregional
organizations, in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions
on Women, Peace and Security at the regional, national and local levels, including
the development of action plans and other complementary implementation planning
frameworks, with sufficient resources, and encouraging Member States to continue to
pursue such implementation, including through strengthened monitoring, evaluation
and coordination,
Recognizing that inequalities and discrimination against women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict situations, including, inter alia, in cultural, social and
economic development opportunities constitute obstacles to women’s participation
in conflict prevention, conflict resolution, mediation and peacebuilding, underlining
the urgent need to advance gender equality and women’s social, political and
economic empowerment, poverty eradication and social protection as well as girls’
access to education,
Reaffirming the key role women can play in re-establishing the fabric of
recovering society and stressing the need for their involvement in the development
and implementation of post-conflict strategies in order to take into account their
perspectives and needs, expressing concern that women’s capacity to engage in
public decision making and economic recovery often does not receive adequate
recognition or financing in post-conflict situations, and underlining that funding for
women’s early recovery needs is vital to increase women’s empowerment, which can
contribute to effective post-conflict peacebuilding,
Recalling the important contribution of civil society, including women’s
organizations and local community women leaders, to conflict prevention, resolution,
and peacebuilding, affirming the importance of their sustained engagement and
meaningful participation in all peace processes and remaining deeply concerned
about threats, attacks and restrictions on the work of civil society organizations that
inhibit their ability to contribute to international peace and security,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General S/2020/946 and its
recommendations for the next decade on the 20th anniversary of Resolution 1325
and, recalling the report of the Secretary-General of 17 September 2015 (S/2015/716)

4/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

which submitted the recommendations of the Global Study on the implementation
of resolution 1325,
1. Commemorates the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) which provides a unique opportunity to take stock of the progress
made to date as well as the opportunity to commit for far greater implementation
of the women, peace and security agenda, while recognizing that 2020 marks the
25th anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing at
which the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action were adopted, and calls on all
Member States to use these anniversaries to intensify national and regional efforts
and international co-operation;
2. Notes with deep concern persisting barriers to the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on Women, Peace and Security
and the frequent under-representation of women in many formal processes and bodies
related to the maintenance of international peace and security, the relatively low
number of women in senior positions in political, peace and security-related national,
regional and international institutions, imbalanced geographical representation of
women, the lack of adequate gender-sensitive humanitarian responses and support
for women’s leadership roles in these settings, insufficient financing for Women,
Peace and Security, and the resulting detrimental impact on the maintenance of
international peace and security;
3. Emphasizing that advancing gender equality and women’s political, social,
and economic empowerment is critical to the prevention of and response to sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations, and that the safety and empowerment
of women and girls is important for their meaningful participation in peace processes,
preventing conflicts and rebuilding societies, and that therefore women’s protection
and participation are inextricably linked and mutually-reinforcing as reflected by all
previous resolutions on women, peace and security;
4. Urges Member States to fully implement the provisions of all previous
Security Council Resolutions pertaining to the Women, Peace and Security agenda
and to reinforce their efforts in this regard;
5. Further urges Member States to commit to implementing the Women,
Peace and Security agenda and its priorities by ensuring and promoting the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in all stages of peace processes,
including through mainstreaming a gender perspective, and remain committed to
increasing the number of civilian and uniformed women in peacekeeping at all levels
and in key positions;
6. Also urges Member States to ensure safe, enabling and gender-sensitive
working environments for women in peacekeeping operations and to address threats
and violence against them, and remain committed to strengthening their collective
efforts to promote the full, equal and meaningful participation of uniformed and
civilian women in peacekeeping operations at all levels and in all positions, including
in senior leadership positions. and calls on all Member States, particularly Troop- and
Police-Contributing Countries as well as countries hosting peacekeeping operations,
to continue increasing the number and participation of uniformed women personnel
in peacekeeping operations;
7. Urges Member States supporting peace processes to facilitate women’s
full, equal and meaningful inclusion and participation in peace talks from the outset,
both in negotiating parties’ delegations and in the mechanisms set up to implement
and monitor agreements, encourages Member States to support efforts, including
timely support to women to enhance their participation and capacity building in

20-146095/37

S/2020/1076

peace processes, in order to address the unequal representation and participation of
women in the peace and security agenda;
8. Calls on Member States to promote all the rights of women, including
civil, political and economic rights, urges them to increase their funding on women,
peace and security including through more aid in conflict and post-conflict situations
for programmes that further gender equality and women’s economic empowerment
and security, as well as through support to civil society, and to support countries in
armed conflict and post-conflict situations, including through access to education,
training and capacity-building, in their implementation of women, peace and security
resolutions, further calls for increased international development cooperation related
to women’s empowerment and gender equality and invites aid providers to continue
to track the gender focus of aid contributions and provide further information and
assessment on this progress;
9. Takes note of the work of the Informal Experts Group on Women, Peace
and Security as expressed in resolution 2242 (2015) to facilitate a more systematic
approach to Women, Peace and Security within its own work and enable greater
oversight and coordination of implementation efforts; and acknowledges UN Women’s
important role in this regard;
10. Encourages regional and sub-regional organisations to continue promoting
and implementing the Women, Peace and Security agenda in their respective
regions, and further encourages them to identify practical and measurable steps
for implementing the agenda as well as enhance cooperation and sharing of best
practices as it relates to implementation of the agenda;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next annual report on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent resolutions further
information on progress made since the adoption of the resolution 1325 and the
remaining challenges in the Women, Peace and Security agenda, recommendations
on how to address new and emerging challenges as well as promote full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in peace processes and ensure that their specific
needs are addressed in peace agreements;
12. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

6/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 2
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to the President of the Security Council’s letter of 29 October 2020
relating to the draft resolution on women and peace and security (S/2020/1054).
In accordance with the procedure set forth for the adoption of resolutions under
the current extraordinary circumstance caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
I am pleased to indicate that Belgium abstains in the voting on this draft resolution.
(Signed) Philippe Kridelka
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations

20-146097/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 3
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of China to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I would like to thank you and your team for the strong support in facilitating
the voting procedure.
Please be kindly informed that China votes in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2020/1054) submitted by the Russian Federation in connection with the agenda
item “Women and peace and security”.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations

8/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 4
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Special Envoy to the
Security Council of the Dominican Republic addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 29 October 2020 regarding draft resolution
S/2020/1054, submitted under the agenda item “Women and peace and security”.
Upon instructions from my Government, my delegation abstains in the voting
on the above-mentioned draft resolution.
(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
Ambassador
Special Envoy to the Security Council of the Dominican Republic

20-146099/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 5
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Estonia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to inform you, Sir, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, that my delegation abstains in the voting on
draft resolution S/2020/1054, in connection with the agenda item “Women and peace
and security”.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United Nations

10/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 6
Letter dated 29 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
[Original: French]
I refer to the letter dated 29 October 2020, calling on the members of the
Council to vote on the draft resolution submitted by the Russian Federation in
connection with agenda item “Women and peace and security”, put into blue under
the symbol S/2020/1054.
France abstains in the voting.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations

20-1460911/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 7
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
It is my honour to write to you, Sir, in response to your letter dated 29 October
2020 initiating a written voting procedure, in line with the agreement reached among
members of the Security Council.
The vote of the Federal Republic of Germany on the draft resolution submitted
by the Russian Federation in connection with the agenda item “Women and peace
and security”, and as contained in document S/2020/1054, is as follows.
The Federal Republic of Germany abstains in the voting on the abovementioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Christoph Heusgen
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations

12/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 8
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Indonesia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I am writing in reference to the letter by the Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation to the United Nations, in his capacity as the President of the
Security Council, dated 29 October 2020, regarding the draft resolution on women
and peace and security (S/2020/1054).
I hereby indicate that Indonesia votes in favour of the draft resolution.
(Signed) Dian Triansyah Djani
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United Nations

20-1460913/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 9
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Niger to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I am writing in response to the letter of the President of the Security Council
dated 29 October 2020, calling on the members of the Council to indicate their votes
on the draft resolution contained in document S/2020/1054, submitted by the Russian
Federation under the agenda item “Women and peace and security”.
In accordance with the agreed temporary procedures for the adoption of draft
resolutions during the coronavirus disease pandemic restrictions, I have the honour
to indicate that the Republic of the Niger decides to abstain in the voting on the said
draft resolution.
(Signed) Niandou Aougi
Chargé d’affaires a.i.
Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to the United Nations

14/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 10
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the letter I wrote in my capacity as the President
of the Security Council, dated 29 October 2020, on the beginning of the voting
procedure on the draft resolution in connection with the agenda item “Women and
peace and security” (S/2020/1054).
In accordance with the procedure for the adoption of resolutions of the Security
Council in place during the duration of the restrictions on movement in New York
due to the coronavirus disease pandemic, outlined in the letter by the President of
the Security Council of 27 March 2020 (S/2020/253), I have the honour to inform you
that the Russian Federation votes in favour of the draft resolution.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations

20-1460915/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 11
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the draft resolution (S/2020/1054) submitted
by the Russian Federation in connection with the agenda item “Women and peace
and security”.
In this respect, I wish to inform you, Sir, that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
abstains in the voting on the above-mentioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
to the United Nations

16/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 12
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 29 October 2020, regarding the draft resolution
submitted by the Russian Federation in connection with the agenda item “Women
and peace and security”, as contained in document S/2020/1054.
The delegation of the Republic of South Africa votes in favour of the
abovementioned draft resolution.
An explanation of vote is also attached.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United Nations

20-1460917/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 13
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
Further to the letter dated 29 October from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation, in his capacity as President of the Security Council,
regarding the draft resolution submitted by the Russian Federation in connection
with the agenda item “Women and peace and security”, as contained in document
S/2020/1054, I would like to inform you, Sir, that Tunisia abstains in the voting on
that draft resolution.
(Signed) Tarek Ladeb
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations

18/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 14
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Chargé d’affaires of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
With reference to the letter from the President of the Security Council dated
29 October, the United Kingdom abstains in the voting on the draft resolution
S/2020/1054, in connection with the agenda item “Women and peace and security”.
(Signed) Jonathan Allen
Ambassador
Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations

20-1460919/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 15
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
In the voting on the draft resolution submitted by the Russian Federation in
connection with the agenda item “Women and peace and security” (S/2020/1054),
the United States of America abstains.
(Signed) Kelly Craft
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations

20/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 16
Letter dated 30 October 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
In reference to the letter dated 29 October from the President of the Security
Council relating to the draft resolution submitted under the agenda item entitled
“Women and peace and security” contained in document S/2020/1054, I would hereby
like to inform you, Sir, that Viet Nam votes in favour of the said draft resolution.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the United Nations

20-1460921/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
We thank the Russian delegation for the organization of the open debate
yesterday (S/2020/1084) on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). We also welcome the announcements by
Russia and by China of their engagement with the Informal Expert Group on Women,
Peace and Security.
During negotiations for this draft resolution, Belgium, along with a majority
of Council members, consistently pleaded in favour of maintaining recently agreed
language on crucial aspects of the women and peace and security agenda. Indeed, our
understanding of the women and peace and security agenda and gendered dynamics
have evolved over the last 20 years, and the normative framework reflects these
shifts. Should the draft resolution be adopted, it would erode the hard-won gains of
our predecessors. This is why Belgium abstains in the voting on this draft resolution.
The following issues, in particular, are of grave concern for our delegation.
The text fails to meet the minimum standard with regard to civil society
involvement and human rights. Member States should empower civil society
and women leaders to implement the women and peace and security agenda on
the ground.
The language used to describe the impact of the coronavirus disease on
women does not adequately reflect the leading role women have played in tackling
the pandemic.
The resolution inadequately reflects the normative framework, including
an insufficient reference to the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of
Discrimination against Women and general recommendation No. 30 of the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women.
The current text is nearly devoid of meaningful language on the implementation
of or on accountability for the women and peace and security agenda. Our delegation
has put forward several proposals on closing data gaps, financing the agenda as well
as overcoming structural barriers to gender equality, which have not been reflected
in the draft resolution.
The women and peace and security agenda belongs to all women, everywhere.
Through their achievements, they have made the agenda their own. We are merely
here to ensure that the Security Council continues to support them, in words, but
foremost in action. It is important that the Council stay united as we sustain efforts
to implement and strengthen the women and peace and security agenda.

22/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
We regret to see that the draft resolution on women and peace and security has
not been adopted. A certain member claims that it attaches importance to the women
and peace and security agenda, but its actions do not match its words.
China has from the very beginning been supportive of Russia’s initiative to
promote a draft resolution in commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and give new impetus to the women and peace and
security agenda. We believe this will help reaffirm our commitment to the agenda
and galvanize the positive momentum for better implementation. In this spirit, China
participated in the negotiations constructively, contributing to the improvement of
the text and to building consensus. Had certain members shown the same spirit of
unity, constructiveness and flexibility, we could have reached consensus and sent
out a positive signal.
Advancing the women and peace and security agenda is an evolving and
enriching process. We should remain open-minded and be inclusive to new perspective
and elements, putting emphasis on solving fundamental problems facing women’s
development instead of clinging only to existing language and refusing improvement.
On many occasions, developing countries have repeatedly stressed that the women
and peace and security agenda and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
are interlinked and indivisible. The achievement of sustainable development and
the economic empowerment of women are key for preventing conflict, sustaining
peace and strengthening women’s protection and participation. China put forward
text proposals in this regard, which were echoed by some colleagues.
It is our belief that, in consultations and negotiations of the Council, members
should respect each other, accommodate each other’s concerns and interests, and
find common ground. This is crucial to the unity and effectiveness of the Council.
We hope all Council members will join hands to strengthen unity in advancing
the important work of the Council, including the women and peace and security
agenda. Only in this way can we maintain the Council’s effectiveness and ability
to take actions, and live up to the expectations of Member States and of the
international community

20-1460923/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
The Dominican Republic decided to abstain in the voting on the draft
resolution contained in document S/2020/1054, presented by the Russian Federation
on women and peace and security.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate the strong commitment of the Dominican
Republic to the advancement of the women and peace and security agenda.
As the Russian Federation presented the initiative of adopting a resolution on
the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) and on further implementation of the women and peace and security agenda,
the Dominican Republic expressed its support, notwithstanding our belief that full
focus should be directed to closing existing gaps and accelerating implementation of
past commitments contained in the 10 resolutions the Security Council has already
adopted on this issue.
We would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Russian Federation on
having organized this year’s debate on women and peace and security (S/2020/1084),
which served as an important platform to deliberate on key issues, and to look at
concerted actions towards implementation, as expressed by the distinguished
briefers invited for the occasion. We also salute the announcements made by the
Russian Federation and China regarding their engagement in the Informal Expert
Group on Women, Peace and Security.
The Dominican Republic entered the negotiation process with a constructive
spirit and good faith, which we maintained throughout.
In the light of the short time frame available for the negotiation of this draft
resolution, the Dominican Republic, along with the vast majority of delegations,
proposed to work on the basis of a concise and short text, focusing our proposals on
maintaining agreed language from previous resolutions that would yield consensus
and the necessary balance on a text of this nature.
However, the draft resolution still fails to address key aspects that are crucial,
not meeting the minimum standard in the context of the normative framework of
the women and peace and security agenda, such as the inclusion of a human rights
approach, and omitting reference to general recommendation No. 30 of the Committee
on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women, which had been
agreed in past resolutions, including the last two commemorative ones.
The draft resolution presented does not address major challenges to
implementation, such as the inadequate financing of the agenda, structural barriers
to gender equality, and lack of accountability; nor does it respect other agreed
considerations, recently adopted in resolution 2493 (2019), on the role and protection
of civil society and women leaders.
The adoption of this draft resolution, particularly on the occasion of the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), would have
compromised progress made over the past 20 years.
There is a long history, leading up to resolution 1325 (2000), of women and
women’s organizations being the ones making real change to the lives of women and
girls in war-torn and post-conflict States. Any steps, decisions or initiatives that the
Security Council takes forward in this regard must be directed to support them and
their work and on closing the existing gaps on the implementation of the women,
peace and security agenda.
24/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 20
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Estonia

to

the

Estonia is submitting the present statement in explanation of its vote on the
draft resolution contained in document S/2020/1054, of 29 October 2020.
Estonia considers women and peace and security an integral part of the
agenda of the Security Council. We have welcomed and supported the steps forward
made in its development, including by our co-sponsorship of key Council decisions
on women and peace and security over more than 10 years. Estonia continues to
implement the women and peace and security agenda nationally and has made it one
of our priorities as an elected member of the Security Council.
Estonia therefore appreciates the attention devoted by the Russian Federation
to the issue of women and peace and security during its presidency, including the
debate organized on 29 October (see S/2020/1084) on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Estonia believes that the
anniversary should be used to enhance the commitments made on women and
peace and security and to promote the full implementation of all Security Council
resolutions in this regard.
While Estonia believes that the Security Council has already established a
comprehensive normative framework on women and peace and security, we engaged
constructively and in good faith in the negotiations on the draft resolution before us
with the objective of ensuring a Council outcome that would add value to the agenda
and its implementation.
Our engagement has also been based on the conviction that we cannot take a
step back on our commitments. We believe that the ownership of the women and peace
and security agenda lies with numerous Member States, civil society organizations
and women peacebuilders, who have worked with determination to advance it, and
that we have no right to diminish it.
Our proposals made repeatedly in the discussion of the draft before us reflect
these considerations. We strongly regret that several of our suggestions, which were
closely based on the Council’s agreements to date, are not reflected in the draft
contained in document S/2020/1054.
The text as it stands excludes key elements with respect to civil society
involvement in the women and peace and security agenda, including the requirements
for their protection and support. Given the serious threats and reprisals against
women human rights defenders, this is a stark omission of the role of our key partners
in the implementation of 1325 (2000).
The text inadequately reflects the foundation of international human
rights law, upon which the women and peace and security is based, including the
Committee on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women
general recommendation No. 30. It fails to sufficiently address the link between the
restrictions on women’s full enjoyment of human rights and the challenges related
to their participation and protection. It also does not address the structural barriers
faced by women.
It does not adequately reflect the importance of the full, equal and meaningful
participation and leadership of women in peace processes — which is a major
shortcoming in the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda —
and means to ensure this. The draft also discounts the role of women’s leadership in
tackling the coronavirus disease epidemic.
20-1460925/37

S/2020/1076

The Security Council has taken a decision to integrate women and peace and
security concerns across all country-specific situations on its agenda, yet the draft
fails to mention this key aspect of the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. It also overlooks the importance of gender mainstreaming in the
work of the entire United Nations to support the full implementation of Council
decisions on women and peace and security.
We highly value the cooperation of all Council colleagues who engaged in
discussions on this text. We believe that the expertise and openness brought by
them to these deliberations would have provided us with solutions for a consensual
Council product, which would do justice to the twentieth anniversary of the women
and peace and security agenda. We regret that so many of their suggestions went
unheeded throughout several rounds of negotiations. We underline the need to ensure
a true dialogue, transparency and openness in any Council deliberation.
We sincerely regret that the draft text fails in the objective that it set out at
the start of this process. We believe that the women and peace and security agenda
belongs to all of us and, therefore, it is our responsibility to make sure we stand with
the commitments we have made to women as part of our goal of ensuring peace and
security. For these reasons, Estonia abstained in the voting on this draft resolution.

26/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: French]
France welcomes the commitment of the Russian Federation to the women
and peace and security agenda, as reflected in its organization of the open debate on
29 October (S/2020/1084) and the announcement of its participation in the Informal
Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security, created in 2015.
As a long-standing supporter of the women and peace and security agenda and a
partner of Russia, France engaged transparently and constructively in the negotiation
process on draft resolution S/2020/1054, marking the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
However, the draft resolution put to the vote by Russia does not match the
challenges and ambition that are required. In particular, we regret that the requests
expressed by the overwhelming majority of delegations to reaffirm what is essential,
such as the indispensable role of civil society, were dismissed. The eagerness to
adopt the draft resolution before the end of this month did not allow us to unite
around a consensual text.
However, the debate in the Security Council (S/2020/1084) unambiguously
confirmed that we have a robust normative framework and that the time has come to
implement every one of our resolutions.
For all those reasons, France decided to abstain in the voting on this
draft resolution.

20-1460927/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
For three weeks, Germany and the majority of Council members have engaged
constructively with Russia as facilitator of draft resolution S/2020/1054 despite our
belief that the women and peace and security agenda is based on a strong normative
framework and does not need more resolutions at this point. A short commemorative
text would have been the better option. What we need is action and the implementation
of the entire women and peace and security agenda, not more words.
We have repeatedly called for the draft resolution on women and peace and
security agenda to include strong language on the human rights foundation of the
women and peace and security agenda, as in all previous resolutions. We have
also called for the adequate reflection of the critical role of civil society, women
peacebuilders and human rights defenders in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda on the ground, as in previous resolutions. And we have called
for a balance in the reflection of the whole women and peace and security agenda and
the inclusion of the most recently agreed standards on the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women, on combating sexual violence and the rights of survivors, on
accountability and on women‘s critical role in conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Unfortunately, our calls were not heeded, despite our efforts and those of a majority
of Council members.
We were very disappointed that the facilitator did not engage in a transparent
manner despite many hours of consultations and bilateral discussions.
Had the draft resolution been adopted, it would have eroded the hard-won
gains of the women and peace and security agenda and watered down previous
achievements on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
That is why Germany, along with nine other Council members, was forced to abstain
in the voting on this draft resolution.
There is no monopoly on women’s human rights or women and peace and
security. That agenda belongs to all women, everywhere. It is our job to make it
possible for all those women to finally take their rightful place. As Danai Gurira
said in yesterday’s open debate: “Male-dominated rooms in the twenty-first century
should be embarrassing to us all” (S/2020/1084).

28/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
We thank Russia for initiating the important draft resolution S/2020/1054 to
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). We deeply regret
that such a crucial draft resolution did not reach consensus at such a pivotal moment.
History will record that, for the first time, there was a draft resolution under
the agenda of women and peace and security that failed to be adopted.
We understand that many substantial elements should have been attached as
additional values into the draft resolution, as repeatedly advised by some delegations.
However, it would be a disservice to gloss over and disregard the draft resolution,
which has a distinct potential to advance the women and peace and security agenda
constructively. It complements all previous Security Council resolutions on the
women and peace and security agenda. Therefore, Indonesia firmly decided to vote
in favour of it.
Indonesia remains committed to strongly supporting the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), resolution 2538 (2020) and its subsequent resolutions.
All such resolutions are strong foundations to promote women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in preventing conflict and sustaining peace.
We are, and will continue to be, actively involved in constructive initiatives
and activities, raised by States Members of the United Nations and other relevant
stakeholders, that strengthen the advancement of the women and peace and
security agenda.
In that regard, Indonesia believes that we must work together in the spirit
of unity, solidarity and mutual understanding. The women and peace and security
agenda is crucial for all countries and all women across the world. All countries are
therefore the owners of this important agenda.

20-1460929/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
As we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we
must aspire to the commitment of the Charter of the United Nations to building
a world where all humankind is able to live in peace and enjoy the protection of
their fundamental human rights, including their right to development, as guided by
Declaration on the Right to Development. In that respect, it is in the interest of all
humankind that for many years women across the globe have been committed to
advancing the goals of equality, peace and development for all women everywhere.
Despite the progress that has been made in advancing gender equality and
women’s empowerment, particularly following the 1995 Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, we must be cognizant that women continue to face discrimination
and inequalities, hampering their full involvement in building sustainable societies.
Women and girls continue to bear the brunt of poverty, inequality and
underdevelopment. In conflict situations, their personal, economic, civil and political
security is persistently undermined. Regrettably, the coronavirus disease pandemic
has laid bare the disproportionate impact that women face in situations of crisis.
Our efforts must continue to be geared towards finding sustainable solutions
to the challenges that women continue to face. Resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, adopted 20 years ago, was aimed at addressing the challenges
faced by women in armed conflict and post-conflict situations. The subsequent
nine resolutions adopted by the Council collectively represent the international
community’s commitment to holistically addressing such challenges.
In that regard, South Africa reiterates its unequivocal and firm support for the
women and peace and security agenda and all resolutions adopted by the Council to
further the agenda.
South Africa appreciates the efforts undertaken by the Russian Federation, as
President of the Security Council for October, in putting forward a draft resolution
to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The initiative
to submit a draft resolution on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) is not only timely but also necessary for the Security Council to reflect
on the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, as well as to
reaffirm the Security Council’s commitment to all previous resolutions adopted on
the matter.
In our view, draft resolution S/2020/1054 safeguards the entire normative
framework of the women and peace and security agenda by urging the implementation
of all previous resolutions on that agenda adopted by the Council to date. It thus
preserves the gains made through not only resolution 2493 (2019), which was
unanimously adopted by the Security Council in 2019, but also all Security Council
resolutions on the women and peace and security agenda. We are reassured by the fact
that each of the resolutions on the women and peace and security agenda maintains
its relevance and none are superseded by the current draft resolution.
The draft resolution could have been more ambitious by advancing the
framework that we already have. The references to the human rights of women and
the participation and protection of civil society, including women peacebuilders,
as well as initiatives to address structural and institutional barriers, could have
been strengthened.

30/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

In addition, the draft text should have paid attention to emerging issues that
impact the women and peace and security agenda, such as the coronavirus disease
pandemic, particularly as it relates to sexual and reproductive health and rights, as
well as gender-based violence.
While the draft resolution put forward does not adequately address those
issues, we recognize that it reaffirms, and does not negate, all previous resolutions
that already cover such matters, particularly resolution 2493 (2019), adopted
unanimously by the Council a year ago. South Africa therefore regards this draft
resolution as the bare minimum required for sustaining the women and peace and
security agenda.
It is for that reason that South Africa voted in favour of the draft resolution
before us today, as it reaffirms and preserves the entire body of resolutions on the
women and peace and security agenda and, importantly, commemorates the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
To conclude, it is unfortunate that petty geopolitical differences have
resulted in many Council members not being willing to constructively engage and
seek compromise on the draft resolution. Such differences undermine the spirit
of collective multilateral action that is required for us to address the challenges
facing women.

20-1460931/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 25
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Tunisia

to

the

Tunisia wishes to express its appreciation to the Russian Federation for its
efforts to facilitate the negotiations on draft resolution S/2020/1054, on women and
peace and security. Tunisia remains committed to the women and peace and security
agenda and shares the view of Council members that the commemoration of the
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) provides a timely opportunity to
recommit to its normative framework and to call for its full implementation.
We believe that significant progress has been made in the past two decades
and that commemorating the anniversary of the resolution 1325 (2000) needs a clear
reaffirmation of commitment to those past achievements.
We acknowledge the extensive efforts made by the delegation of the Russian
Federation to reflect all the ideas expressed throughout the negotiation process.
We specifically appreciate the reference to the need for a balanced geographical
representation of women and the willingness to strengthen the language on the
socioeconomic and development drivers of gender inequality and conflict.
Language that has been previously agreed in recent Security Council
resolutions is of the utmost importance, especially when it relates to issues
pertaining to human rights, the implementation of international instruments, such as
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
the role of civil society and the full, effective, equal and meaningful participation
of women in decision­-making processes. Such aspects were earned after extensive
negotiations and tremendous compromise from all sides. It is also crucial to highlight
the disproportionate impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on women and
girls, as reaffirmed in resolution 2532 (2020) and in several other United Nations
resolutions and reports.
From that perspective, Tunisia will continue to commit to the agenda’s
normative framework, while addressing remaining gaps identified mainly in the
lack of implementation and funding. Tunisia stands ready to continue to engage
constructively and in full cooperation with all Council members and all its partners
to advance the women and peace and security agenda in the United Nations and on
the ground.

32/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 26
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
As proud champions of the women and peace and security agenda, the United
Kingdom will not accept any weakening of the hard-fought progress made over the
past 20 years.
We have repeatedly expressed our conviction that the women and peace and
security normative framework is robust. As we heard from the compelling briefers
in the open debate yesterday (S/2020/1084), what remains is for us to address the
implementation gap and take action. There is no need for any additional resolution
unless it serves to add distinct value to the acquis. Despite our reservations on the
proposal for a resolution, we have remained constructive and engaged throughout
the process.
We collaborated readily, compromising on some of our own women and peace
and security priorities in order to reach a draft text that, at a minimum, did not
set back the agenda. We voiced our concerns about draft resolution S/2020/1054
throughout the negotiations, consistently requesting recently agreed language in
efforts to maintain the integrity of the normative framework. Our repeated calls for
the inclusion of relevant language on women’s human rights and the protection of
civil society were regrettably not met. We share the widely held view that this draft
text lacks sufficient language on implementation and fails to reflect core components
of the framework, such as the essential rights-based approach and the structural
barriers to gender equality.
For those reasons, the United Kingdom abstained in the voting on the draft
resolution, which clearly lacked the support of a broad range of Council members
and failed to represent a basis for achieving consensus. The adoption of this draft
text would have undermined the significant achievements made on this critical
agenda and the enduring efforts of so many women’s rights activists. As members
of the Security Council, it is our role not only to listen to the voices of a diverse
range of women, but also to stand up for their rights and enshrine their inclusion and
participation at all levels.
The United Kingdom will remain resolutely committed to safeguarding the
progress made on the women and peace and security agenda and advancing women
and peace and security substantively alongside Member States, United Nations
agencies and civil society. Women’s human rights are the concern of all. The women
and peace and security agenda is the result of women’s actions, and it belongs to
them. It is now for the Council to take women’s lead and act. Women play a central
role in delivering lasting peace and security.

20-1460933/37

S/2020/1076

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
No nation is more committed to the women and peace and security agenda than
the United States. We were the first nation to enshrine the objectives of resolution
1325 (2000) in our national legislation and develop a whole-of-Government
effort to measure progress and maintain accountability across our domestic and
global implementation.
President Trump has an unmatched record of action in support of the women
and peace and security agenda, and he understands that societies that empower
women are more stable, peaceful and prosperous, both economically and politically.
By abstaining in the voting on the Russian Federation’s draft resolution
S/2020/1054, the United States and nine of our fellow Council members are taking a
firm stand to protect this critical agenda from attack by the Russian Federation and
the People’s Republic of China.
As written by Russia, with contributions from China, this draft resolution
was designed to undermine and reverse the progress of the past 20 years, in a blatant
misuse of the Security Council to advance their singular agendas. It is evident
that our Russian and Chinese colleagues do not support the women and peace and
security agenda, as defined by resolution 1325 (2000), and do not believe that women
should be fully empowered to prevent conflict or sit at the table to pursue peace
and reconciliation.
As the voting results reveal, many other Council members share our concerns.
The Russian draft resolution would have diluted the long-standing United Nations
commitments to women and weakened the consensus about the role of women in
conflict situations. Such efforts are disrespectful to women on the front lines of
peace and security issues today and a threat to those who may follow.
The United States will never support such an action. Along with our partners,
we will continue to defend the aspirations and objectives enshrined in resolution
1325 (2000) against attacks aimed at undermining them, celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of that landmark achievement and safeguard its purpose.

34/37

20-14609

S/2020/1076

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
On the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), this year marks a
significant milestone towards realizing global commitments on gender equality and
the women and peace and security agenda. It is heartening to note that in recent
years, this agenda has become an integral part of the work of the Council. Meaningful
progress on the ground has also been achieved so as to lighten women’s hardship
and promote their increasingly active participation in all walks of life, including in
conflict prevention and resolution and sustaining peace.
In order to maintain and push forward momentum, the message on the
importance of this agenda in the work of the Council should continually be reinforced,
reaffirmed and strengthened. With that in mind, Viet Nam supports the efforts of
the international community, Member States and international partners to promote
the agenda.
Viet Nam therefore today voted in favour of the draft resolution on women
and peace and security, as contained in document S/2020/1054. At the same time,
we reaffirm our strong, consistent and unwavering commitments to the framework
and achievements that the international community has strenuously built up over
the years, including those elaborated in previous relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, including resolutions 1889 (2009), 2122 (2013), 2242 (2015), 2467 (2019)
and 2493 (2019), just to name but a few.
It is regrettable that no outcome was adopted on this important anniversary. It
is therefore important that all the parties, including members of the Security Council,
strive further for mutual understanding and joint efforts in pursuing the women and
peace and security agenda in a consistent, constructive and forward-looking manner.
In this regard, Viet Nam reiterates its commitment to joining the efforts of the
global partnership to continue to ensure that the voices of women are heard, their
concerns and needs are addressed, and their roles and contributions to peace and
security are enhanced and recognized.

20-1460935/37
