I.

H. Application of the Azerbaijani Republic

Application of the Republic of San Marino

Decisions
Decisions
At its 3051st meeting, on 11 February 1992, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the

At its 3054th meeting, on 21 February 1992, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of the Republic of San Marino391 for membership in
the United Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

application of the Azerbaijani Republic389 for membership in
the United Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of
the provisional rules of procedure.
At its 3052nd meeting, on 14 February 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members3ll0 conceming the application of the Azerbaijani
Republic for admission to membership in the United Nations.

At its 3056th meeting, on 25 February 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members392 conceming the application of the Republic of
San Marino for admission to membership in the United
Nations.

Resolution 742 (1992)
of 14 February 1992

Resolution 744 (1992)

or 25 February 1992

The Security Council,

The Security Council,

Having examined the application of the Azerbaijani
Republic for admission to the United Nations, 389

Having examined the application of the Republic of San
Marino for admission to the United Nations, 391

Recommends to the General Assemblythat the Azerbaijani
Republic be admitted to membership in the United Nations.

Recommends to the Genera1 Assembly that the Republic
of San Marino be admitted to membership in the United
Nations.

Adopted without a vote al the 3052nd
meeting

Adopted without a vote al the 3056th
meeting

Decision

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 742 (1992), the President made the following
statement on beha1f of the members of the Council:332

Decision

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 744 (1992), the President made the following
statement on beha1f of the members of the Council:393

"The Security Council bas just recommended that the
Azerbaijani Republic be admitted to membership in the
United Nations. It is with great pleasure that, on behalf of
the members of the Council, I congratulate the Azerbaijani
Republic on this happy and historie occasion. We look
forward to this further strengthening of the principle of
universa1ity.

"The Council bas just recommended that the Republic
of San Marino be admitted to membership in the United
Nations. It is with great pleasure that, on behalf of the
members of the Council, I congratulate San Marino on this
happy and historie occasion. We look forward to this
further strengthening of the principle of universa1ity.

"Azerbaijan's solemn commitment to uphold the
Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which include the principles relating to the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use of force,
is noted with great satisfaction by members of the Council.
Ail the members of the Council look forward to the day,
in the near future, when Azerbaijan will join us as a
member of the United Nations. We look fmward to
meeting the representatives of Azerbaijan, and to working
closely with them."

"San Marino's solemn commitment to uphold the
Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the United
Nations is noted with great satisfaction by members of the
Council. Ail the members of the Council look forward to
the day, in the near future, when San Marino will join us
as a member of the United Nations. We look forward to
meeting the representatives of San Marino, and to working
closely with them."

114
