A/RES/73/274

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 January 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 144

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 22 December 2018
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/673)]

73/274.

United Nations pension system
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57/286 of 20 December 2002, 61/240 of 22 December
2006, 70/238 A of 23 December 2015 and 71/265 of 23 December 2016, section XV
of its resolution 72/262 A of 24 December 2017 and its resolution 72/266 A of
24 December 2017,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
for 2018, 1 the report of the Secretary-General on the investments of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and measures undertaken to increase the
diversification of the Fund, 2 the financial report and audited financial statements for
the year ended 31 December 2017 and the report of the Board of Auditors on the
Fund 3 and the recommendations contained therein, the report of the Secretary of the
Pension Board and the Representative of the Secretary-General for the investment of
the assets of the Fund on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors contained in its report for the year ended 3 1 December 2017 on the Fund, 4
the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budge tary
Questions 5 and the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
comprehensive audit of the governance structure and related processes of the Pension
Board, 6
1.

Takes note of the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board; 1

__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/73/9).
A/C.5/73/3.
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 5P
(A/73/5/Add.16).
4
A/73/342.
5
A/73/489.
6
A/73/341.
1
2

18-22659 (E)

090119

*1822659*

A/RES/73/274

United Nations pension system

2.
Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the investments
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and measures undertaken to increase
the diversification of the Fund; 2
3.
Further takes note of the report of the Secretary of the Pension Board and
the Representative of the Secretary-General for the investment of the assets of the
Fund on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors
contained in its report for the year ended 31 December 2017 on the Fund; 4
4.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 5
5.
Emphasizes the existing prerogative of the General Assembly on matters
pertaining to the Fund;
Actuarial matters
6.
Notes the valuation results reporting a deficit of 0.12 per cent as at
31 December 2017, compared with a surplus of 0.41 per cent as at 31 December 2015,
and in this regard stresses the importance of continuing to achieve the necessary
3.5 per cent annual real rate of return on a long-term basis for the future solvency of
the Fund;
Financial statements of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and report
of the Board of Auditors
7.
Notes the findings and recommendations contained in the report of the
Board of Auditors on the Fund; 3
8.
Also notes that the Board of Auditors issued an unqualified audit opinion
on the financial statements of the Fund for the year ended 3 1 December 2017;
9.
Reiterates the importance of the implementation of all the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors by the secretariat of the Fund, the Pension
Board and the Representative of the Secretary-General, in full and in a timely manner,
and of reporting thereon in the next report to the Ge neral Assembly;
10. Urges the Pension Board to address all pending issues with clear targets
and milestones, and requests the Fund to conduct an independent assessment of the
Integrated Pension Administration System, within existing resources, and to rep ort
thereon in the context of its next report;
11. Requests the Pension Board to ensure that the development of an electronic
signature verification system to facilitate the certificate of entitlement process will be
implemented expeditiously, in compliance with the relevant regulations and rules,
notably the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations 7 and the
Procurement Manual;
Governance
12. Notes the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
and the corresponding comments of the Pension Board with regard to the audit of the
governance structure of the Board 6 requested by the General Assembly in section XV,
paragraph 8, of its resolution 72/262 A;
13. Also notes the current dual role of the Chief Executive Officer and
Secretary of the Pension Board, and decides to replace the existing post by two
__________________
7

2/6

ST/SGB/2013/4 and ST/SGB/2013/4/Amend.1.
18-22659

United Nations pension system

A/RES/73/274

distinct and independent posts, namely, “Pension Benefits Administrator” and
“Secretary of the Pension Board”, by no later than January 2020;
14. Further notes that the Pension Board established a working group, which
should adhere to the tripartite structure of the Board, to consider the issues of
participation, rotation and equitable representation on the Board and to review the
following elements:
(a) The terms of reference and self-evaluation methodology of Board
members;
(b) The composition and size of the Board, including the role of retiree
representatives and the modalities for directly electing retiree representatives to the
Board;
(c)

Allocation of seats on the Board;

(d) Implementation of a review and rotation scheme for the adjustment of the
composition of the Board on a regular basis, to allow eligible member organizations
to share rotating seats in a fair and equitable manner;
(e)
Board;

A regular review mechanism for the adjustment of the composition of the

(f)

The usage of the Standing Committee;

(g)

The need for the Assets and Liability Monitoring Committee;

15. Requests the Pension Board to submit the key findings of the review to the
General Assembly at the main part of its seventy-fourth session;
16. Urges the Pension Board to ensure timely and proper succession planning
for the posts of Chief Executive Officer and Deputy Chief Executive Officer in order
to allow adequate time for a competitive selection process, based on pre-established
procedures, that ensures integrity and fairness;
17. Emphasizes that the Office of Internal Oversight Services shall remain the
sole internal oversight body of the secretariat of the Fund and its investments, in line
with the mandate of the Office, as set out by the General Assembly in its resolution
48/218 B of 29 July 1994, and stresses that any change to the mandate in this regard
remains the sole prerogative of the Assembly;
18. Encourages the Pension Board to update rule H.1 of the financial rules of
the Fund in accordance with paragraph 17 above;
19. Also encourages the Pension Board to review the provisions contained in
the declaration on confidentiality and conflict of interest in order to develop a
standard operating procedure regarding the circumstances under which the
declaration should be used, and to report on progress made thereon in the next report
of the Board;
20. Requests the Pension Board to provide further analysis on the impact of
the proposed amendments to articles 6 and 48 of the Regulations, Rules and Pension
Adjustment System of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and to report
thereon in the context of the next report;
21. Recalls that, subsequent to the establishment of the Fund and the adoption
of its regulations, in its resolution 248 (III) of 7 December 1948, the General
Assembly has sole and ultimate authority to approve amendments to the Regulations
governing the Fund;

18-22659

3/6

A/RES/73/274

United Nations pension system

22. Decides to amend article 4 of the Regulations of the Fund by inserting a
new subparagraph (c) to read as follows: “Subject to the provisions of these
Regulations, the Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure, which shall be reported
to the General Assembly and the member organizations”;
23. Also decides to approve the proposed amendments to articles 30, 32 and
46 of the Regulations of the Fund, as set out in annex XI to the report of the Pension
Board;
24. Approves the exception to article 15 (b) of the Regulations of the Fund, to
effect a change from a biennial to an annual budget, on a trial basis, subject to the
follow-up review to be conducted by the Secretary-General for consideration by the
General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session;
25. Reiterates the need to establish appropriate mechanisms to avoid conflicts
of interest between the management of the Fund and the constituent groups of the
Pension Board and to report thereon in the context of the next report of the Board;
26. Requests the secretariat of the Fund to continue to work towards meeting
the target of 15 business days for benefit processing for actionable cases, and, in this
regard, looks forward to an update in the context of the next report of the Pension
Board;
27. Reiterates the need to enhance the processing of the receipt of payments
by some beneficiaries, and stresses the need for the Fund:
(a) To increase efforts to address the delays and proactively resolve actionable
cases, open workflows and legacy and other outstanding cases and to ensure the
implementation of a system to prioritize the resolution of the most urgent and severe
cases;
(b) To further strengthen communication and transparency with member
organizations and their staff pension committees;
(c) To provide an update on these issues in the context of the next report of
the Pension Board;
28. Requests the Pension Board to review and set key performance indicators
for the senior management of the secretariat of the Fund and to tie their performance
evaluation, in part, to the proportion of cases processed and to the number of
outstanding cases;
29. Requests the Fund to assess the efficiency and geographical coverage of
call centres and client service operations and to report on its findings in the context
of the next report of the Pension Board;
30. Decides to reconstitute the Executive Office of the Pension Fund so that it
is directly responsible for the provision of administrative services to both entities of
the Fund, 8 within existing resources;
31. Requests the Secretary-General and the Pension Board to continue to
ensure that the staff composition of the Office of Investment Management and of the
secretariat of the Fund is recruited on as wide a geographical basis as possible, bearing
in mind Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, and to provide
an update on progress achieved in the context of their next reports;
32. Recalls the high proportion of resources dedicated to support functions,
highlights the importance of strong monitoring of the use and distribution of
__________________
8

4/6

Secretariat of the Fund and Office of Investment Management.
18-22659

United Nations pension system

A/RES/73/274

resources, including temporary resources, across the secretariat of the Fund, and
requests the Pension Board to strengthen monitoring to ensure that the secretariat of
the Fund utilizes resources in accordance with the decisions of the General Assembly;
Investments of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
33. Highlights the fact that the investment strategy of the Fund should be guided
by its annualized real rate of return target, and calls upon the Secretary-General to
continue intensive efforts towards meeting the investment policy objectives;
34. Reaffirms that the Secretary-General serves as fiduciary for the investment
of the assets of the Fund;
35. Requests the Secretary-General, as fiduciary for the investment of the
assets of the Fund, to continue to diversify its investments among developed,
developing and emerging markets, wherever this serves the interests of the
participants and the beneficiaries of the Fund, and also requests the Secretary -General
to ensure that decisions concerning the investments of the Fund in any market are
implemented prudently, taking fully into account the four main criteria for
investment, namely, safety, profitability, liquidity and convertibility;
36. Notes that emerging and frontier markets, including markets in Africa, are
increasingly important to the investment strategy of the Fund;
37. Requests the Office of Investment Management to expedite its fraud risk
assessment, and further requests the Secretary-General to submit detailed information on
follow-up measures to the General Assembly in the context of the next report of the
Pension Board;
38. Recalls the mandates of the Investments Committee and the Committee of
Actuaries, welcomes the established practice of holding joint meetings, and
encourages the Committees to increase joint interaction with the Pension Board;
39. Trusts that the Secretary-General will continue to exert further efforts to
identify potential candidates from all regional groups for membership in the
Investments Committee;
Other matters
40. Approves the admission of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization to membership in the Fund,
with effect from 1 January 2019;
41. Concurs, in accordance with article 13 of the Regulations of the Fund and
with a view to securing the continuity of pension rights, with the new agreement on
the transfer of pension rights of participants in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund and officials of the African Development Bank, as approved by the Pension
Board and set out in annex XIII to the report of the Board, which will become
effective on 1 January 2019;
42. Stresses the important role of the Pension Board in ensuring the
sustainability of the Fund, by managing expenses prudently, setting cost benchmarks
and keeping the cost per participant and beneficiary within its historical 1 0-year
average, after adjusting for inflation;
43. Looks forward to considering the next quadrennial report on the long term sustainability of the Fund in the context of the next report of the Pension
Board;

18-22659

5/6

A/RES/73/274

United Nations pension system

44. Highlights the importance attached by the General Assembly to continuing
to ensure unfaltering accountability by the Pension Board, and requests the Board to
provide detailed follow-up on all aspects of the implementation of the present
resolution, including information on the implementation of the recommendations of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services agreed to by the Board, in the context of its
report to be submitted at the seventy-fourth session of the Assembly.
65th plenary meeting
22 December 2018

6/6

18-22659
