S/PV.8506

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8506th meeting

Wednesday, 10 April 2019, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Pence

Agenda
The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-10510 (E)
*1910510*

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.

purchasing power of ordinary people has fallen further,
rendering food even less affordable for many families.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Eduardo
Stein, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees/International Organization for Migration
Joint Special Representative for Venezuelan refugees
and migrants in the region; and Ms. Kathleen Page,
Researcher at Johns Hopkins University.
Mr. Stein is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Panama City.
I also wish to acknowledge and express our pleasure
at the presence here today of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, whom I thank
very much for joining us this morning.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Let me be clear from the outset that
there is a very real humanitarian problem in Venezuela.
The United Nations is willing and able to respond,
consistent with the long-standing mandate that Member
States have agreed for principled humanitarian action.
We can do more to relieve the suffering of the people
of Venezuela if we get more help and support from all
stakeholders.
Since Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
last briefed the Council on 26 February (see S/PV.8472),
the humanitarian situation has worsened. Recurrent
widespread power outages have affected the whole
country. Without electricity from the grid, many
hospitals have struggled to carry out essential surgical
procedures and to sustain intensive-care services and
dialysis treatment. Water and sewage systems have been
interrupted. Economic decline has continued, and the
2/28

10/04/2019

The scale of need is significant and growing.
The United Nations is working in Venezuela to
expand the provision of humanitarian assistance. Our
efforts are in line with the humanitarian principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence,
as determined by the General Assembly in resolutions
46/182 and 58/114.
The Secretary-General has expressed his concern
for the people in Venezuela. I echo that concern. I
will focus my briefing today on, first, the priority
humanitarian needs in Venezuela; secondly, our efforts
to assist the most vulnerable people; and, thirdly, the
areas where we seek the Council’s collective support.
We recently produced a draft overview report on
priority humanitarian needs in Venezuela. The review
was based on the best available data from all available
official and unofficial sources, including Government
data. We gave our draft report to the Government and
the National Assembly on 27 March.
We estimate that 7 million people in Venezuela
need humanitarian assistance. That is some 25 per cent
of the population. There are people in need throughout
the country, but needs are most severe in the three
states in the south and Zulia and Lara states in the west.
People with chronic health conditions, pregnant and
nursing women, children under five, indigenous people,
people on the move and those living with disabilities
are among the most vulnerable.
The context is a severe and continuing economic
contraction, with associated dramatic increases in
inflation on a scale seen in few if any other countries
around the world in recent years. Our review found
that access to nutrient-rich foods and a varied diet has
diminished. Historically, Venezuela has imported up to
75 per cent of its food. As a result of the crisis, the
availability and affordability of food have fallen, with
lower imports, reduced local production and declining
purchasing power. Many people depend on subsidized
food to meet their needs. Six million families across
the country reportedly benefit from food supplies
distributed by the Government.
Despite this, malnutrition has increased, especially
in areas with the highest poverty rates. The United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization has
estimated that in 2018, some 3.7 million people
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

suffered from undernourishment. The prevalence of
undernourishment has almost trebled over a five-year
period. Other aid organizations report an increase in the
global acute malnutrition rate among children under five.
We estimate that 1.9 million people require nutritional
assistance, including 1.3 million children under five.
More data is needed to improve our understanding of
the nutrition and food security situation.
The Venezuelan health system is strained by
shortages in personnel, medical supplies, equipment
and electricity. Reduced access to medicines has
increased the risk of morbidity and mortality from
diabetes, hypertension, cancer and HIV/AIDS.
Preventable diseases such as tuberculosis, diphtheria,
measles and malaria have resurfaced. The World Health
Organization registered more than 400,000 cases of
malaria in 2017, nearly 70 per cent more than the year
before. That was the largest increase in the world that
year. Overall, we estimate that some 2.8 million people
need health assistance, including 1.1 million children
under five.
Health problems are exacerbated by insufficient
access to clean water and inadequate sanitation
systems. One estimate suggests that 17 per cent of
people living in poverty have no access to safe water or
receive it only once a fortnight. Recent power outages
are making this problem worse. Some families have
resorted to using water from unclean sources because
they cannot afford safe water. Sanitation systems
have deteriorated, affecting solid waste management,
among other services. Basic hygiene needs like handwashing are undermined by the unavailability or
unaffordability of water and cleaning supplies. We
estimate that some 4.3 million people require water and
sanitation assistance.
The crisis has interrupted the education of more
than 1 million children. Many families cannot afford
the transportation, clothing or shoes that children need
to attend school. The population on the move is at
particular risk of protection violations, as are women
and girls, who compose 72 per cent of trafficking
victims. More than 3.4 million people have already left
the country. We estimate that some 2.7 million people
still inside Venezuela require protection assistance
and services.
Let me move on now to how we are assisting the
most vulnerable people.

S/PV. 8506

The United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations are on the ground, and we have been
expanding our operations. Since 2017, the number of
United Nations staff has increased from 210 to nearly
400. United Nations agencies are working in all
24 states. Our efforts are particularly concentrated in the
vulnerable border states of Zulia, Táchira and Bolívar.
To support the expansion of humanitarian
assistance, I released $9 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) in late 2018.
Through this grant, as well as bilateral funding from
donors, the United Nations has provided 189,000
children with preventive and curative treatment for
acute malnutrition; expanded maternal and child health
care through the provision of medicines and supplies
from 74,000 health kits; donated 10 generators to
provide emergency power to hospitals; installed water
tanks in hospitals to ensure a safe supply of water for
Palestinian Authorityediatric and maternal services;
distributed 10 million tablets for the treatment of HIV
among 50,000 people across all 24 states; and delivered
176,000 doses of vaccine against measles, mumps and
rubella for babies and young children.
The United Nations and other aid organizations are
working with institutions and organizations across the
spectrum, including line ministries and national civil
society organizations, and we are in touch with the
National Assembly. Under the leadership of the United
Nations Resident Coordinator, we recently established
a cooperation and assistance coordination team,
bringing together United Nations agencies, the Red
Cross and non-governmental organizations in Caracas
to provide strategic-level guidance and coordination to
the humanitarian operation.
It is clear that much more is needed. We seek the
support of the Council for action in three areas:
First is improved respect for principled
humanitarian action. In Venezuela, there is a need
to separate political and humanitarian objectives.
Humanitarian assistance must be delivered on the basis
of need alone. The Secretary-General has repeatedly
stressed the importance of the humanitarian principles
and has called on Member States and others to respect
them. We seek the Council’s support to safeguard the
neutral and impartial nature of humanitarian action.
The second area is an enabling operating
environment, including sustained and regular access
to people in need. I note recent steps taken by the

19-105103/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Government of Venezuela to facilitate the entrance of
additional United Nations staff into the country and
the expansion of humanitarian programmes, including
those of the Red Cross movement. Additional steps
are needed. We need more humanitarian organizations
with the capacity to meet urgent needs to establish a
presence and assist with operations in the country. We
also need more data and information to ensure our
understanding of needs evolves with the situation.
Thirdly, more money is needed to support the
expansion of humanitarian programmes. The resources
available now are extremely modest in relation to the
needs we see. I would like to thank Member States
that have contributed to the provision of humanitarian
assistance in Venezuela, including our generous donors
supporting the CERF. The Council’s continued support
is critical, but we need a lot more.
The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Stein.
Mr. Stein: The situation in Venezuela has resulted
in a population outflow the magnitude of which is
unparalleled in the modern history of the region. At
present, we estimate that 3.7 million Venezuelans
have left their country, approximately 80 per cent of
whom have left since 2015. Although the vast majority
of Venezuelans who have left home can be found
in neighbouring countries and other parts of South
America, it is important to note that more than 20
countries are affected by those outflows, across the
hemisphere and beyond.
Last year, Venezuelans left the country at a net
rate of about 5,000 per day, and they continue to leave
the country, despite recent border closures on the
Venezuelan side. If the trend continues in 2019, we
estimate that the total number of Venezuelans outside
the country will exceed 5 million by the end of the
year. The testimonials and feedback from Venezuelans
arriving in countries of the region outline a range
of factors, often in parallel, that contribute to their
departure from the country. The stated reasons for
leaving include insecurity and violence; a lack of access
to food, medicine and essential services; loss of income;
and a lack of effective national protection systems.
Against that backdrop of deteriorating conditions
inside Venezuela, we observe individuals and
families leaving the country with increasing needs
and vulnerabilities. A disproportionately high rate
4/28

10/04/2019

of family separation is already taking place as some
family members leave in search of opportunities to
support those back home or secure the means to later
bring their relatives.
The aforementioned border closures also make
it necessary for the majority of persons leaving the
country to cross the border irregularly and in very
dangerous conditions, exposing them to additional risks
of exploitation and abuse, including through human
smuggling and trafficking. The presence of illegal
armed actors in multiple border areas and the seasonal
rise in border river flows create additional challenges
and risks for the continuous population outflows,
including their possible recruitment, which also affects
children and youth.
In that context, it is important to highlight the
generosity of the countries that have been receiving
Venezuelans, both those in transit as well as those being
hosted. Those countries have largely maintained opendoor policies and, through the Quito process, continue
to work towards harmonized approaches on important
matters such as reception arrangements, regular stay
provisions, documentation and social, economic and
cultural inclusion.
The third meeting in Quito on the human mobility
of Venezuelans in Latin America, held this week,
brought together participants from 12 countries and
observers from 13 countries, as well as United Nations
agencies, international cooperation agencies and
financial organizations. Technical discussions during
the meeting indicated important advances in the
harmonization of approaches in the areas of entry and
stay requirements, access to rights and documentation.
Participating
countries
reaffirmed
their
commitment to the continuity of the Quito process
and announced that Argentina will assume the leading
role in moving the process forward and host the next
meeting in Buenos Aires in July. Paraguay offered to
take over the process after Argentina. A priority issue
identified by all participants was the urgent need for
greater international cooperation and the involvement
of multilateral development and financial actors in that
unprecedented humanitarian situation that is affecting
many States of the Latin American and Caribbean
region, as well as other countries.
Despite those efforts, national capacities are
increasingly strained and, in some cases, carry the
risk of denial of entry or access to regular migration
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

schemes. The experience to date, however, demonstrates
that Venezuelans continue to move across the region,
regularly or irregularly, and it is in the best interest
of the receiving countries to avoid situations where
Venezuelans remain undocumented, invisible and
without access to basic rights, as well as exposed to
situations of violence, exploitation or abuse. Taking into
account those considerations, I would like to highlight
some implications for and requests to the Council and
the international community as a whole.
First, more support is needed for the States that
are employing open-door policies to receive, assist and
host Venezuelan outflows, including the initiatives of
the Quito process.
Secondly, the communities that are receiving
Venezuelans are in need of support. Many of the
communities receiving Venezuelans have needs of their
own, and support is also needed for the host population.
By addressing the needs of both, we can increase the
impact of the humanitarian response, mitigate the
possibilities of xenophobic expressions and create a
better climate for the local integration of Venezuelans
into their host communities.
Thirdly, stronger international cooperation
is critically needed. Despite some important
contributions to date, on the whole more is needed
in terms of financial support to countries and other
actors engaged in the humanitarian response. Those
contributions not only strengthen the humanitarian
response and socioeconomic integration solutions, but
also contribute to stability in the region as a whole as it
faces unprecedented humanitarian challenges.
The President: I thank Mr. Stein for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Page.
Ms. Page: I thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Security Council for the opportunity
to present our findings here today. I am Kathleen Page,
a physician and faculty member at the Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine. The findings that
I am presenting today were published last week by
Human Rights Watch, together with the Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health.
Our report concludes that the combination of
severe medicine, health supplies and food shortages
in Venezuela, together with the spread of epidemics
within and across the country’s borders, has resulted in
a breakdown of Venezuela’s health system. The crisis in

S/PV. 8506

Venezuela fits the definition of a complex humanitarian
emergency, and Secretary-General António Guterres
should formally declare it as such and lead a full-scale
United Nations-led response that is neutral, independent
and impartial.
We conducted research at the borders of Venezuela
in Colombia and Brazil, where we interviewed more
than 150 health professionals, humanitarian actors,
United Nations officials and local authorities, as well as
dozens of Venezuelans who had crossed the border. We
also reviewed data from the Venezuelan Government,
international organizations, Venezuelan hospitals and
other local actors.
The health data that we analysed show a health
system that is not functioning, with increasing mortality
and morbidity. The recent nationwide blackouts have
further undermined the ability of public hospitals
to respond to the medical needs of Venezuelans. The
latest statistics from the Venezuelan Ministry of Health
indicate that, from 2015 to 2016, maternal mortality
rose by 65 per cent, and infant mortality by 30 per
cent. Venezuela is the only country in the region where
infant mortality is rising and has returned to levels last
seen in the 1990s.
Infectious diseases are increasing and spreading at
an alarming rate. From 2008 to 2016, only a single case
of measles was recorded. Since 2017, there have been
more than 9,300 cases in Venezuela, and an additional
10,000 in Brazil, mostly in border areas. Since 2016,
there have been more than 2,500 suspected cases of
diphtheria, whereas there was none in the preceding
decade. The number of cases of malaria has increased
in recent years from fewer than 36,000 cases in 2009
to more than 414,000 in 2017 — the highest rate of
increase in the world. The number of tuberculosis
cases increased from 6,000 in 2014 to 13,000 in 2017,
resulting in the highest tuberculosis incidence rate in 40
years. In 2018, nearly nine out of 10 Venezuelans living
with HIV were not receiving antiretroviral therapy.
Although
Venezuelan
authorities
stopped
publishing statistics on nutrition in 2007, available
evidence indicates that hunger, malnutrition and
severe food shortages are widespread. From 2015 to
2017, nearly 12 per cent of Venezuelans — 3.7 million
people — were undernourished. National surveys show
that 80 per cent of Venezuelan households are food
insecure, and, in some locations, acute malnutrition
among children surpasses crisis thresholds. Hospitals

19-105105/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

10/04/2019

across the country are reporting increases in paediatric
admissions and mortality due to acute malnutrition.

I welcome and call on the Vice-President of the
United States of America.

Venezuelan authorities also no longer publish
official health information. They have threatened and
retaliated against health-care workers who collect data,
report deaths or speak out about medicine shortages.
Objective and verifiable data are critical to assess
the situation, follow trends and develop an effective
humanitarian response. While more international aid
has started to enter the country, the response to date
has been insufficient, and there have been obstacles
to implementation. While Venezuelan authorities
are within their rights to reject particular offers of
assistance, they are responsible for fully addressing the
country’s urgent humanitarian needs.

Mr. Pence (United States of America): I am here
today on behalf of the President of the United States
of America to discuss the ongoing crisis in Venezuela
and to call on this body to stand up for democracy and
the rule of law in that nation, which has suffered so
much. Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations
confers on the Security Council the responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
As another American president said many years ago,
the United Nations is designed to make possible lasting
freedom and independence for all its Members. It is
why this institution exists.

In order to protect the rights to health and food of the
Venezuelan people, we recommend that the SecretaryGeneral declare that Venezuela is facing a complex
humanitarian emergency and acknowledge the severity
of the situation. The crisis should be a top priority
that requires United Nations system-wide, full-scale
mobilization of humanitarian relief. The SecretaryGeneral should request that Venezuelan authorities
grant United Nations agencies full access to health,
nutrition and food security data, and allow them to
undertake a nationwide comprehensive humanitarianneeds assessment. The response we are calling for
would be credible, neutral, independent and impartial,
as it would be under the auspices of the United Nations.
Furthermore, the Security Council should regularly
meet to address the humanitarian crisis in Venezuela,
as well as its regional impact, given that more than
3.4 million Venezuelans have left the country in recent
years. We call on the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to document violations to the rights
to health and food in her upcoming report on the
situation in Venezuela. Finally, we call on the Human
Rights Council to continue to monitor the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela and adopt a draft resolution
to create an international commission of inquiry to
investigate violations of the rights to health and food.
The President: I thank Ms. Page for her briefing.
I would ask the briefers to stay so that they can
answer any questions that Council members might have.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
6/28

For six long years, the people of Venezuela have
suffered under the heavy hand of oppression. The
Maduro regime’s socialist policies have shrunk their
economy by nearly half. In what was once one of the
wealthiest countries in our hemisphere, nine out of
10 people now live in poverty. The average Venezuelan
has lost more than 20 pounds through deprivation and
malnutrition. Thousands of Venezuelan children are
starving and, at this very hour, infants in hospitals across
Venezuela are dying for lack of basic medical care. The
Maduro regime, in the midst of this deprivation and
suffering, has used violence and intimidation against
anyone who opposes their actions. In the past three
months, the regime has thrown at least 1,255 people
into jail without any due process of law and killed at
least 40 protesters. That is the nature of the regime that
we are dealing with. But the Maduro regime is a threat
not only to the Venezuelan people, it is a threat to the
peace and security of the wider region as well.
The rising desperation in Venezuela has fuelled
a mass exodus, the likes of which we have never
seen in the western hemisphere. More than 3 million
Venezuelans have now abandoned their beloved
country, and, if things do not get better, it is estimated
that another 2 million are expected to follow before the
year is out. Travelling through the region, my wife and I
witnessed the results of that deprivation first-hand. At a
church in Manaus, Brazil, we spoke to families who had
fled the deprivation in Venezuela. I will never forget
when a father looked at me, with his two young boys
standing at his side, and said how hard it was as a father
to come home at the end of the day and say, “we are not
eating today”. As he said it, his two little boys looked
up and nodded, recalling those days. Then there was the
day in Cartagena, Colombia, at another mission, where
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Venezuelan people had fled the deprivation in their
country, and a grandmother told me how it had gotten so
bad in their small rural town that her grandchildren had
to rise at 4 a.m. to get a single ticket to purchase a piece
of bread at 4 p.m. Their children were starving, and she
gathered up her grandchildren and fled the country.
Those are the stories the world deserves to hear of
deprivation. The truth is that those who stay behind are
subject to crime, violence and lawlessness. Thieves in
Venezuela do not rob banks; they rob restaurants for
food. Vicious gangs and so-called “colectivos” have
turned the streets into war zones. Venezuela now has
the highest murder rate in the world, as more than 70
people are murdered every single day. Venezuela is a
failed State, and as history teaches, failed States know
no boundaries. Drug traffickers, criminal gangs, even
terrorists, such as Hizbullah, are exploiting the chaos
in Venezuela to gain a foothold in the region and export
crime and violence. Were we to let the crisis continue,
the chaos and suffering would only spread.
The struggle in Venezuela is between dictatorship
and democracy. Nicolás Maduro is a dictator with no
legitimate claim to power. And Nicolás Maduro must
go. But for all the suffering, the Venezuelan people
across Venezuela — in cities large and small — people
are rising up. They are rising up against their oppression
and deprivation. Today those courageous Venezuelans
will take to the streets again. As President Trump said
not long ago, the fight for freedom in Venezuela has
just begun.
Just three short months ago, after Nicolás
Maduro was sworn into his second term, which was
stolen in a sham election, the National Assembly, the
only duly elected body in Venezuela, exercised its
power under the Constitution and recognized a new
leader, interim President Juan Guaidó. All across the
western hemisphere nations have been standing up
to declare their support for President Guaidó. Last
month, the Inter-American Development Bank voted
to see President Guaidó’s representative. Earlier this
week, the Group of Seven issued a statement saying
the May 2018 presidential election lacked legitimacy,
and called on the Madura regime to, in their words,
“restore the authority of the National Assembly”. And
just yesterday, the Organization of American States,
the oldest regional organization in the world, voted to
stand with the Venezuelan people and recognize the
Guaidó Government’s representative as the only true
representative of Venezuela.

S/PV. 8506

At President Trump’s direction, the United States
was proud to be the first nation to recognize interim
President Juan Guaidó as the legitimate President
of Venezuela. Today, 54 nations have joined us. The
western hemisphere has spoken with a clear voice.
Nations across the world have spoken. It is time for the
United Nations to speak.
In February, the United States introduced a draft
resolution at the Security Council that called for the
restoration of democracy in Venezuela and for the
Maduro regime to allow all humanitarian aid into the
country. The draft resolution was not adopted (see
S/PV.8476). Two nations that continue to back that
brutal regime used their vetoes to stop this body from
taking action. And while Russia and China continue
to obstruct the Security Council, rogue States, like
Iran and Cuba, are doing all they can to prop up the
Maduro regime.
For decades, Cuba has tried to create client States
across our region. While normal countries export
goods, Cuba exports tyranny and strong-arm tactics.
Even now Cuban military and intelligence services
train, support and equip Venezuela’s secret police as
they silence opponents, jail and torture members of
the opposition.
Last week, the United States took action to sanction
ships transporting Venezuelan oil to Cuba. And soon,
at President Trump’s direction, the United States will
announce additional action to hold Cuba accountable
for its malign influence in Venezuela. This week, in
addition to Cuba’s action, Caracas received a delegation
from Iran to begin direct air service between those two
rogue capitals. That blacklisted airline is used to export
terrorism by Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps,
which President Trump formally designated as a foreign
terrorist organization on Monday. That is the company
that Nicolás Maduro keeps, and those nations continue
to prop him up even as he inflicts suffering on the
Venezuelan people. Just two months ago, the dictator
in Caracas actually danced while his own citizens were
shot and truckloads of desperately needed food and
medicine burned.
Unlike nations that are subsidizing the dictator
in Caracas, under the leadership of President Donald
Trump, the United States has been standing with the
people of Venezuela. And we are committed to helping
the families and communities that have been devastated
by the Maduro regime. At this point, the United States

19-105107/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

has sanctioned more than a 150 Government officials and
organizations loyal to the dictator. We have sanctioned
State-owned businesses to prevent the Maduro regime
from robbing the people of what is rightfully theirs, and
as President Trump has said, we can be a lot tougher.
In addition, the United States has positioned
more than 500 metric tons of food and humanitarian
supplies on the Venezuelan border, ready for immediate
distribution. We have provided $200 million in aid to
support displaced Venezuelans and the host communities
that support them. And today, under President Trump’s
direction, the United States is announcing an additional
$60 million in humanitarian assistance to address that
crisis. The United States of America will continue to
exert all diplomatic and economic pressure to bring
about a peaceful transition to democracy in Venezuela,
but all options are on the table.
Up to this point, while other international bodies
have acted, the United Nations and the Security Council
have refused to act. But now that nations across this
hemisphere have spoken, the time has come for the
United Nations to recognize interim President Juan
Guaidó as the legitimate President of Venezuela and
seat his representative in this body. This body should
revoke the credentials of Venezuela’s representative
to the United Nations, recognize interim President
Juan Guaidó and seat the representative of the free
Venezuelan Government in this body without delay.
With all due respect, Ambassador Moncada should
not be at this meeting. He should return to Venezuela
and tell Nicolás Maduro that his time is up. It is time
for him to go.
The men, women and children of Venezuela are
suffering. Their economy has been destroyed. Their
democracy has been destroyed. The people of Venezuela
are paying the price, and soon the region and the world
will pay the price if we fail to act. There can be no
bystanders to this history. For the peace and security of
our hemisphere, the world and the United Nations must
stand with the people of Venezuela.
To that end, the United States is preparing a
draft resolution recognizing the legitimacy of the
Government of interim President Juan Guaidó, and
today we urge every member of the Security Council
and all States Members of the United Nations to
support it and to stand with the Venezuelan people as
they rise up to restore freedom, democracy and libertad
to their nation. And this they are doing. They are rising
8/28

10/04/2019

up against intimidation and violence. Even today the
people of Venezuela are taking to the streets to march
for freedom. Despite all the hardship, they continue to
march. Despite all of the oppression, they continue to
march. Despite the opposition, they continue to march
with courage and strength, because they are marching
to freedom. In the words of Simón Bolívar, a people
that loves freedom will in the end be free.
But now it is time for the United Nations to act
and for the world to stand with the people of Venezuela
as they march to freedom. History has taught us what
happens when the civilized nations of the world allow
oppression to go unchecked. When a brutal dictatorship
arose in Europe, the world failed to respond, and
millions of lives were lost in the Second World War.
This very institution was forged in the aftermath of
that war so that nations around the world could come
together and confront dictatorship with one voice. And
so the United States is calling on the United Nations to
live up to its very purpose, reject the failed leadership
of Nicolás Maduro, stand with us and with nations
across the world and this hemisphere to help the people
of Venezuela forge a brighter future.
As President Trump has said, “If the righteous many
do not confront the wicked few, then evil will triumph”.
When decent people and nations become bystanders
to history, the forces of destruction only gather power
and strength. So let us today rededicate ourselves to
the mission upon which this body was founded — to
maintain international peace and security. We have
confidence that if we do that, if we make every effort
to be at peace, the God of peace will guide us and bless
us, today, tomorrow and always.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the honour of
addressing the Council today. May God bless the people
of Venezuela. May God bless us all.
The President: I will now turn the hourglass
once again.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): You can turn your wonderful hourglass as
many times as you wish, Mr. President, but I will take
as much time as I need.
We are both surprised and yet not surprised that the
Security Council convened an extraordinary meeting
today with the participation of the Vice President of
the United States, whom you, Sir, are of course always
happy to see in this Chamber. It is just a pity, however,
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

that he did not want to listen to the views of the other
members of the Council on the situation in Venezuela.
Today we are witnessing yet another episode in a tragedy
in many acts in an attempt to effect regime change in
Venezuela. The situation in Venezuela does not pose a
threat to international peace and security. However, the
outside players involved are a direct threat to the peace
and security of Venezuela itself, and we have just heard
that today.
We just heard a horrific description of the
suffering of the Venezuelan people under the yoke of
an illegitimate dictator that can be eased only through
decisive action by the international community,
needless to say led by the United States. I would like to
know where they got all the numbers and testimony that
we heard about today. When was the last time anyone
who spoke today was in Venezuela? As it turns out, the
situation has to be studied at a distance, based on the
premise that so-called President Guaidó is the country’s
only legitimate authority and source of information
about what is going on there. By the way, I would like
to say to Ms. Page, who gave us a worrying description
of the health-care situation in Venezuela and of the
measles epidemic there in particular, that epidemics
unfortunately happen. Does Ms. Page know that the
New York authorities have declared an emergency due
to a measles epidemic in New York that is just a few
hundred metres from the United Nations Headquarters
building, in the borough of Brooklyn?
We have seen all of this already in other regions
of the world. We heard so-called witnesses who had
settled in the West tell blood-curdling stories about
the suffering of the peoples of Iraq, Libya and Syria,
after which it was precisely because of the Western
intervention in those countries that their real suffering
began and has continued to this day. Does the Council
want to see a similar scenario in Venezuela?
Like the legitimate authorities in Caracas, we do
not deny the fact that the humanitarian situation in
Venezuela is definitely not ideal. We are ready to work
with them to improve the situation, based on General
Assembly resolution 46/182, which among other
things requires that humanitarian assistance should
be requested by a country’s legitimate Government.
The Secretariat should assist in that, but the briefing
on behalf of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has left us with a dual
impression. On one hand, it stresses the importance
of separating political and humanitarian tasks in

S/PV. 8506

providing assistance to Venezuela. Needless to say,
we are in favour of neutral and impartial humanitarian
assistance. On the other hand, we are disappointed
that the data presented was collected and published
without the agreement of the legitimate Government
of Venezuela. It appears that we are returning to those
less than glorious times when OCHA was used to
disseminate unverified information. We would like to
think that is not the case now. Furthermore, preparing
a needs assessment is an indissoluble part of preparing
a humanitarian assistance plan, which in its turn can
be done only with the agreement of the legitimate
authorities. Any failure to comply with that principle
undermines a key aspect of resolution 46/182.
We categorically reject the methods of the United
States with regard to Venezuela. With one hand, by
continually imposing new sanctions and restrictions
that prevent the country from developing normally, it is
keeping Venezuela in a choke hold, when international
assistance to States that need it should be designed to
establish a situation that enables a State to take care of
its own citizens. And with the other hand it is picking
Venezuelans’ pockets, expropriating Venezuelan assets
in Western banks. Just since the beginning of this year
the United States has taken more than $30 billion from
Venezuela, asserting that now only self-proclaimed
President Guaidó can use that money. The overall
damage that United States actions have done to the
Venezuelan economy since 2013 amounts to hundreds
of billions of dollars. And despite all of that it keeps
calling more loudly than anyone for help for the people
of Venezuela.
Incidentally, I would like to remind the Council that
humanitarian assistance has definitely not gone smoothly
of late in the United States itself. It still has not fully
dealt with the destruction wrought by Hurricane Maria,
which devastated Puerto Rico, among other places, in
the autumn of 2017. At the time there were horrendous
problems with the lack of water, food, electricity and
medical assistance. Some 225,000 families were left
homeless. An entire harvest of crops vital to the island
was lost. According to various estimates at the time,
the total damage was assessed at between $45 billion
and $90 billion, and Washington completely rejected
any international assistance. In September 2017,
President Maduro expressed Venezuela’s readiness
to immediately launch a programme of support and
solidarity to Puerto Rico. Cuba also offered to help
Puerto Rico deal with the effects of the hurricane,

19-105109/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

which Washington also rejected. Venezuela eventually
did provide assistance to Puerto Rico through Citgo,
the United States subsidiary of Petróleos de Venezuela,
S.A., while the Cuban Government respected the
America’s refusal of its help and did not insist or make
use of the subject for propaganda purposes, despite the
fact that many in the United States were not pleased
with the decision.
Caracas is not refusing humanitarian assistance
that is provided in accordance with the principles
approved by the United Nations. Russia and a number
of other countries have provided such assistance
through the World Health Organization. The sanctions
and outside interference in this State’s internal affairs
will not allow the crisis in Venezuela to end. As for the
country’s internal political conflicts, we believe firmly
that the only thing that will help to overcome them is a
dialogue within Venezuela itself.
The United States has persisted in destabilizing the
situation in Venezuela by creating an artificial crisis
around the country in order to replace its legitimately
elected leader with its own pawn. There are endless
examples of the United States’ blatant interference in
the affairs of Latin American countries and its use of
military force to overthrow leaders it does not like. I
would like to once again ask Venezuela’s neighbours
if they have really learned nothing from history. Do
they really not understand that Venezuela is merely a
bargaining chip in the geopolitical and geostrategic
struggle for influence in the region and the world,
in the spirit of a revitalized Monroe Doctrine? By
the way, the attitude of Latin American countries to
what is happening in Venezuela is not as unequivocal
and uniform as the Vice-President of the United
States told us today. We have heard that in previous
Council meetings.
It is very odd to be speaking yet again about what
should be self-evident truths, which is that a resolution
of a crisis created in Venezuela can be achieved only
through internal Venezuelan dialogue. It is only the
self-proclaimed President who is unwilling to do that,
because he has received no orders to that effect, but
there is no other way. In that context, we welcome
the international initiatives coming from the Latin
American region aimed at promoting a dialogue
between the legitimate Government and the leaders of
the opposition. Our experience suggests that Mexico
and Uruguay’s proposal for a Montevideo mechanism
has the greatest potential in that regard. It provides
10/28

10/04/2019

for establishing a comprehensive and all-inclusive
dialogue and in that regard has much greater chances
of success than initiatives that require preconditions
before anything can start.
The possibility of joining in the efforts to provide
good offices or mediation should be open to everyone
trying to contribute constructively to establishing an
inclusive dialogue within Venezuela. Unfortunately,
what is going on in the Security Council today is merely
another episode in the frontal attack on the official
Government in Caracas and ordinary Venezuelans. I
want to point out that alongside their attempts to impose
humanitarian services, so-called well-wishers are
actively trying to challenge the credentials of official
Venezuelan delegations to international platforms. We
heard this today from the lips of the Vice-President
of the United States. I will not comment on his tone,
but I want to say that the Permanent Representative
of Venezuela, who is in this Chamber today, was
appointed by his country’s legitimate Government,
and his appointment was confirmed by the General
Assembly of the United Nations. Furthermore, these socalled friends of Venezuela are replacing Venezuela’s
official ambassadors and abetting the seizure of
diplomatic property and thereby blatantly violating
the founding principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and undermining some of the most important
norms of international law. It may be that the socalled international rules-based order that our Western
colleagues are promoting so actively provides for
such thuggish action, but international law definitely
does not.
We urge the United States to acknowledge, finally,
that Venezuelans and other peoples have the right to
determine their own destiny. If the United States wants
to make America great again, something that we are all
sincerely interested in, it should stop interfering in the
internal affairs of other States. It will only be respected
for doing so. After all, the United States does not like it
when anyone interferes in its affairs. No one likes that.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the valuable information provided
by the speakers invited to today’s briefing, which
enables us to once again sound the alarm about the
serious humanitarian crisis, economic collapse and
disintegration of public services, unprecedented in the
history of Latin America, that the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela is experiencing. In that regard, I want
to emphasize that Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama
and Paraguay, member countries of the Lima Group,
align themselves with this statement.
In order to understand the situation in Venezuela,
it will suffice to mention some figures on its economy.
For example, according to estimates by the International
Monetary Fund, there was 1.5 million per cent inflation
in 2018 alone and the gross domestic product has fallen
by 44 per cent since 2013. According to the National
Survey of Living Conditions, which is a joint project of
three Venezuelan universities — Central, Andrés Bello
Catholic and Simón Bolívar — Venezuela, which once
had one of the highest incomes in the region, is now a
country 94 per cent of whose citizens live in poverty,
with 60 per cent in extreme poverty and 80 per cent at
risk of food insecurity because they do not have enough
income to buy food.
Therefore, while Nicolás Maduro’s illegitimate
regime hides those figures, which show that the
economy in Venezuela is in free fall, and boasts that the
country does not need humanitarian aid, hospitals are
collapsing without vaccines or medicines, diseases that
had been eradicated are resurfacing, unemployment is
increasing at a dizzying rate, cities are becoming more
violent, electricity and water supplies are collapsing
and the flight of talent suggests a future that is even
gloomier and more worrisome than ever. All this is
the responsibility of a regime that has been declared
illegitimate in a resolution of the Permanent Council
of the Organization of American States. It is an
authoritarian regime that silences the media, represses
and imprisons the opposition and abuses its total power.
In that context, the number of people who have
emigrated recently reached more than 3.5 million,
with 5,000 new and ongoing daily departures, which
represents an enormous challenge for host countries
and their health, education, housing, employment
and integration services. It is worth noting that the
countries of the region have had to allocate significant
and unanticipated domestic resources to provide
such social services to the hundreds of thousands of
Venezuelans we have hosted, which in some cases is
beyond our capabilities.
How did we arrive at that situation? The answer is
clear. The unprecedented crisis is due to the illegitimate
and oppressive nature of a regime that has added to
the breakdown of the constitutional order and the rule
of law its incompetence in economic management,

S/PV. 8506

corruption and the illicit diversion of resources, turning
a prosperous and thriving country like Venezuela
into one where poverty, insecurity and hopelessness
are prevalent.
There is now an urgent need to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis of millions of Venezuelans,
which clearly cannot be controlled or entrusted to an
illegitimate regime that uses aid solely for political and
propaganda purposes. In the short term, it is urgent to
channel humanitarian assistance through the United
Nations system and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, possibly with the support and participation of
local and international non-governmental organizations
on the ground. That will allow for an impartial and
independent delivery aimed at those most in need.
However, that urgent and necessary response should
not lead us to forget that it is only a palliative to the true
solution to the Venezuelan problem, whose impact on
the region threatens peace and security. The solution
involves the restoration of democracy and the rule of
law in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, led by the
Venezuelans themselves in a peaceful manner, within
the framework of the Constitution and international
law, supported by political and diplomatic means and
without the use of force. We therefore reaffirm our
recognition of and support for the National Assembly,
the interim President of Venezuela, Juan Guaidó, and
his representatives entrusted with that mandate.
We therefore ask the international community and
the members of the Council to support the countries
of the Lima Group in their efforts to help restore
constitutional order in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela in order to address the root cause of the
serious humanitarian situation about which we are
meeting today.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
It is important that the Council again take up the
situation in Venezuela in the light of recent events.
In particular, we deplore and are concerned about the
deteriorating conditions in the country, which have
exacerbated the humanitarian crisis affecting millions
of Venezuelans and which continues to drive many
of them to leave their homeland in pursuit of better
livelihood opportunities.

19-1051011/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

According to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, 11.7 per cent of Venezuela’s
population are undernourished. The proportion of
people living in poverty has also increased dramatically
in recent years. Every day, millions of Venezuelans face
unprecedented challenges in obtaining supplies and
accessing basic services such as health care, medicines,
vaccines, water, electricity and education. Diseases
such as tuberculosis, diphtheria, measles and malaria
have re-emerged throughout the country.
In recent weeks, the situation has been further
complicated by power outages in most of the country,
which lasted for several days. The results have
been devastating.
We have seen tragic situations in hospitals, where
the lack of electricity forces medical personnel to often
work without the minimum conditions of hygiene and
tools. The lack of water is another tragic consequence
of those outages.
In the same way, in many places school and work
activities have been temporarily suspended, which
impacts the productivity of the country and contributes
to the economic deterioration. Given that outlook, no
significant improvement in the situation is envisaged in
the short term.
The crisis in Venezuela cannot be solved by
humanitarian assistance alone. It is urgent to find
the conditions to conduct concrete negotiations that
lead to a solution to the crisis through a fair, free and
competitive electoral process with guarantees for
all political groups and actors and the support of the
international community in a climate of respect for
human rights. We also call for that to be a solution
led by the Venezuelans themselves and achieved in a
peaceful manner.
I reiterate our strong determination to work together
with the international community to help Venezuela
to find a response to the crisis that is democratic and
adheres to the law, both internal and international and
that, above all, paves the way for the reconstruction of
Venezuelan society in a spirit of unity and a vision for
the future.
Aware of the central role of States in humanitarian
action and in order to achieve a substantial increase in
humanitarian assistance for the country, we make an
urgent appeal to the Venezuelan authorities to recognize
the serious situation in which the country finds itself.
12/28

10/04/2019

In that direction, we encourage them to establish spaces
for coordination and humanitarian action with actors on
the ground, supported by the humanitarian principles
of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence,
to reach the most needy and vulnerable populations.
We acknowledge the work carried out in the context
of the cooperation and assistance coordination team to
assess the existing needs. We urge all actors, including
the Government authorities, to continue working towards
a people-centred humanitarian action. All actions must
address the priority needs of the Venezuelans, with an
approach that lays the foundation for redirecting the
country towards sustainable development and enables
the return of the 3.7 million who have been forced to
leave their homeland.
We believe that the recent agreement reached by the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies to expand its humanitarian actions in the
country is an encouraging step despite the fact that the
650,000 people in need are only a fraction of the total
that requires immediate assistance. We are confident
that that is only the first step towards new initiatives
and measures that have a positive impact on the lives
of Venezuelans. We also wish to emphasize the need
to speed up the mechanisms for authorized personnel
to enter the country and for them to have unhindered
access to the most vulnerable areas. We support the
expansion of the United Nations presence on the ground
and appeal to the international community to make
the necessary financial resources available for muchneeded humanitarian assistance in Venezuela.
In conclusion, we urge the members of the Council
to remain focused on improving the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela, promoting the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and in
international humanitarian law and strengthening the
role of the United Nations in negotiating a solution to
this very serious crisis.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China has been following closely the developments in
Venezuela. China supports the Venezuelan Government
in its efforts to uphold its national sovereignty,
independence and stability, and believes that
Venezuela’s affairs should be handled independently by
the Venezuelan people themselves. China calls on the
Venezuelan Government and opposition parties to seek
a political solution through dialogue and consultation,
within their constitutional and legal framework.
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

China’s position on the Security Council’s
involvement in the Venezuelan issue has been consistent
and clear. Our point of departure is, as always, to
uphold the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations
and the basic norms governing international relations,
promote a peaceful settlement of the Venezuelan issue
and maintain long-term peace and development in
Latin America.
China opposes any interference by external forces
in Venezuela’s internal affairs; military intervention in
Venezuela; and the use of the so-called humanitarian
issue to achieve political aims. History has shown
repeatedly that unilateral sanctions only further
complicate situations and affect people’s daily lives.
They do not help resolve problems or bring peace to
a country.
On the one hand, we hear fine words about caring
about the well-being of Venezuelans, while, on the
other, we see increasingly tighter sanctions on the
country. These two things are not consistent, and the
underlying motive is dubious.
To help the Venezuelan people overcome their
temporary difficulties, China has decided to provide
emergency aid consisting of civilian goods to Venezuela;
the relevant supplies are on their way to Venezuela in
batches. On 29 March, the first batch of medicines
and medical supplies was delivered to the Venezuelan
Government. China’s assistance to Venezuela is in
keeping with its long-held principles on foreign aid.
It is intended to help the Venezuelan people overcome
the negative impacts of external interference and
sanctions, with no political conditions attached. China
will continue its cooperation with Venezuela, based
on the principles of mutual respect, equality, mutual
benefit and common development, for the greater wellbeing of the two peoples.
Peace and stability in Venezuela is in the
fundamental interests of the country and its people, and
it also serves the common interests of all parties. We
hope that the international community will take steps
that are truly conducive to the stability and economic
development in Venezuela as well as better livelihoods
for its people; provide constructive assistance to the
country on the basis of respect for the sovereignty of
Venezuela; and promote the effective settlement of the
relevant issues as soon as possible.
We hope that the countries concerned will promptly
lift the unilateral sanctions on Venezuela, create the

S/PV. 8506

conditions for its economic and social development
to return to normal, and lend help and support to the
country, in accordance with the basic principles of
United Nations humanitarian assistance.
Earlier in his intervention, the United States
representative
levelled
unfounded
accusations
concerning China’s position on this agenda item,
which China categorically rejects. As is common
knowledge, China has all along maintained friendly
and cooperative relations with other countries around
the world, Venezuela included, on the basis of the five
principles of peaceful coexistence.
We support the people of various countries in
independently choosing a development path that caters
to their national realities. We never interfere in other
countries’ internal affairs or impose our will on other
countries. States members of the Security Council
should faithfully abide by the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and universally
recognized norms of international relations, and they
should show genuine respect for the choices made by
the peoples of other countries to take concrete steps
that are conducive to the well-being of the people of
Venezuela, rather than the opposite.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
to start by commending in particular the participation
in this meeting of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and of the Vice-President of the United States.
The briefers, whom I wish to thank, painted a picture
that is absolutely clear. Venezuela has been plunged
into the worst humanitarian crisis in its history. The
crisis, which is massive and systemic, is having major
consequences across the American continent. Contrary
to what we are going to hear, there is no so-called
foreign plot behind the chaos. The Venezuelan regime
is the sole and only culprit of this tragic situation, which
has recently deteriorated even further owing to the
large-scale breakdown of the electrical-supply system,
followed by a water-service interruption.
But the Venezuelan people have not yet seen the
worst of it. Increased indicators of deterioration, such
as those measuring poverty, violence and mortality,
might be only the prelude to an even deeper crisis
unless something is done to ease the suffering of the
Venezuelan people and move towards a political and
peaceful solution. The question that we should be
considering together is: how can we reverse the tragic
dynamic that is under way?

19-1051013/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

I will therefore focus
complementary matters.

on

three

10/04/2019

urgent,

participation, to find a humanitarian and political
solution to the crisis.

The first urgent issue is the need to ensure
and facilitate access by humanitarian agencies and
non-governmental organizations, while fully respecting
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. Indeed, the outer limits of cruelty
seem to constantly be pushed outward, seeing that the
regime’s allies are prepared to divert humanitarian
assistance. Political instrumentalization, whatever its
source, should be condemned in every case.

Lastly, the third urgent matter is to begin a political
and peaceful transition in Venezuela in the form of free,
fair and transparent presidential elections, overseen by
the international community. On the question of the
causes of the humanitarian crisis, we will undoubtedly
hear the Venezuelan authorities once again accuse
foreigners of being responsible for the tragedy of the
Venezuelan people. Yet it is the Maduro regime that
is both the author and the main actor of that tragedy.
By trying to hold on to power by organizing mock
presidential elections, repressing the opposition and
dissenting voices and monopolizing Venezuela’s wealth,
the current regime has brought an entire country and
people to the brink of collapse.

The position taken by the Venezuelan regime of
denying the existence of a humanitarian crisis and
restricting access by humanitarian actors is taking an
increasingly high toll in terms of human life. I will
simply mention the impact of the breakdown of the
health-care system on the most vulnerable people, as
well as increasing malnutrition and higher mortality.
France’s position has been clear since the beginning
of this tragedy. We stand shoulder to shoulder with the
Venezuelan people. France, in its national capacity and
through the European Union, has a prepared a response
that is commensurate with the scale of the crisis. The
European Union announced on 27 March an additional
€50 million in humanitarian assistance in Venezuela.
It is equally urgent to provide assistance to the
more than 3 million Venezuelans who have had to
take the path of exile owing to the chaos and violence.
I welcome the measures taken by all the countries of
the region, whose solidarity has been exemplary, in
particular Columbia, which is shouldering the heaviest
burden, with some 1.4 million refugees and migrants.
Here I wish to welcome the presence here of the
Colombian Minister for Foreign Affairs. This sustained
engagement deserves our deep admiration, even as we
observe a continued flow of people leaving the country
– more than 5,000 people a day – as indicated by the
Special Representative.
Let us make no mistake: unless there is a radical
change in the position of the Venezuelan authorities,
and unless they fully cooperate with humanitarian
agencies, this exodus could accelerate and have a very
negative impact on the stability and development of
neighbouring countries. I would therefore reiterate
France’s full solidarity with the countries affected.
Meanwhile, we strongly urge the Venezuelan regime
to seize the opportunity created by the International
Contact Group, which is striving, with France’s active
14/28

Many countries, including France and its European
partners, have drawn the necessary conclusions from
that situation. The President of the National Assembly,
Juan Guaidó, has become the interim President not
as a result of foreign support but by upholding the
Venezuelan Constitution and with a view to organizing
free, credible and transparent elections.
It is unacceptable that the survival of a regime
should be at the expense of the lives of a people. We
urge the Venezuelan authorities to allow humanitarian
staff access to Venezuelans and to move towards a
peaceful, democratic and sustainable solution. The
Security Council will need to demonstrate its unity to
play the role that it must in that situation. The goal is
to promote a negotiated and peaceful solution to the
crisis. The use of force and violence must be avoided
in Venezuela — a point that France especially wants to
drive home. There can be only a political and peaceful
solution, which requires that democratic presidential
elections take place at the earliest date.
While Venezuela teeters on the verge of collapse,
our role is not to serve as a substitute to the Venezuelan
people, but to the contrary, to allow the Venezuelan
people to speak freely and express their wish to decide
their future by re-establishing democracy and the rule
of law in Venezuela. That is the essence and meaning of
France’s efforts in that regard.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our three
briefers, as well as the United States for proposing this
discussion today and Vice-President Pence for joining
the Security Council.
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

It is clear from the briefings that we heard that
the humanitarian crisis in Venezuela has reached epic
proportions, and it is right that the Security Council
should discuss such issues. I know that there is an
age-old debate that we have never resolved as to how
bad a situation must get within a country in order
for it to constitute the sort of issue that the Security
Council has looked at. But the figures that we have
heard today and their effect on the Venezuelan people
and their neighbours, as well as the view of the regional
authorities and international authorities, as represented
by the Joint Special Representative and the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, make it, I believe, absolutely an
issue that the Council should be discussing.
We have heard today how ordinary Venezuelans
are unable to access food and basic health care.
Preventable diseases, such as measles and diphtheria,
have reappeared. HIV goes untreated and maternal and
newborn mortality rates are extremely high. Electricity
and water shortages, as many speakers have said, have
made it all much worse. The figures are appalling, but we
are also starting to hear words such as ‘unprecedented”
and “unparalleled”.
Today I heard some things that I did not know,
particularly about the health side. In that regard, I thank
Ms. Page. They are truly shocking. The malaria figure
especially stuck in my mind. I think the answer with
respect to measles is to refer to the George Washington
University study about Russian social media, so I am
not going to go into that. But I think that the malaria
figure alone ought to really horrify us.
It is all the more shocking because, as a number
of speakers have said, the crisis is man-made,
and even more so because Venezuela used to be a
prosperous country. My understanding of the figures
of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development and World Bank is that Venezuela was
considered to be an upper-middle-income country. The
fact that it can go from that status to having the sorts
of problems that we heard described today really does
draw the concern of the international community.
I want also to reference the refugee situation. The
figure we have heard is that 3.4 million Venezuelans
have left their country to go to their neighbours. I too
welcome the presence of the Colombian Foreign Minister
here today, and we commend him and his Government;
our Security Council colleague, Peru; and others in
the region that have offered refuge and hope to those

S/PV. 8506

millions of ordinary Venezuelans. But we cannot rely
solely on the region’s efforts because, as we also heard
today, that number is set to rise quite dramatically.
I wanted to thank the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, through the Joint Special
Representative, for the efforts that they have made. I
think that we agree that it is a positive first step that
the Maduro regime no longer denies the existence of a
crisis and that the Red Cross and the United Nations are
allowed to start the international humanitarian response.
The scale of what is needed was set out graphically by
the Emergency Relief Coordinator, which points to how
much more needs to be done.
The United Kingdom agrees with the majority
of the Council on the need for a new start in
Venezuela, and we will be working closely with the
international community to ensure that assistance
can reach those most in need. However, I want to
echo what Vice-President Pence said in his emphasis
on democracy and the rule of law. We stand with the
Venezuelan people. This is about what is needed to help
the Venezuelan people. We therefore support the United
Nations efforts, under the leadership of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to mount
an international humanitarian response commensurate
with the severity of the situation and underpinned by the
principles of independence, neutrality and impartiality.
I call Member States’ attention to the three areas that
the Emergency Relief Coordinator outlined.
We call on the Maduro regime and all actors to
facilitate the humanitarian process and allow further
international organizations, such as the United Nations,
Red Cross and non-governmental organizations,
unhindered access to deliver humanitarian assistance
to meet the urgent needs of the Venezuelan people. I
repeat that it is against international law to try to deny
one’s own people the help that they need, particularly
with respect to food.
I would also like to use this occasion to call on
Member States to support the United Nations efforts.
For our part, we have committed a package of nearly
$9 million in humanitarian aid to respond to the most
severe needs in Venezuela and host countries. We hope
that our aid package will respond to the most severe
health and nutrition needs by supporting emergency
rooms and maternity wards. We hope to help people
fleeing their homes get access to critical support, and

19-1051015/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

we hope to help meet the immediate needs of those
forced to flee Venezuela, who are at greater risk of
exploitation. We therefore plan to offer migrants access
to personal documentation and information on how to
access basic services.
It is important that we are clear that the suffering
faced by the Venezuelan people is the result of years
of mismanagement by the de facto Government.
Humanitarian aid is urgently needed, but, as many
speakers have said today, it will not solve the crisis.
Political change is equally urgent. The legitimate
interim President — Juan Guaidó — was stripped of
his immunity as Speaker of the National Assembly. His
Chief of Staff was arrested and others who are trying to
secure peace and democracy in Venezuela have suffered
similar forms of intimidation and threats. Mr. Guaidó
has our full support in his efforts to bring about the
necessary change. The people of Venezuela deserve a
better future.
I repeat that it is our belief that it is time for a new
start, with free and fair elections in accordance with
international democratic standards.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I thank those who have called for this briefing
for the information they provided.
In order to prevent the situation from further
deteriorating, we call on all Council members to work
together to foster a peaceful solution to the crisis.
We call for violence to be avoided at all costs. In that
regard, I would like to make three points — first, the
importance of full humanitarian access in accordance
with humanitarian principles; secondly, the need to
launch as soon as possible a peaceful political process
that paves the way towards free and transparent
presidential elections; and, thirdly, an appeal to protect
Venezuelan citizens from all forms of violence.

10/04/2019

supplies and personnel in the country. We recall the
need to respect the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence in the provision of
humanitarian assistance, and we stress how it important
it is that such assistance be provided according to needsbased criteria and not used to achieve political ends. I
also commend the efforts of the United Nations and all
humanitarian and medical personnel in Venezuela, as
well as those of other partners, such as the European
Union, which my colleague from France mentioned.
Secondly, in the absence of a political solution,
the humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate.
Belgium reiterates its call for the early launch of a
peaceful political process that paves the way towards
the holding of free and transparent presidential elections
and reconciliation in Venezuela. As I have already
said on several occasions, the May 2018 presidential
elections were neither free and fair nor creditable, and
thereby stripped the Government of Nicolás Maduro of
its democratic legitimacy.
We support Juan Guaidó in his endeavour to
organize the holding of free, fair and democratic
presidential elections. The European Union, together
with countries of the region, has set up the International
Contact Group, which aims in particular to create the
necessary conditions for the holding of presidential
elections in the near future. I call on all stakeholders
to demonstrate their full commitment to that initiative.
In that regard, Belgium is concerned about reports
of an increase in foreign military aid to the Maduro
regime, the goal of which is far from clear. As I
have already said, Belgium advocates for a peaceful
resolution of the situation in Venezuela, and the presence
of foreign security forces will not help achieve, but is
diametrically opposed to, that goal.

First, it is clear that the situation in Venezuela
constitutes a humanitarian crisis, as we just heard from
the briefers. Approximately 25 per cent of Venezuelans
are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. Those
segments of the population most affected include people
suffering from chronic health problems, pregnant
women, young children and indigenous populations.
We must do everything in our power to alleviate the
suffering of those vulnerable groups.

Thirdly, we call for the protection of Venezuelan
citizens from all forms of violence. The Venezuelan
people have the right to express themselves without fear
of political persecution. The intimidation of members
of the press and civil society is unacceptable. Belgium
urgently calls for full respect for the rights provided in
the Constitution and for the immunity of all members
of the National Assembly, including its President. Their
civil rights, freedom and physical integrity must be
respected at all times. They must be able to carry out
their functions without any form of intimidation.

Belgium calls on all actors to allow and facilitate
safe, rapid and unhindered access for humanitarian

In conclusion, I thank the countries of the region
for their support for Venezuelan refugees and migrants,

16/28

19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

especially Colombia, represented here today by
its Minister.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank all the
briefers for the information that they provided us at the
beginning of this meeting.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is closely
following developments in the situation and the increase
in tensions in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. We
regret that the situation is increasingly deteriorating and
express our concern that, if the situation continues on
its current path, we may well arrive at an unsustainable
and undesirable scenario for both the Venezuelan
people and the international community. I would like
to state that Equatorial Guinea condemns all acts that
could jeopardize respect for human rights, that we
believe in freedom of expression and that all peaceful
demonstrations must be respected, as long as they
take place in adherence to the relevant laws in force in
the country.
I reaffirm my country’s commitment to the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, which
categorically prohibit the use of force and advocate for
respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
all States Members of the United Nations. We share the
concern of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees that the humanitarian situation in Venezuela
is going from bad to worse.
While we commend the timely and notable
solidarity of the countries of the region and the noble
work of the humanitarian agencies that are supporting
the 10 countries of the region hosting millions of
Venezuelans, it is nonetheless necessary that those
countries continue to keep their borders open and
ease their entry restrictions. In that regard, and as an
example, we acknowledge the efforts to encourage
international solidarity that Cuba has made and is
making to support many countries, not only in its region
but in other regions, in particular Africa, including my
own country, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, in the
areas of health and education, among others.
We are facing a real refugee and migrant crisis.
Approximately 4 million Venezuelans have left their
country. Given that situation, more must be done,
based on the Global Compact on Refugees, to provide
additional support for those who are leaving Venezuela
as well as for the countries that are receiving them.
Similarly, we call for the cooperation of those concerned

S/PV. 8506

to ensure that the provision of humanitarian assistance
adheres to the regulations governing humanitarian aid
and that it reaches those in need without discrimination
or distinction of any kind.
Moreover, we remain convinced that, as the crisis
is a national problem of Venezuela, dialogue and
negotiations among national political actors are the best
way to overcome it. In that regard, it is crucial that the
parties concerned set up a negotiating table at which
the representatives of international organizations,
especially the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, serve as impartial mediators.
We welcome the Montevideo mechanism, the goal
of which is to preserve peace in Venezuela, based on
the principles of non-interference and the peaceful
resolution of the conflict.
We believe that, given this tense and turbulent
situation, all parties, whether directly involved or
not, should refrain from making statements or taking
actions that could be considered a threat of use of force,
so as to not substantially raise tensions further and lead
to an escalation in violence and cause greater harm.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that the crisis in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela requires all national
and international stakeholders to prioritize the interests
of the Venezuelan people over any personal or partisan
interests. Therefore, we once again urge political
actors to increase their efforts to facilitate a peaceful
negotiation scenario and to accept both the good offices
of the Secretary-General in the peaceful settlement
of disputes and the involvement of United Nations
agencies and regional and subregional organizations in
order to reach a productive and sustainable agreement
for the political, economic and social strengthening of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
participating in today’s meeting, as well as Mr. Mike
Pence, the Vice President of the United States of
America. I also thank all briefers for their updates.
We are confronted with a worrisome humanitarian
crisis whose implications may go beyond Venezuela
and neighbouring countries if not addressed urgently.
There is no doubt that the crisis will have negative
repercussions on regional security and stability in a
way that will make it difficult to contain the further
political and economic implications.

19-1051017/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

We are concerned about the humanitarian situation
in Venezuela, whose people are struggling with a severe
shortage of food, medicine, water and electricity, all
of which are major life necessities and reflect a grave
economic situation and unprecedented inflation. That
has led to a major displacement of people in recent
years, the majority of them women and children.
Such displacement has placed significant economic
and political pressures on neighbouring countries
and their ability to provide refuge and food to those
displaced people.
Some 3.5 million Venezuelans have taken refuge in
15 neighbouring countries, while 7 million more are in
need of urgent humanitarian assistance, according to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
as we heard from Mr. Lowcock. We therefore urge the
Venezuelan Government to open the country’s border
crossings in order to allow humanitarian assistance,
including food and medicine, to reach the largest
number of people in need, in line with international
principles and standards.
We call once again on all Venezuelan parties to
refrain from any provocative measures and to prioritize
the national interest of Venezuela in order to preserve
its security, stability and unity while advancing the
aspirations of the Venezuelan people. We call on them
to launch a serious and inclusive dialogue to prevent
bloodshed and preserve the dignity of the Venezuelan
people. Such dialogue should address the root causes of
the crisis and spare Venezuela and the countries of the
region any further violence and instability. We support
all efforts that seek a peaceful solution to the crisis.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reiterates its
full commitment to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, which call for respect for the
sovereignty of States and non-interference in their
internal affairs, in line with Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to recognize the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and earlier on, Mr. Mike Pence,
Vice-President of the United States of America.
We would like to thank all the briefers, especially
Mr. Lowcock and his excellent staff in Venezuela. We
ask him to convey our utmost gratitude and appreciation
for the sterling job they are doing in Venezuela, as
they dispatch and offer much-needed assistance to the
18/28

10/04/2019

people of Venezuela in the midst of uncertainty and
political contestation.
International solidarity is a hallmark of most of us
in developing countries, including Cuba. The situation
in Venezuela requires a constructive and united
Security Council in addressing both the humanitarian
and political situation facing the country.
The political situation and continued economic
difficulties in Venezuela are the result of myriad
factors, including conflicting geopolitical dynamics.
That necessitates the Council’s focus on the resulting
humanitarian situation in Venezuela and its adverse
impact on ordinary people. In that regard, I wish to
reiterate South Africa’s position on three issues.
First, the provision of humanitarian assistance
must be provided in accordance with the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence and in full compliance with General
Assembly resolution 46/182. Those principles have
enabled the Council to act in other difficult situations in
order to support people in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance. That should be the central approach of
the Council in this matter. We totally agree with the
Secretary-General in that respect. The Council should
not politicize humanitarian assistance.
Secondly, it is important that the effective and
unhindered provision of humanitarian assistance
take place in coordination and cooperation with
the Venezuelan Government, acknowledging the
fundamental principles of State sovereignty, as reflected
in the Charter of the United Nations. It is therefore
necessary to acknowledge and work with established
structures in Venezuela so as not to create parallel
structures that may also cause increased tensions in
that country.
Thirdly and finally, the provision of humanitarian
assistance should be based on an adequate and accurate
needs assessment of the situation — as Mr. Lowcock
advised — in order to match those needs with
appropriate support and totally steer away from the
possibility of humanitarian intervention being used as a
pretext for increased tensions, including the possibility
of military intervention.
South Africa therefore urges all parties to respect
the need for impartiality, neutrality and independence in
the provision of humanitarian assistance to Venezuela.
We also call on the international community to support
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

the channelling of humanitarian assistance through
United Nations agencies. We are very grateful to be
able to say that we have increased personnel capacity to
more than 400. We hope to see more in Venezuela and
an increased United Nations presence in neighbouring
countries. We should also do so through other
international organizations, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, in order to promote
the much needed neutrality and impartiality for the
provision of humanitarian assistance to Venezuela.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, permit me, like
others, to thank today’s briefers.
I will focus my intervention on addressing three
points related to humanitarian situation. I think that
that is supposed to be our main focus today.
First, we are deeply concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, which we have
been following closely. As we heard in today’s briefing,
the people of Venezuela are experiencing many
difficulties. They cannot and must not be ignored.
The facts also show that there are millions of refugees
crossing the border, affecting neighbouring countries,
and that issue should also be addressed. We thank the
countries that have received those refugees. We fully
support United Nations efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance to alleviate the hardship experienced by the
people of Venezuela. Of course, we also support the
work of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs thus far. I have taken note of the three areas that
deserve the Council’s attention, as duly presented by
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock. I thank him
very much for that.
I believe that many countries represented in the
Chamber care about the plight of the Venezuelan
people and have the best of intentions. But the best
intentions are not enough. It should not matter how
assistance is being delivered. Countries should channel
their assistance to the United Nations system, which is
impartial, and gain the trust of the Venezuelan people.
What is most important is that assistance reach those
who are really in need — the people of Venezuela.
This is the time for the United Nations to once
again play the crucial role not only of good offices but
also of a good guardian of humanity, by coordinating
the delivery of international assistance. The United
Nations has the mandate and expertise, as stated in
its Charter,

S/PV. 8506

“to achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social,
cultural, or humanitarian character”.
We urge that any delivery of assistance by any parties
be guided by General Assembly resolution 46/182 and
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence. Many have already alluded to those
points. Such assistance must be free from political
objectives and should be delivered on the basis of need,
in close coordination with the Venezuelan Government
and in full respect for the country’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Certainly, it is also necessary
to create conditions that will enable the successful
provision of humanitarian assistance to the people
in need. We appreciate the granting of full access to
humanitarian personnel in Venezuela. Humanitarian
assistance should also be provided to refugees in
neighbouring countries.
That brings me to my second point, which is the
need for dialogue. Indonesia reiterates that dialogue is
the key that will significantly enable the best conditions
for the smooth flow of humanitarian aid. Indeed, to
resolve the broader situation in Venezuela, we would
once again urge all parties to prioritize dialogue and
accept the Secretary-General’s good offices in helping
resolve the crisis. In that regard, we encourage countries
that have an influence on the parties to play a positive
role. Indonesia has always believed that there has to be
a negotiated solution based on dialogue among all those
involved, including the option set forth in Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Thirdly, the Security Council, as a whole, must do
everything it can to not impede but open up avenues
that result in constructively and peacefully resolving
the ongoing situation. The Security Council has met
three times to discuss the situation in Venezuela, yet so
far it has failed to make any difference in the country.
Once again, it is another sad day for the Council. Based
on the principles of the Charter, the Council must
discharge its responsibility by assisting Venezuela in
stabilizing itself and restoring normalcy. It should work
in unity. The humanitarian challenge that has resulted
from economic and political difficulties cannot be met
unless the Council resolves to rise above its differences.
Borrowing from the national motto of Indonesia,
“Unity in diversity”, although the Council might be
diverse in its views, it must be united in its action for
the greater good of humankind. Let us show the people
of Venezuela that the Security Council can and will be

19-1051019/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

united. Let us show that we care and will not leave them
in despair and hopelessness.
I am reminded of what Dag Hammarskjöld
said: “The United Nations was not created to take
mankind to heaven, but to save humanity from hell”.
Indonesia implores the Security Council to act with
unity and determination so as to be on the right side
of history — the side of peace for Venezuela. I would
like to echo the call of Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for us to separate humanitarian objectives
from political objectives. Now is not the time for
naming and shaming. Let us focus on saving lives and
on the many children of Venezuela so that they have a
better future. I must say that after my last statement to
the Council on this issue (see S/PV.8476), I got calls
from ordinary people in Caracas, not only thanking us
for our statement but also reminding us all here in the
Council to put aside our differences and think about
all of the people of Venezuela. We have opened the
curtains in the Security Council; now let us open our
hearts and bring light to Venezuela.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me thank the briefers for
their valuable and informative contributions to today’s
discussion. Our briefers’ interventions have clearly
demonstrated to all of us the gravity of a humanitarian
situation that needs to be addressed in an urgent manner
to help the people of Venezuela.
There is no doubt that the people of Venezuela face
a dire humanitarian crisis, which is man-made and the
result of corruption and mismanagement. Furthermore,
the crisis and suffering of the people of Venezuela
continue to deteriorate due to the refusal of the de facto
regime of Nicolás Maduro to grant access to a country
that so desperately needs humanitarian aid. The reality
on the ground speaks for itself. The health sector is in
absolute collapse. The shortages of food and medicine are
regular, not sporadic. Widespread malnutrition among
children, increasing infant and maternal mortality and
the resurgence of infectious diseases long considered
eradicated should not happen in a country that has all
the necessary natural and human resources to flourish
and should lead statistically in every socioeconomic
category. What makes the case worse is that not only is
the Government unable to resolve those issues, but that
it also contributes to deepening the crisis by denying its
scale and casting aside offers of aid.
20/28

10/04/2019

Let me also thank Kathleen Page for the John
Hopkins University report. We consider the findings
very troubling.
The current humanitarian crisis in Venezuela has
had a particularly alarming effect on women and girls,
the most vulnerable groups in the majority of conflicts
and crises. The trafficking of women for sex and forced
labour is increasing throughout the region. Moreover,
women in Venezuela are facing further challenges
and risks, including a rise in sexual and gender-based
violence, shortages of feminine items and high levels of
maternal mortality.
Much remains to be done to address the extremely
urgent needs, and Venezuelan actors across the political
spectrum have the responsibility to put the interests of
the Venezuelan people at the centre of their actions at
this critical time. But it is up to the de facto regime
to acknowledge the problem first and allow large-scale
humanitarian assistance into Venezuela.
As we speak, more and more people — 5,000
every day — are crossing the borders, joining the more
than 3 million Venezuelans who have already fled the
country and leaving behind those unwilling or unable
to leave despite being forced to live in extremely
miserable conditions. The Council cannot remain idle
in the face of such a crisis, which is having an adverse
effect on the peace and security of the region.
We appreciate the efforts of the countries of Latin
America aimed at maintaining an open door and
providing assistance to refugees. A friend in need is
a friend indeed. We commend the Governments and
the peoples of Peru, Colombia — represented today
by its Foreign Minister — and Ecuador and other
neighbouring countries for the true hospitality they
have extended to the people of Venezuela.
While trying to focus on the humanitarian aspects
of this briefing, we cannot but refer to the political
background of the Venezuelan crisis. In this regard,
the two key issues to be addressed are the rule of law
and legitimacy. Given the multifaceted challenges
ahead and current absence of political dialogue, Poland
considers the National Assembly as the only power in
Venezuela that has a democratic mandate, obtained in
free, fair and credible elections. The National Assembly
and its President, Juan Guaidó, should be heard and
respected. We call once again for the full respect of his
constitutionally mandated prerogatives and immunity
for all members of the National Assembly, including of
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

its President. We further call for respect for democracy,
the rule of law and fundamental freedoms and human
rights, including the freedom of assembly. We also call
for refraining from violence.
The main challenge for the political track in this
crisis is to guarantee, with all international support,
the peaceful character of the transition process. We
are convinced that the solution to the multidimensional
crisis affecting Venezuela can only be a political,
democratic and peaceful one and that the restoration
of democracy is possible through free, transparent and
credible presidential elections. We support the initiatives
of both the European Union and the Lima Group to
find a way out of this acute crisis, which is above all
political, but with severe economic and humanitarian
consequences for the people of Venezuela. We must
therefore do our utmost to alleviate the most urgent
humanitarian needs and reduce human suffering. We
have to support Venezuelans in their hopes for a decent
life in a democratic and prosperous country. Time is
short, and we cannot remain indifferent.
Finally, we urge the de facto regime in Venezuela
to respect and fully protect the freedom of media,
including the safety and security of journalists. We
strongly condemn cases of violent attacks and acts
of intimidation against both foreign and domestic
journalists. All such cases should be investigated in a
thorough and independent manner.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would also like to welcome the participation
in today’s meeting of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Vice-President of the United
States. We thank the speakers for their thoughtful
briefings on the humanitarian situation in Venezuela.
Côte d’Ivoire, which is following developments
in Venezuela with particular attention, notes with
regret the political and institutional impasse in the
country. This political tension is seriously affecting an
already difficult economic situation and exacerbating a
humanitarian crisis marked by the deterioration of the
health and food situation and whose repercussions at
the subregional level are palpable. In total, according to
humanitarian agencies, 7 million Venezuelans, nearly
a quarter of the population, need food and medical
care. Some 3.4 million of them have found refuge in
neighbouring countries.
The humanitarian emergency in Venezuela
requires greater involvement of our Council in order

S/PV. 8506

to provide an appropriate response to the current needs
of millions of suffering people, while respecting the
principles of international humanitarian law. In this
regard, my delegation believes that, with its leadership
and great expertise in humanitarian matters, the United
Nations should play a leading role in mobilizing its
specialized agencies and coordinating the assistance
of the international community. In this perspective,
it is necessary to establish close collaboration and a
synergy of actions among the Venezuelan authorities,
the specialized agencies of the United Nations and
all international partners, in order to mobilize the
necessary resources to meet the needs and ensure safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to populations
in distress.
My country would like to remind all parties of their
obligation to respect human rights and international
humanitarian law. It also welcomes the authorization
granted to the Red Cross to distribute emergency aid
and thanks neighbouring countries for their solidarity
with the Venezuelan people.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its consistent
position in favour of a peaceful solution to the crisis. It
therefore once again urges all parties to engage in frank
negotiations to resolve the crisis.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.
First, let me pick up where our colleague from
Indonesia left off when he said that this is a sad day for
the Council. I do not share that view. I think that the
discussion today, which we as the presidency wanted
to have focus on the humanitarian situation, gives rise
to optimism. I am optimistic that, as a result of this
meeting, we will have a situation where more will be
done on the humanitarian front.
Accordingly, I also would like to thank the three
briefers for their very impressive statements. Our
Russian colleagues called into the question the basis
for their findings. Maybe afterwards they can indicate
what the basis was for those findings.
Our Russian colleague compared the situation
with regard to the measles outbreak in New York with
the measles situation in Venezuela. However, there is
one big difference between the two. If parents in New
York want to vaccinate their kids, they can go into a
pharmacy and get the vaccine. If parents in Venezuela

19-1051021/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

tried to get the vaccine for the measles in a pharmacy in
Caracas, they would be unable to find it.
In this context, I would also like to pick up on
what our Belgian colleague said with regard to arms.
I would like to express the view that what Venezuela
needs least at the present moment is a supply of military
weapons. What Venezuelans need right now is a supply
of humanitarian aid and medical assistance.
In the light of what our Indonesia colleague has
said, I would like to appeal to our Venezuelan colleague
that he recognize the dimension of the humanitarian
crisis that his country is facing and that he allow all
humanitarian actors to work in his country. These
workers need access, and they should be able to assist.
As our French colleague has reminded us, the principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
should govern the delivery of humanitarian aid. Like
others, we are alarmed about the politicization of
the humanitarian issue. That runs counter to the
humanitarian mandate.
Many speakers also alluded to the massive exodus
of Venezuelans from their country. Like nearly everyone
around the table, let me also express Germany’s
solidarity with the neighbours and pay tribute to what
Peru, Ecuador and Colombia are doing, as well as the
Foreign Minister of Colombia. I would also like to
commend the countries in the region for seeking to
coordinate their efforts in response to the humanitarian
crisis. It is the biggest refugee crisis that Latin America
has seen in its history.
On the political solution, very briefly, we need
a peaceful political process. All actors must show
restraint, refrain from the use of force and respect
human rights. We support free, transparent and credible
presidential elections organized under the leadership
of the interim President, Juan Guaidó. The European
Union is also ready to help through the International
Contact Group.
I would like to conclude by saying that we must not
leave the people of Venezuela alone.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
22/28

10/04/2019

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be very brief. It is just to clarify the
situation of vaccines. I just wanted to say that the
Government of Venezuela was ready to buy the vaccines
but, as I said, the money that had been deposited in
British and American banks was stolen from it.
It is very simple. First, the problem is created. It
is then proposed that it be resolved. That is by way
of clarification.
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I know,
Mr. President, that you do not want to prolong this. I do
not want to get into a tit for tat, but the money was not
stolen from a British bank. It is very important that we
correct such falsehoods.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): To begin, we must respond to the
host of falsehoods spoken here by the Vice-President
of the United States while we are supposed to be
discussing the humanitarian situation. I must clarify
matters before the international community, the
people of Venezuela and the media. He lied in saying
that yesterday the region as a whole rejected the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
at the Organization of American States. That is false.
He is misinformed. It is a problem with his lawyers.
Yesterday, in its eagerness to promote a coup d’état in
Venezuela and impose a puppet Government to serve
the interests of the United States to enable it to pillage
our homeland, they sacrificed the founding Charter of
that organization, which is the equivalent of the Charter
of the United Nations. They distorted the law to the
extent that what was approved was not the expulsion
of the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela but the inclusion of a representative of the
National Assembly. What they did there yesterday is
a legal absurdity, since the Organization of American
States, like the United Nations, is an organization of
States, not of assemblies. The only State present in that
organization is the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Therefore, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was
not expelled from that organization. What they now
have is a strange individual. No one understands what
he will do, because he does not represent the State of
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela but the National
Assembly. That is what is written in the resolution. So
he is lying.
I say that because the United States uses that lie to
sell its course of action to the other States Members of
United Nations to convince them to impose a puppet
Government here and that the United Nations is a club
of friends of the United States. According to him, the
only ones that can be here are the friends of the United
States, those that serve its interests and believe in the
Monroe Doctrine, which is clearly a racist policy of
more than 200 years ago, when the United States was
a slave State, and which they think can still be pushed
today when it comes to international law. But there
is no basis in international law for what he is doing.
We are certain that when the United States tries the
trick that it played yesterday at the Organization of
American States here at the General Assembly, it will
fail. We are certain of that. And we wanted to respond
to that before proceeding. It also threatens us with war:
“all options are on the table”. On what legal basis can a
country come to the Security Council table to threaten
another with war? The Security Council should address
that point as well.
Turning to the topic at hand, the humanitarian
situation in Venezuela must be resolved, but if we make
a mistake in the diagnosis, we will also make a mistake
in the treatment for its relief. As has been said here,
the situation is the result of human actions. I want to
mention something that has not been said, including
by the three briefers — and they are very quick to
gather data about the smallest non-governmental
organization, while never setting foot in Venezuela,
including Mr. Stein. He knows a great deal but is blind
before the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. However, he sees the representative of the
dictator Government in Guatemala and meets with his
representatives. But he will not meet with us to learn
what the current situation is, despite the fact that we
have invited him on several occasions.
None of the three briefers, like most members of
the Security Council, recognize that the human actions
that led to this situation are part of a plan to destroy
the economy directed by the Government of the United
States and the United Kingdom in order to strangle the
national economy, cause the greatest social suffering
possible, undermine our country’s ability to support
itself and, ultimately, bring about a collapse that allows
for a foreign military intervention under the perverse

S/PV. 8506

pretext of the responsibility to protect, which has
been the excuse for colonial invasions of countries
with oil reserves. It is a giant inhumane experiment in
unconventional warfare, a policy of calculated cruelty
and a massive violation of human rights, going as
far as committing crimes against humanity, in order
to justify an overthrow and pillage by installing a
subordinate local Government and, in our case, using
racist ideology of 200 years ago, that is, the infamous
Monroe Doctrine.
Members may think that I am exaggerating. But let
us hear the criminals in their own words. Do not listen
to me but to what they say. In January last year, that is,
more than a year ago, the State Department declared:
“the pressure campaign is working ... what we are
seeing ... is a total economic collapse in Venezuela.
So our policy is working, our strategy is working
and we are going to keep it”.
In October of last year, the United States
Ambassador, William Brownfield, said:
“We must treat this as an agony, a tragedy that
will continue until it reaches an end ... and if we
can do something to speed it up, we must do it,
understanding that this is going to have an impact
on millions of people who are already having
difficulty finding food and medicine ... We cannot
do this and pretend that it is not going to have an
impact. We have to make a hard decision. The
desired end justifies this severe punishment.”
Those are not the diplomatic words or the words of
a humanitarian worker. They are basically the words
of a psychopath. There is no name for it, it is cruel
and inhumane. It is an international crime. Severe
punishment for the entire Venezuelan people, that is
what he said.
Senator Marco Rubio, the leader of the coup d’état
in Venezuela, said:
“In the next few weeks, Venezuela is going to enter a
period of suffering that no nation in our hemisphere
has ever confronted in modern history.”
On 22 March, Mr. John Bolton, infamous in this
Organization, said, sickeningly,
“It is like in Star Wars, when Darth Vader constricts
somebody’s throat; that is what we are doing to the
regime economically”.

19-1051023/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

That is what he said; those are not my words. This
is deliberate economic destruction, the systematic
implementation of the policy of aggression through the
use of financial instruments, through the application
of undue pressure and through the use of market
dominance to influence the banking sector, private
enterprise and other nations that engage in legal trade
with Venezuela, including extorting United Nations
agencies — all of this in order to isolate our country
from the international trade and financial system.
If it were true that the Venezuelan Government,
as has been stated here many times, as part of an
incredible litany of lies, is killing its own people,
then why is this group of countries using massively
extortionate methods that only increase the suffering?
Why would that be necessary if we are already killing
our people, as they say? In fact, they are the ones
causing our social implosion. What we want is peace
and the well-being of our people. They are the ones
who want to see social implosion in order to justify an
invasion. This is a plan under which banks, insurance
companies and the shipping system are being used with
a destructive capacity comparable to that of weapons
of mass destruction, but without those responsible for
the suffering being brought to justice or suffering the
moral sanction that they deserve.
John Bolton said, “My advice to bankers …
brokers … and other businesses: do not deal in
[Venezuelan] gold or oil”. Mr. Elliot Abrams, also
infamous for his actions in Nicaragua and the Middle
East specifically, where he planned the killing of
thousands of people, stated:
“We are imposing our sanctions. What does the
regime do? It tries to find other ways to get around
them. It tries to find new customers. It tries to
find new sources of imports. So what do we do?
We watch carefully, and we can see ships moving
and we can see new contracts with new companies,
and when we do, we talk to shippers, or we talk
to refiners, or we talk to Governments, and we
say, you should not be doing that. That is what we
are doing.”
That is what was stated by Mr. Abrams, whom
some are attempting to portray as a humanitarian actor.
One repugnant aspect of this criminal policy of
mass destruction is that it goes hand in hand with looting
and pillaging. This deprives our people of basic goods,
leading to tremendous suffering and literally robbing
24/28

10/04/2019

the Venezuelan people of tens of billions of dollars.
The profits of our refineries are being confiscated;
they are using them to pay the debts of companies that
are friends of the Trump Government. Those friends
of the Trump Government hold Venezuelan bond
debt, which they are prohibited from transferring, so
they are receiving special licences from the Treasury
Department to collect their profits from the earnings
of our refineries, stolen from the people of Venezuela.
Now there is a plan to saddle the country with more
than $70 billion in indebtedness, as was just announced
jointly with the International Monetary Fund. This
$70 billion is to be used to pay the uncertified debts
created in opaque financial negotiations with friends
of the United States Government. Nor can we forget
about the Bank of England, which stole $1.2 billion in
gold from our people, under the pretext that they do not
recognize President Nicolás Maduro.
Unbelievably, the last time we brought up this point
(see S/PV.8476), the British representative stated that
this was not the case, that it was a money-laundering
issue. That is impossible, because the gold has been
there for more than 30 years, and they know where it
came from. In addition to taking more than two years
to respond to our questions, they have joined with the
Venezuelan opposition, the puppet Government that
they are supporting, saying that they are complying
with the sanctions imposed by the United States and
with the order handed down by the British Government
to recognize that puppet Government. The credibility
of the Bank of England as a neutral, transparent
organization has been ruined. It is now negative; it is
less than zero. It is an institution that is working for the
Trump Government and the British Government. It is a
colonial Power that is behaving as did English pirates
200 years ago.
This is the real cause of the situation of the
Venezuelan people. There is no other cause. Yes, our
people are suffering, but our Government — as the
Secretary-General can confirm, as can the Chef de
Cabinet, with whom I meet almost every week — is
working intensively with the United Nations system to
boost the number of cooperation projects as well as the
volume and capacity of those programmes, particularly
in the areas of health care, food, education, electricity
and transport.
By the way, Mr. President, if you were better
informed about Venezuela, you would know that
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

vaccines are available in Venezuela and that the situation
with respect to malaria, measles and diphtheria has
improved considerably owing to our cooperation with
the Pan American Health Organization. But if you keep
restating figures from two or three years ago or figures
such as the briefer presented, you will be deceiving the
public. Vaccines are available right now in Venezuela;
the situation in this respect has improved over the past
two years as a result of this cooperation.
The same is true of our cooperation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross, with whose
President our own President, Nicolás Maduro, met
yesterday in Caracas in order to make headway in the
creation of a direct mechanism that would facilitate the
provision of truly neutral, independent and impartial
assistance. The same can be said of the friendly
countries that provide assistance on a peaceful basis, in
full respect of our sovereignty.
One key factor that has been underestimated by
those who are waging war against Venezuela is the sheer
strength of our national spirit, which only grows when
we are facing difficulties. This macabre experiment in
destruction is aimed at proving that economic crimes do
work, that peoples can be broken and made to surrender
to foreign oppressors.
But they are wrong about Venezuela. The collective
suffering that they are indeed causing is resisted
by growing levels of organization on the part of our
people. Our national Bolivarian armed forces have
not broken rank despite all the calls for a coup d’état
and are more united with the people than ever. Our
people are resisting, and our workers are reacting to
the clandestine attacks and acts of sabotage against our
vital infrastructure with a discipline and celerity that
the aggressors had not imagined they would possess.
Yes, there is pain, there is suffering, but this is not
triggering a civil war, which is what they want. Today
our people are setting an example for the world of how
to fight for peace and community.
It would be logical to think that the efforts of our
Government to overcome the difficulties caused by
this aggression would be recognized and supported
by all of those who claim to be so interested in easing
the situation in Venezuela. However, what we are
experiencing is a fresh wave of economic extortion,
which is cutting off our country’s financial flows with
the exterior and is also affecting our cooperation with
United Nations agencies, which even as I speak cannot

S/PV. 8506

find a way to receive our funds and send the supplies
necessary to meet the needs of our people.
Why is that? Because the Trump Government
is engaged in a campaign of terror against any
commercial or financial actors that have anything to
do with Venezuelan money. We have money; we are not
asking anyone for anything. We have money, but the
Trump Government is terrorizing economic actors to
ensure that they do not touch it. What the United States
is engaged in has nothing to do with humanitarian
assistance; it is a clandestine operation carried out
without the consent of Venezuela that violates our
territorial integrity through the threat of the use
of force, as we have seen, and is aimed at inciting a
military uprising and civil war. That is the specialty of
that Government.
The Security Council, under Articles 24, 34
and 39 of the Charter, has the responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and to
determine the existence of any threat to the peace or of
any act of aggression. We therefore ask and call on the
Council to please determine the following.
First, what is the legal basis in international law
and under the Charter of the United Nations for the
United Nations and the United Kingdom to impose
on Venezuela a programme of economic destruction
without the express authorization of the Security
Council? Are they taking measures in line with those
provided for under Article 41 of the Charter of the United
Nations — measures for economic blockade — with the
authorization of the Council? This is illegal. When will
the Council determine the illegality of this aggression?
Secondly, what is the legal authority for applying
what is now being called “secondary sanctions” against
countries that are legally transacting business with
Venezuela? What authority does the Government of the
United States have to place sanctions on any country
for doing business with us?
Thirdly, what is the legal basis in international law
for the United States to threaten Venezuela with the
use of military force? Where is that? Why is there no
pronouncement on that?
Fourthly, what is the legal authority for the United
States and the United Kingdom to appropriate our
wealth? The representative of the United Kingdom
said they were extending $9 million. Do we have to
thank them for offering $9 million for the situation in

19-1051025/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Venezuela, when they have $1.2 billion in confiscated
funds in the vaults of the Bank of England and they
say that the Bank of England is an independent
institution — while the Bank of England says it does
not obey what the British Government says to them?
That is the subject of a case we have against them in
court at the moment. What is the legal authority for the
United States and the United Kingdom to appropriate
our wealth and gain extortive earnings by massively
violating the human rights of our people?
Lastly, what is the legal basis for the United States
to intervene in what are essentially matters having
to do with Venezuela’s domestic jurisdiction, in
violation of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the Charter of the
United Nations?
In conclusion, the diagnosis of the present situation
is that it is the result of a campaign of aggression by
the United States and the United Kingdom. Treating the
situation cannot be by way of a new dose of aggressive
intervention with a humanitarian mask. The solution does
not lie in donations by the criminals who want to paint
themselves as saviours. It does not lie in humanitarian
channels designed to provoke armed conflicts. It does
not lie in holding donors conferences that serve to hide
the plunder against our nation. Addressing the situation
requires returning the money stolen from our people;
halting the economic and financial blockade against
our nation; stopping the sabotage of our infrastructure
through covert operations; ceasing threats of military
intervention; and ending threats against Venezuelans
who want to have a dialogue. We must stop Trump’s war,
and the Security Council must meet its responsibility
by guaranteeing Venezuela its right to peace.
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I apologize for taking
the floor again, but I cannot allow those allegations
against the Bank of England to go unaddressed.
I reject completely the allegations made by the
Venezuelan Ambassador. He has made them before. I
wrote to the then President of the Security Council — the
Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea — on
21 February, rejecting the allegations (S/2019/176). I
will have that letter circulated again and we will put
it on our website. But for the benefit of the record,
the Bank of England’s reputation is world-renowned.
26/28

10/04/2019

It operates to the highest standards. It has operational
independence from the British Government.
The President: The representative of Peru has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
shall be very brief. I do not believe there is a need to
respond to a person who does not represent a country
but instead represents an illegitimate Government.
What we would like to highlight — I think it is very
important, and several speakers have mentioned it — is
the issue of Venezuelan refugees and migrants. Many
countries in the region are making enormous efforts in
that regard. We in Peru host 750,000 migrants, whom
we have welcomed with our own resources. I mentioned
this issue a little more than a month ago (see S/PV.8476),
and Mr. Maduro’s representative could not respond
to the question of why he did not mention this very
grave situation being lived by hundreds of thousands
of Venezuelans.
Also on that occasion, we listened with great
surprise how frivolously we were being told that the
situation in Venezuela was normal and that people were
preparing for the carnival festivities and to go to the
beach. And, once again today, we heard that the situation
is basically caused by sanctions — by foreign action.
As I said in my statement, the very grave humanitarian
and economic crisis is of internal making. For years,
like other countries, Peru has been receiving increasing
flows of refugees, which will grow even larger unless
there is a change in the situation. We can therefore in
no way accept that argument being used to confuse
global public opinion when it comes to a crisis that is
exclusively of internal making.
The President: The representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): First, on the Bank of England, we
are going to circulate to all Members of the United
Nations and to the general public the truth about this
situation. The Bank of England is not independent, as
confirmed in letters to our representatives stating that it
is following the sanctions imposed by the Government
of the United States. The Bank of England is not
independent when it communicates with representatives
of the dictatorship imposed by the Government of the
United States — rather, that it wants to impose — on
19-10510

10/04/2019

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Venezuela. The Bank of England does not enjoy great
prestige, given that what it is doing to us now it did to
Libya previously. The Bank of England simply takes
advantage: when it sees an opportunity to confiscate
the wealth of a country it thinks has weaknesses, it
changes its mind.
The latest example is this: the British Government
says that its traditional policy is to recognize States, not
Governments, and that they are not going to change it.
But they did change it in the case of Venezuela. Now
they are saying that they are not recognizing a State, but
a new puppet Government that does not even control a
single street in Venezuela. The Bank of England adjusts
itself to that new policy, and now the President of the
Central Bank of Venezuela, with whom the Bank of
England has dealt with for years, says that he is not
recognized because the British Government changed its
mind. That is not an independent bank. And those who
keep their gold there have to be very careful, for it is
in danger.
With regard to what the Ambassador of Peru said,
he has to be reminded that the United Nations is not a
club of the friends of Peru, or the United States, and
that Peru’s bilateral relations — for whoever recognizes
Peru, or not — has no bearing on my participation as the
representative of the State of Venezuela at the United
Nations. My rights here are conferred by the legitimacy
of my Government within Venezuela, and not by what
the Ambassador of Peru or the Vice-President of the
United States might say. Whoever thinks that their
enemies have to be pushed out of the United Nations
and the Organization of American States has not
understood the principles set out in the Charter of the
United Nations or those of multilateralism. I therefore
raise the warning about the campaign that is starting
today to try call into question our rights and those of all
Members of the Organization.
With regard to the issue of migratory flows, I must
say that there is in fact migration in Venezuela — and
there is an economic cause behind it. But it is ridiculous
to talk about refugees here, for a refugee is technically
someone fleeing a political situation whose life is in
danger and has no possibility of going back. Anybody
who wants to can come back to Venezuela. In fact,
thousands are going back from many countries. They
come and go, yes. There are countries where thousands
of people come and go every day. They cannot be called
refugees; they are economic migrants.

S/PV. 8506

However, the Ambassador of Peru wants the issue
of economic refugees to be made a criminal or security
matter here at the Security Council. If that is the case,
then he should also be concerned about the refugees
travelling in caravans to the United States border
and the fact that President Trump is responding with
a wall and an army and is declaring an emergency
humanitarian situation. But the Ambassador of Peru
does not seem to think that such a serious matter should
be addressed in the Security Council, only the issue of
Venezuela. That double standard is what we came here
to denounce. The economic situation is in a bad state
and is difficult, but what cannot happen to bring in the
Security Council to try to criminalize the Venezuelan
Government and create the conditions for an invasion.
That is what we came here to denounce. We also came
here for the Council to investigate and determine
whether there really is a legal basis for the aggression
against our people.
The President: As the briefers have been addressed
during our discussion, I would like to give them the
opportunity to take the floor.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: You asked me a question, Sir, about
the basis on which we are assessing humanitarian need
in Venezuela, and I would be happy, if the Security
Council wished, to provide a written explanation of
how we do that. In summary, however, in the interest of
time, as I said in my statement, the work we have done
so far has been on the basis of all of the available data.
We have, in the best way we were able to in Venezuela,
applied our tried and tested methodology that we use
all over the world to assess humanitarian need. We have
applied our standard system for caveating and quality
controlling the use of the data and the judgments
we make on the data. Again, as I said earlier, we are
keen to sustain the consultations we have with the
Government and others, because the only basis for
principled humanitarian action as the situation evolves
is a serious and professional ongoing effort to assess
humanitarian need.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Stein.
Mr. Stein: I will refer to only two points.
First, with respect to the legitimacy of the
data, we carefully picked our data based on the
immigration data of legal crossings at Government
border installations of the migration authorities of the

19-1051027/28

S/PV.8506

The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

receiving countries, and, of course, the hardest hit has
been Colombian territory. But if we were to include
the various video recordings of irregular footpaths,
blind trails or unofficial border points, which are used
on a daily basis by different numbers of unrecorded
Venezuelans crossing irregularly, the numbers would
go well above the mark of 4 million. As those present
know, irregularity increases vulnerability. But we
have chosen not to include those irregular numbers of
blind crossings.
Secondly, with all due respect, I would like to
set the record straight about what was said by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
in the Security Council today. I was officially invited
by his Administration last year, and on 16 November I
personally met with Foreign Minister Arreaza. I never
ever resisted or gave any indication of not being willing
to accept the invitation to go to Caracas. The only
request I made was for an agenda of the visit, in other
words, the reason they were inviting me. Insofar as I
must remind the members of the Security Council, our
mandate is basically humanitarian, to attend to those
people who have left Venezuelan territory. But, in any
case, Foreign Minister Arreaza agreed that they would
send a proposed agenda for my visit, for which I am
still waiting.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Page.
Ms. Page: With regard to the question regarding
the data, as I mentioned, we did some site visits,

28/28

10/04/2019

we spoke to workers within and outside Venezuela
and also reviewed public data published by the Pan
American Health Organization and the World Health
Organization. Further details about our methodology
are published in the peer-reviewed article in The
Lancet that came out two weeks ago, for those who are
interested in reviewing that.
I also want to highlight that we in fact obtained
official data, when we could. To highlight one point, as I
mentioned, childhood mortality and maternal mortality
increased pretty significantly from 2015 to 2016. That
data comes from official reports from the Venezuelan
Ministry of Health, and that increase preceded the
economic sanctions were mentioned.
The President: The representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): I hope that this is the last time I
take the floor. I would like to point out to Mr. Stein that
we have a letter that he himself signed that states that
he cannot come to Venezuela, despite our invitation,
because his mandate does not allow it. That is why we
made a formal complaint to the Office of the SecretaryGeneral, as we have a document that proves that he did
not want to meet. That is why we said that we have
proof in hand.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

19-10510
