S/PV.9171

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9171st meeting

Thursday, 27 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Mythen
Ms. Mbabu
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-65714 (E)
*2265714*

S/PV.9171

Threats to international peace and security

period of four days, and was chaired by Ambassador
György Molnár of Hungary.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Adedeji
Ebo, Director and Deputy to the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ebo.
Mr. Ebo: We are aware that the Russian Federation
has filed an official complaint, in line with the provisions
of article VI of the Biological Weapons Convention
(BWC), regarding allegations of biological weapons
programmes in Ukraine. As High Representative
Nakamitsu informed the Council in March and May,
the United Nations is not aware of any such biological
weapons programmes. That remains the case today. I
would also like to note that the United Nations currently
has neither the mandate nor the technical or operational
capacity to investigate that information.
As High Representative Nakamitsu has previously
stated in the Council, the relevant instrument of
international law is the 1972 Biological Weapons
Convention, which effectively prohibits the development,
production, acquisition, transfer, stockpiling and use of
biological and toxin weapons. The Russian Federation
and Ukraine are both States parties to the Biological
Weapons Convention.
On 29 June, Russia submitted a request for the
convening of a formal consultative meeting under
article V of the BWC and the Final Declarations of the
Convention’s second and third Review Conferences.
In accordance with the agreed timelines, an informal
meeting to discuss the arrangements for the formal
meeting took place in Geneva on 27 July, chaired by
Ambassador Aidan Liddle of the United Kingdom.
The formal consultative meeting opened on Friday,
26 August 2022 for a brief procedural meeting. It then
resumed its business on Monday, 5 September, for a
2/14

27/10/2022

The meeting heard the presentation by the Russian
Federation of its article V consultation request
regarding respective outstanding questions by the
Russian Federation to the United States and Ukraine
concerning the fulfilment of their respective obligations
under the Convention in the context of the operation of
biological laboratories in Ukraine. The meeting also
heard the response by the delegations of Ukraine and
the United States. Each delegation then made further
statements amplifying points raised in their statements.
Additionally, the meeting heard national statements
from 42 States parties and one signatory State. There
then followed an opportunity to respond for the Russian
Federation, the United States and Ukraine.
States parties welcomed the fact that the delegations
of the Russian Federation, Ukraine and the United States
had sought to clarify their positions with respect to the
issue at hand. States parties noted that the consultation
was fully in conformity with the conclusions of the
final document of the third Review Conference relevant
to the application of article V of the Convention. The
formal consultative meeting concluded with States
parties adopting a report agreeing that “No consensus
was reached regarding the outcome of the formal
consultative meeting”, The adoption of the report
marked the end of the formal consultation process.
The provisions of article VI have not been invoked
since entry into force of the Biological Weapons
Convention. Article VI of the Biological Weapons
Convention states the following:
“(1) Any State Party to this Convention which
finds that any other State Party is acting in breach
of obligations deriving from the provisions of the
Convention may lodge a complaint with the Security
Council of the United Nations. Such a complaint
should include all possible evidence confirming its
validity, as well as a request for its consideration by
the Security Council.
“(2) Each State Party to this Convention
undertakes to cooperate in carrying out any
investigation which the Security Council may
initiate, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, on the basis of the
complaint received by the Council. The Security
Council shall inform the States Parties to the
Convention of the results of the investigation.”
22-65714

27/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

The Convention does not provide any guidance on
the type of investigation that the Council may initiate.
States parties have also not developed any specific
guidance or procedures concerning the modalities to be
employed the purposes of an article VI investigation.
Should the Council initiate an investigation, the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs stands ready
to support it.
As High Representative Nakamitsu has mentioned
previously, the operations and institutional structures
of the BWC must be further bolstered to ensure it
is properly equipped and resourced to face future
challenges. The Convention’s upcoming ninth Review
Conference in November and December this year
presents the ideal opportunity for its States parties to
comprehensively strengthen the Convention.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ebo
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We note the briefing of Deputy
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mr. Adedeji Ebo.
Russia requested the convening of this meeting
of the Security Council on the basis of article VI of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their
Destruction (BWC) in order for the Council to consider
a complaint lodged on 24 October, which contains
evidence of violations of the BWC by Ukraine and the
United States in the context of activities of biological
laboratories in Ukraine. The complaint is contained in
a letter that was circulated on 25 October as an official
document of the Security Council (S/2022/796).
The Russian Federation has long repeatedly
expressed concern over military biological activities
carried out with the direct assistance and participation
of the United States Department of Defense in
laboratories on the territories of former Soviet
republics, far from the North American continent and
close to Russia’s borders. Such activities are conducted,
inter alia, indirectly through the Pentagon’s Defense
Threat Reduction Agency and private companies
that are standing contractors of the United States
Department of Defense, including the Black & Veatch
Special Projects Corp., CH2M Hill and Metabiota. This

S/PV.9171

poses a direct threat to the biological security of the
Russian Federation.
In the course of the special military operation in
Ukraine, the Russian Federation has obtained a variety
of documents and evidence revealing the true nature
of the military biological activities of the United
States Department of Defense and its contractors with
Ukraine in the military biological area. This has been
presented in detail at numerous briefings of the Russian
Ministry of Defence and meetings of the Security
Council. Analysis of those materials offers evidence of
non-compliance by the American and Ukrainian sides
with the provisions of the BWC.
When making the decision to lodge a complaint
and call for a Security Council meeting, Russia acted in
full compliance with the understanding of BWC States
parties anchored in the final documents of the second
and third BTWC Review Conferences. Before resorting
to the mechanism of article VI, we made every effort
to have the situation settled in bilateral and multilateral
formats. In mid-June, we sent aide memoires to the
United States and Ukraine in which we articulated
specific questions regarding their compliance with
articles I and IV of the Convention and asked for detailed
answers to those. However, neither Washington, D.C.,
nor Kyiv provided any clarification, and neither took
urgent measures to remedy the situation.
In light of the outstanding unacceptable situation
in the area of biological security, in late June 2022 we
sent a request to the two depositaries of the BWC to
initiate a procedure for calling a consultative meeting
under article V of the BWC, and attached thereto a
large volume of documents to justify on our concerns.
In late July, informal consultations were held to host
a preliminary discussion of organizational issues of
the pending meeting. The consultative meeting itself
convened on 26 August and from 5 to 9 September. The
very fact that the meeting was held and the substantive
nature of the discussion confirm the relevance of the
problem that we raised, which affects not only Russia
but the entire global community.
We proceeded on the assumption that the consultative
meeting would allow the delegations concerned,
with the support of their experts, to gain a thorough
understanding of the situation, exchange assessments,
ask professional questions and receive detailed answers.
During the meeting, we made every necessary effort
to provide detailed materials and arguments to enable
the consultative meeting to achieve its objectives and

22-657143/14

S/PV.9171

Threats to international peace and security

resolve the situation related to military and biological
activities on the territory of Ukraine. We expected the
representatives of the United States and Ukraine to
provide all required clarifications on the substance of
our concerns, and hoped to encourage Washington and
Kyiv to adopt comprehensive and exhaustive measures
to improve the current situation.
However, based on the results of the exchange of
views among participating States, we must say that the
overwhelming majority of the claims put forward by
Russia have not been appropriately addressed. As stated
in the final report of the consultative meeting, it was
not possible to reach consensus on the questions raised;
they remain open and must be resolved. The Russian
Federation reiterates that we still have questions for
the United States and Ukraine regarding compliance
with their obligations under the BWC in the context
of biological laboratories operating in Ukraine. We
circulated a list of those questions together with our
formal complaint so that all participants in this meeting
would have an opportunity to study it.
In accordance with article VI of the BWC, any
State party to the Convention which finds that any other
State party is acting in breach of obligations deriving
from the provisions of the Convention may lodge a
complaint with the Security Council. In doing so, each
State party undertakes to cooperate in carrying out any
investigation that the Security Council may initiate, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, on the basis of the complaint received
by the Council. In that connection, Russia has lodged a
complaint with the Security Council under article VI of
the BWC, in which we state that the United States and
Ukraine have committed acts violating their obligations
under the BWC and request the Security Council to
convene a meeting to consider that complaint.
In accordance with article VI of the Convention, the
complaint includes all possible evidence confirming its
validity. Under the 2005 Agreement between the United
States Department of Defense and the Ministry of
Health of Ukraine Concerning Cooperation in the Area
of Prevention of Proliferation of Technology, Pathogens
and Expertise that could be Used in the Development
of Biological Weapons, the Pentagon may provide the
Ministry of Health of Ukraine with assistance in the
area of “cooperative biological research, biological
threat agent detection and response” with regard
to “dangerous pathogens located at the facilities
in Ukraine”, as stated in article 3. Article 4 of the
4/14

27/10/2022

Agreement stipulates that all pathogens can be stored
only at the laboratories assisted by the United States
Department of Defense, and that the samples of all
strains collected in Ukraine and data generated by the
infectious disease surveillance in that country must
be transferred to the United States. The deliverables
under the Agreement, as well as the information on its
implementation, are by default sensitive or restricted
under article 7. At the same time, representatives of the
Pentagon or its contractors, in accordance with article
5, shall have the right to participate in all activities
related to the implementation of the Agreement.
The direct United States Department of Defense
involvement in the financing of military and biological
activities in Ukraine is reflected in the 2018 plan
for the provision of technical assistance to certain
recipients of the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine under
the 2005 Agreement. The real recipients of funds are
laboratories of the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence
located in Kyiv, Lviv, Odesa and Kharkiv. Black &
Veatch Special Projects Corp. was designated as the
implementation contractor. By 2020, the number of
Ukrainian laboratories involved in the work funded by
the Pentagon through the Defense Threat Reduction
Agency and Black & Veatch Special Projects Corp. had
reached 30, located in 14 communities, as set out in the
relevant registration card.
A final report upon review of the microorganism
strain collection at the I. Mechnikov Anti-Plague
Scientific and Research Institute in Odesa gives vivid
insight into the scale and focus of these military and
biological activities. According to that document, the
Institute had 422 cholera storage units and 32 anthrax
storage units. Of note is a large number of test tubes that
contained the same strains from different subcultures.
In the absence of any recent mass outbreaks of these
diseases in Ukraine, the range and accumulated
volumes of bioagents challenge their alleged preventive,
protective or other peaceful purposes.
At the same time, the list of studied pathogens is not
in line with current Ukraine’s health issues, as outlined
in World Health Organization documents — including
measles, poliomyelitis, tuberculosis and other socially
significant infections — but includes pathogens of
dangerous infectious diseases that are potential agents
of biological weapons. The documents obtained
contain descriptions of the UP-4, Flu-Flyway and P-781
projects to study the possibility of spreading dangerous
infections through migratory birds, including highly
22-65714

27/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

pathogenic influenza and Newcastle disease, and
bats — including pathogens of plague, leptospirosis,
brucellosis, as well as coronaviruses and filoviruses
that are potentially infectious to humans — that can
be considered means of delivery. The geographic scope
of both projects includes Russian regions bordering
Ukraine and the territory of Russia itself.
In addition, on 9 March, on the territory of the
Kherson region, the Armed Forces of the Russian
Federation discovered three unmanned aerial vehicles
equipped with 30-litre containers and equipment that
could be used to spray bioagents. In late April, 10
more drones of the same type were found in the area
of Kakhovka. These facts are of particular importance
in light of a confirmed request from the Ukrainian side
to the manufacturer of Bayraktar unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs)concerning the maximum payload of
Bayraktar Akıncı UAVs, with a flight range up to 300
kilometres, and the possibility of equipping them with
an aerosol-generating system with a capacity of 20
litres and higher.
Unanswered question remain concerning United
States patent No. US8967029B1, of 3 March 2015, issued
by the United States Patent and Trademark Office for an
unmanned aerial vehicle equipped for the aerial release
of infected mosquitoes, that is, for a device designed to
be applied as a technical means of delivery and use of a
biological weapon — biological and immunobiological
agents, bacteria and viruses — including highly
contagious — “that could wipe out 100 per cent of
enemy troops”.
According to the description, such a drone
transports a container housing a huge number of
infection-transmitting mosquitoes to be released at a
designated area. The attacked people are infected with
highly contagious diseases via mosquito bites. The
description clearly states that an infected solider will not
be able to fulfil his assigned mission, and that therefore
“the sickness can be a more valuable military tool than
the most up-to-date military guns and equipment”. It is
indicated that “infecting enemy’s personnel in such a
way would have significant military effect”.
In accordance with United States legislation, a
patent cannot be issued in the United States unless a
complete description of the actual machine assembly
is provided. It therefore follows that a container as a
bioagent delivery means has been developed and can be
quickly manufactured.

S/PV.9171

Ukraine fails to mention data on the programmes
and projects ongoing since 2016 — including UP-4, FluFlyway and P-781 — and funding by a foreign State’s
military department in its annual reporting under the
BWC confidence-building measures developed by
the States parties in order to prevent or reduce the
occurrence of ambiguities, doubts and suspicions. This
raises the question of a violation of political obligations
regarding the submission of data on confidence-building
measures adopted by the States parties to the BWC.
The United States reports also omit data on the
programmes and projects implemented outside United
States national territory, or on the financing thereof.
Our repeated appeals to the American side to provide
exhaustive explanations with respect to such activities
remain without due feedback in essence. Such secrecy
and neglect of Russian claims by the United States only
confirms their validity.
The circumstances described and the nature of
military and biological activities carried out in Ukraine
testify to the violations of provisions of BWC articles
I and IV by the United States and Ukraine. Such
assessments are also confirmed by the analytical reports
of the Kherson Department of the Security Service of
Ukraine, dated 30 June 2016 and 28 February 2017.
It is indicated therein that the United States Defense
Threat Reduction Agency programmes implemented
through the Black & Veatch Special Projects Corp.
were intended to establish control over the functioning
of microbiological laboratories in Ukraine conducting
research on pathogens of infectious diseases that can
be used to create or update biological weapons. It is
indicated that projects subordinate to the military
department of a foreign State are conducive to allowing
foreign specialists to penetrate regional biolaboratories
and familiarize themselves with strategic developments.
We have submitted a draft resolution to the
Security Council. In accordance with article VI of the
BWC, the draft is aimed at establishing and dispatching
a Security Council commission to investigate into the
claims against the United States and Ukraine contained
in the complaint of the Russian Federation regarding
compliance with their obligations under the BWC in the
context of the activities of biological laboratories in the
territory of Ukraine. The draft is under discussion at the
expert level, and we count on its prompt endorsement
and adoption.
We hope that the Council commission will be
able to speedily clarify all circumstances of potential

22-657145/14

S/PV.9171

Threats to international peace and security

non-compliance by Washington, D.C., and Kyiv with
their obligations under the BWC in the context of
biolaboratory activities in Ukrainian territory with a
view to stimulating the American and Ukrainian sides
to remedy the outstanding intolerable situation. We
also expect that the commission will present a relevant
report on the issue containing recommendations to
the Council no later than 30 November and inform the
BWC States parties of the results of the investigation
at the ninth Review Conference, to be held in Geneva
from 28 November to 16 December.
Russia will articulate its further approach to
ensuring national, regional and global biological
security depending on the results of the consideration of
our complaint and the Security Council draft resolution.
The outcomes of this work will also define our position
with regard to the strengthening of the BWC and
resolving the situation with violations of the Treaty
by the United States and Ukraine in the context of the
activity of United States biolabs on Ukrainian territory.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank Mr. Ebo
for his briefing.
We regret that yet again this Chamber is being used
as a stage for the Russian disinformation campaign. The
sole purpose of these false allegations is to provide a
smoke-screen aimed at sowing confusion and drawing
attention away from Russia’s own unprovoked, illegal
and brutal warfare in Ukraine.
Let me be clear — Norway is determined to uphold
a total ban on biological weapons. Allegations of the
violation of the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)
are something we take seriously and merit scrutiny.
Norway has meticulously assessed the documents
provided by the Russian Federation, circulated to the
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) and the Council.
Norway also listened carefully to the exchanges during
the formal consultations under article V earlier this
fall. Yet we have heard nothing and read nothing that
even comes close to substantiating the allegations put
forward. The consultations did not demonstrate cause
for concern regarding violations of the BWC by the
United States and Ukraine.
Contrary to Russia’s assertions, the documentation
strongly suggests that the cited cooperation between
the United States and Ukraine indeed had a legitimate,
peaceful purpose — a purpose fully in line with the
provisions on international cooperation and assistance
in article X of the BWC. It is intolerable that Russia
6/14

27/10/2022

repeatedly uses the BWC’s mechanisms to criticise
international assistance, which is encouraged under
article X, a cornerstone of the Convention. We know,
now better than ever, that cross-border cooperation is
essential to strengthening our collective resilience to
biological threats. It is therefore imperative that we
speak out forcefully and resolutely against attempts
to falsely frame peaceful cooperation and assistance
activities as a form of non-compliance.
In recent months Russia has made numerous
allegations that Ukraine is planning military operations
that involve chemical, biological or radioactive material.
But let me say again that Russia’s war against Ukraine
is a blatant violation of law and the very principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Let me end by underscoring again that Norway
condemns Russia’s war against Ukraine. We demand that
Russia halt fighting, withdraw its troops immediately
and stop causing death, suffering and destruction.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
The United Nations was established following
the Second World War with the objective of saving
humankind from the scourge of war. Ensuring that
weapons of mass destruction of any kind are never
used is at the very heart of that commitment. The
Council must be unified in sending a clear message
that any use of biological, chemical or other weapons
of mass destruction under any circumstances is
unacceptable and would constitute an attack against
our shared humanity.
The international consensus around the prohibition
of the use of weapons of mass destruction is built on wellestablished international legal frameworks, including
the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), to which
the United Arab Emirates is committed. According
to the Convention, biological weapons must never be
developed, produced, stockpiled, acquired, retained
or transferred. Their use in conflict or in any other
setting is unacceptable. We also recall the importance
of supporting and facilitating the research of biological
agents for peaceful purposes, including notably for the
prevention of disease, in line with the Convention.
We encourage all States parties to the Convention
to resolve their disagreements through constructive
dialogue. In practical terms, this means that when
issues arise under the Convention, parties consult
one another and cooperate to resolve differences.
22-65714

27/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

The formal consultative meetings held in August and
September represented an example of that commitment
by the States parties.
Finally, we once again call for de-escalation, a
cessation of hostilities throughout Ukraine, and finding
a diplomatic solution to this conflict. We stress again
that dialogue is the only sustainable way to avoid the
dangerous path that we now find ourselves on. We
urge the parties to identify and commit to working on
specific areas where positive steps forward may be
feasible. We also believe that by building confidence in
an incremental way, we may work towards achieving a
sustainable peace.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank our Mr. Ebo for his very clear briefing.
I would like to start by reaffirming the United
Kingdom’s deep commitment to the Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention (BWC).
On 24 February, Russia invaded Ukraine — an
act of aggression in clear violation of international
law that the General Assembly voted overwhelmingly
to condemn. Since then, the Russian Federation has
repeatedly spread disinformation, including wild
claims involving dirty bombs, chemical weapons and
offensive biological research. How much more of this
nonsense do we need to endure?
As we have heard, Russia’s allegations were
given a full hearing last month, in accordance with
the processes set out under article V of the Biological
and Toxin Weapons Convention. Eighty-nine States
parties attended that meeting and listened as Russia
delivered nothing but misrepresentations of assorted
public documents and copy-and-pasted images from
Wikipedia. The response from the other States parties
was clear and overwhelming: Russia must end its
aggression and disinformation campaign against
Ukraine, and Russia must stop demonizing legitimate,
peaceful scientific and technical cooperation, which all
BWC States parties have a right to participate in under
article X of the Convention, and which is rightly valued
by many States parties.
That process has now concluded. Russia’s claims
have been heard, considered and rejected. The bar has
not been met for further investigation and proposals for
further action would be a waste of the Council’s time.
The Council is a serious body and risks being brought
into disrepute by Russia’s actions. There are plenty of
issues that demand our attention, but Russia is clogging

S/PV.9171

up the agenda with conspiracy theories. Instead of
attempting to smear Ukraine, Russia should focus on
its own obligations, including under the Charter of the
United Nations, and end this war.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): This is the fourth or fifth
meeting — I have lost track — called by the same
delegation, on the same issue, to listen to the same
things, with the same outcome: nothing. The agenda
for this meeting could therefore have been: Security
Council briefing on nothing — a new agenda item of
the Council.
Let us be very clear — we take issues of weapons
of mass destruction very seriously. We listen very
carefully to reports, look for evidence and are and will
always be ready to do the right thing is case of need.
But there has to be a case, and we do not find it here.
Therefore, my question is: Does the Security Council
not have anything better or more important to do than to
succumb to an incurable obsession and keep spending
its time and resources in such misuse? Because that is
the sad reality nowadays. When the Council is not being
blocked, paralysed or held hostage, it is simply misused
and drained. Have we not we enough of such endless
smokescreens to divert attention from real issues, from
the terrible debacle on the ground, with the sole aim
of feeding the domestic and international opinion with
parole, parole?
Throughout this year, on every occasion we
have listened carefully to the Russian claims, which
to date, as confirmed once more today by Mr. Ebo,
remain unfounded, unverified, unsubstantiated and
uncorroborated. As we have said many times here on
this issue and other related issues, the only way to
verify claims is to make use of the mechanisms we
have. We have a Convention; we have mechanisms; we
have established procedures; we have rules. What more
do we need?
Article V of the Biological Weapons Convention
(BWC) provides all member States with a mechanism
for dialogue and consultation to clarify issues related
to the application of the Convention. It was convened
in August, and it was inconclusive; that should be
the proper process in any circumstance, instead of
disseminating false and messy information that does
not meet any scientific parametres or criteria, and
making baseless accusations against member States.
We cannot be thrown into and stay in the propaganda
courtyard just because Russia has decided to talk and

22-657147/14

S/PV.9171

Threats to international peace and security

27/10/2022

listen to itself and misuse the Council, exporting a
distorted reality.

infectious diseases. Those facilities make it possible to
detect and diagnose diseases.

Documents presented by Russia do not present any
tangible evidence to demonstrate any violation of the
BWC in Ukraine. The scientific research and projects
mentioned therein are within the prerogatives of
article X, one of the pillars of the Convention, devoted
to international biological cooperation for peaceful
purposes. Therefore, the allegations made and the
conclusions drawn are neither convincing nor credible
and, in our view, do not constitute any breach by the
United States and Ukraine of their obligations under the
BWC. We have heard again today a lot of accusations,
including about different pathogens and deadly
mosquitoes. I wonder how those mosquitoes would be
able to distinguish between Russians and Ukrainians.

We hear Russia raise alarms that biological
weapons will be delivered by birds and bats, and now
even mosquitoes. Birds and bats —Russia knows that
public health laboratories routinely study migratory
animal species to assess and counter animal-borne
pathogens. We must bear in mind that, much like
Russia, birds and bats do not tend to observe or respect
sovereign borders. Russia’s assertions are absurd for
many reasons, including because such species, even
if they could be weaponized, would pose as much a
threat to the European continent and to Ukraine itself
as they would to any other country. Ukraine’s scientific
studies do not amount to a malicious conspiracy. To
the contrary, they constitute a laudable public health
campaign. The United States is proud to have assisted
Ukraine in doing that work safely and securely, as we
have with other countries.

The use of disinformation and misinformation,
in particular by States or those affiliated to them, is
never candid. It always has a purpose. It often is used
as a cover for something else, and we do not want to
believe that this is a pretext for further escalation and
the possible use of chemical or biological weapons in
Ukraine by Russia. That should never happen, and we
hope it will not happen. It is the Russian war that is
deadly and that is causing victims, and it is this war that
must stop. That is what we should be discussing and
deciding upon here.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Mr. Ebo for his informative briefing
this afternoon.
I am going to keep my remarks short because,
frankly, this meeting is a waste of everyone’s time.
Russia has called us here once again for the sole purpose
of spreading disinformation. We all know those claims
are pure fabrications, brought forth without a shred
of evidence. And I would even venture to say that
the Russian delegation knows that these charges are
fabricated, but it dutifully carries out marching orders
from President Putin. Still, I must take this opportunity
to set the record straight.
Ukraine does not have a biological weapons
programme. We just heard Mr. Ebo say that the United
Nations is not aware of any such programmes. The United
States does not have a biological weapons programme.
There are no Ukrainian biological weapons laboratories
supported by the United States. Ukraine does own and
operate a public health laboratory infrastructure, as
do many countries that seek to guard themselves from
8/14

Respecting the Biological Weapons Convention,
we presented our arguments in detail in the article V
consultative meeting of States parties to the Convention
in Geneva just last month. Russia failed to convince the
States parties of its false claims in Geneva. Now it is
trying to see if its lies can gain traction in the Security
Council. But Russia will continue to be frustrated,
because unfortunately for that country, facts do not
lie. We take our obligations under the Biological
Weapons Convention seriously and participate fully,
transparently and with integrity in the procedures
outlined in the treaty.
The same cannot be said for Russia. It is Moscow
that has long maintained a biological weapons
programme in violation of international law. And
it is Moscow that has a well-documented history of
using chemical weapons and shielding the Al-Assad
regime, which has repeatedly used chemical weapons,
from accountability.
Russia is right to claim that the Council has the
power to investigate violations of certain international
obligations. That is exactly why we believe there
should be an investigation into whether Russia illegally
procured Iranian unmanned aerial vehicles. But here
is the difference, and it is a big one. We have ample
evidence of our claims. All Russia has are bizarre
conspiracies — conspiracies that are no more credible
today than when they were first brought it to the Council
six months ago.
22-65714

27/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

So, while I believe that this meeting is a colossal
waste of time — and we should decide just how much
of our time we allow Russia to waste — I am glad the
Council has the chance to see Russia’s disinformation
campaign for what it is — an attempt to distract from
the atrocities Russian forces are carrying out in Ukraine
and a desperate tactic to justify an unjustifiable war.
It does not matter how many meetings Russia tries
to call on this subject, and it does not matter how hard
it ratchets up its propaganda machine. We must not
divert United Nations resources towards a baseless
investigation and we must not allow Russia’s tactics to
distract us from its brutal war of aggression. To do so
would be to give in to lies and undermine the credibility
and the dignity of the Council.

S/PV.9171

Ghana remains concerned about the ongoing war in
Ukraine, and more so with the increasing prospect of
the use of weapons of mass destruction as the conflict
escalates. Ghana therefore reiterates its call on both
parties to exercise restraint and avoid the deliberate
or accidental release of chemical or biological agents
and other weapons of mass destruction. We implore
both parties to adhere to international laws and
instruments like international humanitarian law and
the BWC, which prohibits the use of biological agents as
instruments of war. Those instruments were established
to prevent the recurrence of past tragedies and protect
future populations.

My Russian colleague said that the current situation
is unacceptable and should be rectified. What situation?
The only unacceptable situation is Russia’s war of
aggression against Ukraine, and we call on Russia to
rectify that by withdrawing its forces from Ukraine and
ending this war now.

In conclusion, the use of biological agents and
toxins and other weapons of mass destruction as
instruments of war is ruthlessly inhumane, can never
be confined to national borders, will leave no winners
and should therefore not be even contemplated. We
implore the parties and stakeholders of the conflict to
resort to diplomacy and constructive dialogue as the
only sustainable solution to the conflict.

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I join previous
speakers in thanking Mr. Ebo for his briefing.

Ms. Mbabu (Kenya): I thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo for
his briefing.

Today’s briefings and previous briefings on the
same subject, provided earlier this year, have been
noted, and we continue to take, seriously, every report
of the threat of use or potential use of biological or
chemical weapons. In that regard, we maintain that the
independent and impartial investigations conducted
by internationally recognized and mandated bodies
should be the only way to establish the facts in reports
concerning the threat of use or the potential use of
biological or chemical weapons.

Weapons of mass destruction, including biological
weapons, pose a grave danger. The indiscriminate
nature of those weapons can lead only to immediate
and long-term effects on people, societies and the
environment. Kenya is therefore deeply concerned by
any allegations of their use anywhere and by anyone.
We reaffirm our support for the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC), which remains the global norm
against biological weapons and a fundamental pillar of
the international community’s efforts to prevent the use
of such weapons.

We believe that in all such circumstances, the
voluntary disclosure of information and easy access to
relevant information on the activities of laboratories
of member States are a vital confidence-building
measure that could help build trust among States.
Accordingly, we wish to underscore the need to
establish an implementation body for the Biological
Weapons Convention (BWC) as a means of
encouraging compliance and transparency by member
States, and further urge the international community
to forge consensus towards the establishment of a
verification regime for the BWC in light of recent
global developments, such as the coronavirus disease
pandemic, as well as the continuous deterioration of the
international security climate.

As a State party, we echo the need for adherence
to the BWC. In this case, we refer to article I of the
Convention, which states that each State party to the
Convention undertakes never in any circumstances
to develop, produce, stockpile or otherwise acquire
or retain those weapons. Once such conventions are
breached, the escalation of armed conflict could lead
to an almost unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe.
It would also make it all the more difficult to resolve
this conflict promptly and peacefully. Kenya therefore
reiterates its call on all State parties to the Convention
to make use of the established mechanisms to ensure
there is no ambiguity on the presence of these extremely
dangerous weapons.

22-657149/14

S/PV.9171

Threats to international peace and security

Finally, we reiterate the need for restraint and
immediate de-escalation of the situation in Ukraine and
to continue to seek a peaceful solution for this conflict,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo for his briefing.
Mexico has taken due note of the Russian
Federation’s statements on alleged military biological
activities in Ukraine and has considered them with the
seriousness they deserve.
The Security Council addressed this situation in
March and May, and the consultations provided for in
article V of the Biological Weapons Convention took
place in September in Geneva. Those consultations
did not conclude in indicating that there had been
any violation of the Convention. The United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs stated that it had no
evidence regarding activities in Ukraine contrary to
the Biological Weapons Convention, as brought to the
attention of the Council in May.
Now that the consultations provided for in article
V have been held, the question before us is whether
an investigation by the Security Council should be
triggered, as provided for in paragraph 2 of article
VI of the Convention. The unavoidable requirement
for activating the Security Council’s consideration
of the matter and the eventuality of launching an
investigation in that regard is to have irrefutable
evidence of the presumed violation of obligations
derived from the Convention. Given that the Office for
Disarmament Affairs, on two occasions — and again
this afternoon — has said that it does not have such
evidence, in Mexico’s opinion what is appropriate
is that the issue be brought to the attention of the
ninth Review Conference of the Biological Weapons
Convention, which is to meet next month in Geneva.
We will have another opportunity to determine at that
time if we can establish a verification mechanism,
which the Convention is undoubtedly lacking.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
France condemns this umpteenth attempt by Russia
to make us forget that it is in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations. Russia is again using the Security
Council as a propaganda platform. It repeats that there
are offensive biological programs in Ukraine. Let us be
serious and return to the facts. The United Nations has
10/14

27/10/2022

clearly indicated on several occasions, has done so again
today, that it has no information on this subject — none.
States parties to the Biological Weapons Convention
also met in Geneva in September to consider the socalled evidence provided by Russia. This has been
examined in detail and its inanity has been technically
demonstrated. It is clear that the open consultation
procedure under article V of the Convention is no
longer necessary. But what Russia is asking for today is
to set up an ad hoc commission to investigate the same
unfounded allegations, which are clearly not supported
by any serious evidence. Russia is once again sowing
confusion. It seeks to distract the attention of the
international community and its own people from the
catastrophic reality of its war on the ground.
Unfortunately, this is not the first time that Russia
has spread lies to cover up its own responsibility.
Everyone knows that it is Russia, not Ukraine, that
has used chemical weapons in recent years and for
years covered for the Syrian regime, which used them
against its own people. We are very concerned that
this disinformation campaign could be a prelude to the
use of a weapon of mass destruction in Ukraine. The
obviously false allegations that Ukraine is preparing to
use a dirty bomb reinforce our concern. No one would
be fooled by an attempt to use such an allegation as a
pretext for escalation. Let it be clear — we reject any
pretext for escalation on the part of Russia.
The Russian discourse is dangerous, and all
the more irresponsible as it emanates from a State
depositary of the Biological Weapons Convention and
is part and parcel of its instrumentalization by Moscow.
We must focus all our efforts on safeguarding and
implementing the Convention so as to ensure that those
shocking weapons are never used in the future.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank the Secretariat for its briefing.
Military biological activities bear on international
peace and security and the common interests of all
humankind. As a country that suffered immensely
from biological weapons during the Second World
War, China always stands for the complete prohibition
and thorough destruction of all weapons of mass
destruction, including biological weapons, and firmly
opposes the research, development, stockpiling or use
of biological and chemical weapons by any country
under any circumstances. All States parties should
22-65714

27/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

strictly observe the objectives and principles of the
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC).
The information and leads about biological military
activities released by Russia deserve a corresponding
response from the party concerned. China calls on the
relevant party to take a responsible attitude, effectively
fulfil its obligations as a State party to the BWC, and
provide comprehensive and in-depth clarifications on
the issues raised by Russia. At Russia’s request, the
States parties to the BWC held a formal consultative
meeting on this matter in September. It is regrettable
that the relevant party failed to answer and clarify
fully the questions raised by Russia. The international
community could consider invoking article VI of the
Convention to facilitate the solution of the issue.
The establishment of a verification mechanism
is a necessary means to ensure the authority and
effectiveness of the various treaties in the field of
disarmament and arms control. The BWC should not be
an exception or gap to be filled. China once again calls
on all parties to meet each other halfway; take the ninth
Review Conference of the Convention, to be held in
late November, as an opportunity to further strengthen
the confidence-building mechanism; restart at an early
date the negotiations on a verification protocol that have
been stalled for more than 20 years; and strive for the
establishment of a multilateral verification mechanism,
so as to effectively strengthen global biosecurity.
On the Ukraine issue itself, China’s position is
consistent and clear. We expect, as always, an early
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities so as to prevent
a larger humanitarian crisis from arising. We have
consistently called on all parties concerned to exercise
calm and restraint so as to avoid a further escalation of
the situation. We have always advocated dialogue and
negotiation to achieve a political settlement of the crisis.
A prolonged, expanded and complicated conflict
in Ukraine serves no one’s interests. The international
community should embrace a heightened sense of
urgency, step up mediation efforts, push for an early
resumption of negotiations between Russia and Ukraine,
and build up political conditions for peace. China is
ready to work with the international community and
continue to play a constructive role to that end.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Mr. Ebo for his very
clear briefing today.
The use of biological agents or toxins as instruments
of war is truly abhorrent. It is rightly banned under

S/PV.9171

international law, and there can be no impunity for
those who use them. Ireland looks forward to the ninth
Review Conference Biological Weapons Convention
(BWC) and will work with States parties to further
strengthen that key international instrument.
That makes it all the more regrettable that Russia
is again bringing its baseless and unfounded claims
against Ukraine and the United States regarding
legitimate public health cooperation and research.
Despite the large amount of material Russia has shared,
no substantive or credible evidence has been presented
to support Russia’s allegations. That was also the case
at the BWC article V formal consultative meeting held
last month. Ireland considers the article V meeting to
have been a deeply regrettable misuse of the provisions
of the Biological Weapons Convention by Russia.
Regardless, we appreciate the comprehensive
and substantive responses of Ukraine and the United
States to Russia’s allegations. The responses clearly
demonstrate that their treaty-related activities, as well
as their activities conducted through the Cooperative
Threat Reduction programme, represent peaceful,
legitimate cooperation and research. Such activities are
fully consistent with article X of the Convention and,
indeed, are to be encouraged. In that regard, Ireland
is gravely concerned by Russia now having lodged a
complaint with the Security Council under article VI of
the Convention.
We uphold the right of any State to request
the Council to investigate alleged breaches of the
Convention. However, given the nature of the material
that Russia has presented, we do not see further
investigation under article VI as either warranted
or useful. Rather, the invocation of article VI in this
manner is a further effort by Russia to misuse the
BWC and the Security Council as a platform for its
disinformation, in an attempt to justify its unjustifiable
and unlawful invasion of Ukraine. Such deeply cynical
and harmful actions demean the Council and its role in
maintaining international peace and security.
Russia’s actions risk undermining essential
multilateral disarmament and non-proliferation
instruments upon which all our security depends.
Equally, they are an attack on legitimate cooperation
and research supporting public health in Ukraine and
countries around the world. We must do all that we
can, as global partners, to ensure effective disease
monitoring, detection, control and prevention. Efforts
to misrepresent or undermine such work in Ukraine

22-6571411/14

S/PV.9171

Threats to international peace and security

and elsewhere will only weaken efforts to prevent and
control future outbreaks. That is work that Russia itself
engages in and benefits from.
Russia would be better served by immediately and
unconditionally ending its hostilities, withdrawing
from the entire territory of Ukraine and refraining
from further threat or use of force of any kind against
Ukraine or any other State.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking Director Ebo for his briefing.
From 5 to 9 September, the parties to the Biological
Weapons Convention (BWC) held formal consultations
in Geneva under article V of the BWC, in accordance
with the procedures established at the Review
Conferences of the Convention. On that occasion, Russia
presented its concerns regarding alleged biological
weapons developed jointly by the United States and
Ukraine on Ukrainian territory. Likewise, the parties
to the Convention listened to the comments of the two
countries on the Russian queries. We take note of the
arguments presented by the Russian Federation, as well
as of the draft resolution put forward.
Since this is the first time a complaint is being
brought to the Security Council under article VI of the
BWC, it is essential to establish procedures that can be
used for future, similar initiatives. Moreover, should the
Council decide to proceed with such an investigation,
it must be thoroughly provided with substantial, solid
evidence. We hope that the parties directly involved
in the issue can take advantage of these exchanges of
information to keep the dialogue channels open in order
to avoid misunderstandings that could be perceived as
threats, with undesirable consequences for all.
That having been said, allow me to reaffirm Brazil’s
commitment to the resumption of negotiations with a
view to the adoption of a binding verification protocol
that strengthens the implementation of the Biological
Weapons Convention regarding the exclusively peaceful
use of knowledge and technology in the field of life
sciences. The situation before the Council today only
reinforces the urgency of and necessity to establish
such a mechanism.
The next BWC Conference represents an opportunity
for us to re-engage in such discussions without delay.
Until such a protocol is adopted, we call on States
parties to strengthen the mechanisms of transparency
and confidence-building available under the framework
of the Convention by sharing the wides possible range
12/14

27/10/2022

of information regarding research projects on topics
related to the object of the Convention.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, I thank
Mr. Adedeji Ebo, Director in the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, for his briefing. We have
carefully noted the points made in the briefing.
India attaches high importance to the Biological
and Toxin Weapons Convention (BWC) as a key global
and non-discriminatory disarmament convention. The
Convention also includes binding obligations on States
parties to never acquire or retain biological agents
that have no justification for peaceful purposes and
bans assistance to anyone in acquiring or developing
them. It is important to ensure the full and effective
implementation of the BWC in letter and spirit. We
also believe that any matter relating to obligations
under the Biological Weapons Convention should be
addressed as per the provisions of the Convention and
through consultations and cooperation between the
parties concerned.
India would like to underline the important role
of international cooperation in the field of peaceful
biological activities and related exchanges of scientific
and technical information, as provided for in article X
of the BWC. India believes that the full and effective
implementation of article X of the Convention is
important to generate equitable benefits for States
parties, in particular developing countries.
India participated in the article V consultations
on the matter last month. The current situation
reflects the need to negotiate a comprehensive, legally
binding protocol, providing for an effective, universal
and non-discriminatory verification mechanism to
strengthen the implementation of the Convention by
States parties. That is necessary to strengthen the
Convention and its implementation.
We remain deeply concerned at the worsening
situation in Ukraine. We have been consistent in calling
for a cessation of hostilities and pursuing the path of
diplomacy and dialogue to address the situation. The
very fact that we are discussing this issue in the Council
is reflective of the precarious predicament in which the
world finds itself today.
India’s position on the conflict has been consistent
since the beginning of hostilities. An escalation of
hostilities and violence is in no one’s interest. We have
urged both sides to return to the path of diplomacy
and dialogue. We have expressed our support for all
22-65714

27/10/2022

Threats to international peace and security

diplomatic efforts to end the conflict. We therefore
sincerely hope for an early resumption of peace talks
to bring about an immediate ceasefire and an early
resolution to the conflict. We reiterate that the global
order is anchored in respect for principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Gabon.
I thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo for his briefing.
Allegations about programmes to develop biological
weapons in Ukraine are very serious. The rhetoric of
fear surrounding such allegations is as challenging as
it is alarming. We are clear in our view that the use of
biological agents, pathogens or germs to spread disease
for warlike purposes bodes ill and grim for humankind.
Such weapons have indeed been prohibited by the
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention for 50 years.
We call here for the strengthening of the Biological
Weapons Convention regime and for providing it
with monitoring and verification mechanisms capable
of guaranteeing compliance by member States with
its relevant provisions. My country therefore calls
for a timely, transparent, impartial and independent
investigation into those allegations.
My country is opposed to the use of any weapon
of mass destruction. We condemn the use of all kinds
of weapons with indiscriminate effect and targeting
civilian populations and infrastructure, including
remote-controlled weapons, which inflict unnecessary
suffering on civilians and contribute to fuelling
a climate of daily terror. We call on all parties to
demonstrate restraint.
We must work to end this murderous war in Ukraine
by engaging in good-faith negotiations with a view to
achieving a lasting peace between the parties. We must
respond to the urgent humanitarian needs and distress
of civilians, who continue to pay the highest price in the
war. We call on the parties to refrain from any attitude
of provocation or self-deception that could compromise
the search for a diplomatic solution.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.

S/PV.9171

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The propaganda arsenal of our Western
colleagues has long contained what they believe to
be a hard-hitting argument: “Russia is raising a false
alarm”, “spreads disinformation”, “misleads the
Security Council members”, “distracts the Council
from discussing more important matters”. At the
same time, we have heard nothing of substance today.
Indeed, our Western colleagues have had nothing to say
save that, in their high, peremptory opinion, none of
this is worth even the tiniest bit of attention. Funnily
enough, some of them still cannot tell the difference
between biological and chemical weapons, mixing the
two together.
We were told today, inter alia by the representative
of the United Kingdom, that all the issues had been
considered and Russian allegations dismissed. By
whom? By the United Kingdom? Of course, what the
United Kingdom believes to be true is always the
ultimate, indisputable truth. If the United Kingdom
rejected the allegations, then we can call it a day.
There have been attempts to convince us that the
cooperation of the United States and Ukraine in the
biological area is purely peaceful in nature. But will they
please answer one simple question? Why is it that this
cooperation on the part of the United States is managed
by a military authority — the Pentagon — and its many
contractors? If they had really studied the documents
that we circulated, which I doubt, they would have
seen copies of agreements and work acceptance sheets
signed by military representatives on both sides. What
sort of humanitarian cooperation can a Ministry of
Defence engage in? We have heard no answer even to
that simple question, to say nothing of the others that,
as can well be imagined, are quite numerous in the 300page compilation that we shared.
In all that was said today, we were particularly
touched by the remark of our American colleague
concerning the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs (UNODA), saying that there was no United
States military biological activity in Ukraine and
asserting that this affirmation by UNODA was proof
in itself. Does anyone believe that we are that naïve
enough to imagine that the Pentagon would have
informed UNODA and its High Representative about
its secret military biological programmes in Ukraine?
We have invoked the mechanism provided for
under the Biological Weapons Convention. We invoked
article V of the Convention, but received no meaningful

22-6571413/14

S/PV.9171

Threats to international peace and security

response. That being the case, we were compelled to
invoke the provisions of article VI. The fact that some
do not like it does not make our request illegitimate. I
repeat — we are acting within the legal scope of the
Biological Weapons Convention. As I said, even if some
do not like our arguments and the facts we cite, they
have no right to ignore them and shift the focus to their
political assessments. Perhaps that is how they would
choose to act within the “rules-based order” that they
promote, in which they set the rules and others have to
follow them, but here at the United Nations we all are
equal before international law and we all proceed on
its basis. Like it or not, there will be accountability for
violations of the BWC, if proven.
My colleagues’ synchronized attempts to present
our arguments as some sort of propaganda are
unconvincing and indicative of their bloc discipline,
or rather their “frank pledge”. Let me stress again that
neither the United States nor Ukraine has responded
to our question, either in Geneva or, in the case of the
United States, here today. I think that the representative
of Ukraine, who will speak shortly, will not do so
either. That is why we continue to take steps within
the BWC framework. We lodged a complaint with the
Council and put forward a draft resolution requesting
an investigation. We have the right to do so, whether
they like it or not. So let us remain in the legal field and
save our political assessments for other meetings.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Mr. Ebo, the Deputy to the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for his briefing, which has yet
again reconfirmed the absence of any information to
substantiate the Russian disinformation narratives.
This week is Global Media and Information
Literacy Week at the United Nations. Having called
for three consecutive meetings of the Security Council
with the sole purpose of spreading its propaganda
and disinformation, the Russian Federation has
chosen the weirdest way possible to mark this week.
This is a deliberate misuse of the Security Council’s
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. By continuously producing fakes
and disinformation on the compliance of other States
parties to the Biological Weapons Convention, the

14/14

27/10/2022

Russian Federation undermines the credibility and
integrity of the Convention.
Ukraine has never, ever developed, produced or
stored, alone or together with someone else, biological
or chemical weapons. Our country does not possess a
corresponding infrastructure for biological weapons
development and production. Formally, that provocative
issue has been raised by Russia many times already.
In that regard, I would like to draw attention to the
outcomes of the formal consultative meeting of States
parties to the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention
(BWC), requested by the Russian Federation and held
in Geneva in September. The delegations of the two
BWC member States arrogantly blamed by Russia for
prohibited biological activities — namely, Ukraine
and the United States — provided the international
community with detailed and exhaustive information
during the event. The overwhelming majority of the
89 BWC States parties that participated in the meeting
found those presentations accurate and persuasive. All
Russian allegations were rejected, and the discussion
has exhausted itself. The BWC formal consultative
meeting’s final report is self-evident — the process
launched by Russia under BWC article V is terminated.
Ukraine would also like to recall our readiness to
receive in our country a transparency visit of a group of
international independent experts to our public health
laboratories after Russia ceases its full-scale war of
aggression against Ukraine and withdraws its military
from the sovereign territory of Ukraine.
Since 2014, Ukraine has repeatedly requested the
Russian Federation at the BWC meetings, and demands
so now, to provide the international community
with information on the location and status of the
biomaterials from the occupied Ukrainian public health
laboratories and their use. No answer has been received
so far. By spreading such lies, the Russian Federation
is laying the groundwork for further provocations in
Ukraine. Russia’s false flag operation over the use
of biological warfare agents is a threat that should be
treated seriously.
Ukraine appeals to the international community
to exercise the utmost vigilance and exert pressure to
prevent Russia’s insidious plans with bioweapons.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

22-65714
