A/65/PV.41

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

41

st plenary meeting
Friday, 29 October 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Waffa-Ogoo
(Gambia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda items 13 and 115 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/65/L.7)
The Acting President: In connection with draft
resolution A/65/L.7, I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang: In connection with draft resolution
A/65/L.7, entitled “Review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture”, I wish to put on record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General in accordance with rule 153 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the
draft resolution, the General Assembly would request
all relevant United Nations actors to take forward, in
line with their mandates and as appropriate, the
recommendations of the report presented by the
co-facilitators (A/65/868, annex) with the aim of
further
improving
the
effectiveness
of
the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Recognizing that the peacebuilding work of the
United Nations requires sustained support and adequate
resources to meet the challenges, it is anticipated that
additional staff resources would be required in the
biennium 2012-2013 to improve the effectiveness of
the Peacebuilding Commission. Those resources would
allow for providing capacities for communication and
outreach and for undertaking the mapping of existing
peacebuilding initiatives and resources in countries for
the Peacebuilding Commission. Furthermore, they
would support the resource-mobilization functions of
the country-specific configurations, the implementation
of the recommendations of the review report
concerning the development of an effective
communications strategy for the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the undertaking
of missions to engage and consult with actors such as
the European Union, the World Bank, the African
Development Bank, the African Union and relevant
regional organizations for the purpose of building
partnership for peacebuilding, including resource
mobilization.
Such requirements would be considered in the
context of the finalization of the proposed programme
budgets for the biennium 2012-2013. Accordingly, the
adoption of draft resolution A/65/L.7 would not entail
any additional requirements under the programme
budgets for the biennium 2010-2011.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.7, entitled
“Review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture”.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-61179 (E)

*1061179*

A/65/PV.41

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/65/L.7?
Draft resolution A/65/L.7 was adopted (resolution
65/7)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda items 13 and 115.
Agenda item 73 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Note by the Secretary-General (A/65/313)
Report by the Secretary-General (A/65/315)
Mr. González Sarasa (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
May I begin by expressing deep condolences on the
part of the Cuban Government and people for the
deaths of the Prime Minister of Barbados, The
Honourable David Thompson, and of the former
President of Argentina, Néstor Kirchner.
The establishment of an international criminal
jurisdiction that is impartial, non-selective, effective,
fair, complementary to national justice systems,
genuinely independent, and therefore free of
subjugation to political interests that might erode its
essence, continues to be an objective that Cuba
supports.
The International Criminal Court has a
constitutive problem regarding the limitations on its
independence, given the way in which its relations with
the Security Council have been defined. Article 16 of
the Rome Statute gives the Council the power to
suspend investigations or trials undertaken by the
Court, a matter that was not settled with outcomes of
the Review Conference of the Rome Statute, held in
Kampala on 31 May to 11 June.
The definition of the crime of aggression arrived
at during the Conference fell short of Cuba’s
expectations. Thus, the opportunity was lost to
establish a generic definition covering forms of
aggression that also manifest themselves in
international relations between States and are not
limited to the use of armed force but can have an
impact on the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of States.

2

For more than 50 years, Cuba has been subjected
to such forms of aggression, resulting from the
aggressiveness and permanent hostility of its powerful
northern neighbour, which have caused thousands of
deaths and injuries and incalculable material, economic
and financial damage to the people of Cuba. Moreover,
the definition of the crime of aggression that was
adopted in Kampala adds an ambiguous qualifier to the
elements that the Court should consider in determining
the existence of such an act, in that it fails to describe
clearly what is meant by the gravity and scale that
characterize such crimes and render them clear
violations of the Charter of the United Nations.
In Cuba’s opinion, the use of force by a State in a
manner incompatible with the Charter of the United
Nations is in itself a grave breach of the Charter. The
integrity of the Rome Statute as a complement to
national criminal jurisdictions must be protected. The
Court must remain impartial and fully independent of
the political entities of the United Nations, which must
not be allowed to affect its functioning. The
responsibilities of the Security Council under the
Charter should not limit the Court’s role as a judicial
body.
Cuba maintains a constructive position regarding
the establishment of an international criminal justice
system that is genuinely impartial, effective,
independent
and
complementary
to
national
jurisdictions. In that regard, we have followed with
interest the Court’s evolution and developments within
it. We have participated with interest as an observer in
the meetings of the Assembly of States Parties to the
Rome Statute.
We would, however, like to express our concern
about a serious precedent that has been established in
the way in which the Court can initiate proceedings
against nationals of States non-parties to the Rome
Statute, where the jurisdiction of the Court has not
been accepted in keeping with article 12 of the Statute.
The Cuban delegation reiterates that the legal principle
with respect to the consent of the State concerned must
be respected, since this is a treaty that is covered by
Article 11 of Part II of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties of 23 May 1969.

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

My delegation reaffirms its determination to
contribute to the implementation of international
criminal law so that it is fully effective and conforms
with international law, particularly the United Nations
Charter.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation has examined the report (see A/65/313) of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) before the
General Assembly, and particularly Chapter III
regarding the Sudan, which includes information that
lacks any objectivity or legal foundation. This has
strengthened our conviction more than ever before that
our firm position vis-à-vis the Court is right and just
and that we have been dragged into its proceedings,
which are based on political deception disguised as
law. Needless to say, such politicization of
international justice runs completely counter to the
objectives for which the Court was established. The
Sudan was a full participant in all the preparatory
meetings that preceded the drafting of the Statute of
this Court, culminating in its adoption at the 1998
Rome Conference.
I should mention from this rostrum that since that
date, and before the Statute entered into force, the
Sudan has repeatedly and distinctly warned about the
risk of politicizing the Court and deflecting it from the
objectives for which it was established. Since that time,
we have also warned about the gravity of the
possibility that certain States might take advantage of
the relationship between the Court and the Security
Council, as addressed in article 13 (b) of the Statute, in
order to transform the Court into a purely political tool
disguised as a legal entity. Now we see that the
situation that we warned of at the preparatory meetings
before the drafting of the Statute has materialized and
that the facts confirm what we repeatedly warned of
and explained when expressing our reservations.
Africa, our mother continent, is now paying the
price for the ambiguity and the grey texts of the
provisions of the Rome Statute, which have been
abused by certain circles that have used the Court as a
means to serve their political interests, which can be
seen in the targeting of African States and their leaders,
as if the Court’s only jurisdiction were in Africa and in
no other continent. That politicization of justice is
completely unacceptable. That is what has led the
African Union to adopt its firm and principled position
rejecting such a blatant politicization of justice, a
position endorsed by major regional organizations and

10-61179

political and geographical groups, representing more
than two thirds of the total membership of the United
Nations: the African Union, the League of Arab States,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Community of SahelSaharan States.
From this rostrum, I salute all the member States
of those organizations. In spite of being parties to the
Rome Statute, they have not hesitated to declare their
firm rejection of the Court’s transformation from a
judicial body into a tool for political intrigue and
extortion, which cannot be further from the main
objectives for which the Court was established. What
kind of justice ignores hundreds of thousands of
civilians outside of Africa who have been killed
collectively by means of the latest and most destructive
tools of war and death? Why does it only see what
happens in Africa? Where are the preconditions to the
exercise of jurisdiction under article 12 of the Rome
Statute?
With regard to the competence of the Security
Council, we have already drawn attention to that
situation based on the fact that the Council is a
political body that Member States of the Organization
have been attempting for over two decades to reform
and have not been able to do so. It was obvious to us
that article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute would be abused
with regard to certain cases that are before the Security
Council and would be referred to the Court under
Chapter VII of the Charter. It was not strange, then,
that resolution 1593 (2005), regarding the situation in
Darfur would be adopted in a flawed manner and in
contradiction of basic justice and equality, both of
which prohibit exceptions or selectivity.
We could speak for a very long time if we started
to dissect all the claims that have been made against
the Sudan, its leadership, its people and its sovereignty.
The professional conduct of people of law and
jurisprudence is based on integrity and impartiality.
They do not engage in political or media campaigns in
order to become stars or to prove themselves. Justice is
much larger and more sublime than limited personal
gains. What we have seen in the prosecution statements
could not be further from the provisions of article 15 of
the Rome Statute.
The Assembly is well aware that during the
preparatory consultations on the Rome Statute, many
countries expressed reservations over the unlimited

3

A/65/PV.41

authority of the Prosecutor, and they were right to do,
since mixing politics with the law would ruin both and
transform them into a complete distortion that annuls
the basic tenet of legal jurisprudence, namely, that
peace is the highest form of justice. The moves made
by the Prosecutor with regard to the Darfur issue are a
clear example of the politicization of his position. The
Prosecutor has become a real obstacle to the political
process aimed at achieving comprehensive and
sustainable peace in Darfur. Every time negotiations
get closer to conciliation and the signing of an
agreement, the Prosecutor comes up with another case
or a new fabricated accusation that sends the wrong
message to the armed rebel movements, taking back
the political process to square one.
In that context, the most recent decision by the
Court to add the crime of genocide to the list of
allegations against the leadership of the country and
the symbol of its sovereignty took place during the
preparation for the presidential elections in my country
and at a time when negotiations in Doha, under the
sponsorship of the brotherly country of Qatar and with
the participation of the United Nations-African Union
Mediator, Mr. Djibril Bassoulé, were close to reaching
an agreement. It was then that the Prosecutor came up
with a fabricated new accusation, namely, the crime of
genocide, an accusation made against His Excellency
the President of the Republic of the Sudan.
Let me ask the Assembly: is it conceivable that a
President of a State who is alleged to have committed
the crime of genocide against certain tribes in his
country would, at the same time, have five Ministers in
his Government from those tribes, including the
Minister for Justice? How could that be when
thousands of members of those tribes live in the heart
of the capital, Khartoum? Scores of members of those
tribes are also members of the federal Parliament, and
the state parliaments as well. Would this not give an
indication that the accusation is false and has
absolutely no basis in truth?
The irony and the extreme excesses of the
Prosecutor reached their limit with his description of
the elections in the Sudan as similar to Nazi elections.
Where is the law and the objectivity in this purely
political description? Is this evidence of professional
conduct?
We were not at all surprised with the new
tendency of the Court to contradict the well-established

4

and most basic tenets of international law, particularly
with regard to the immunity of heads of State and
Government, which have been adopted by the
International Court of Justice with regard to all
provisions relating to high officials of that kind. How
clear, then is the difference between one Court and the
other.
It is also ironic that the Assembly considered
yesterday morning the report of the International Court
of Justice (A/65/4) and reaffirmed that that Court, in all
of its decisions and advisory opinions, was completely
committed to the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly with regard to respect for the sovereignty
of States and their territorial integrity. Where does the
International Criminal Court stand with respect to
those values and principles of justice?
In the light of the position taken by the heads of
State of African and Arab countries, the heads of State
of the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement,
meeting at Sharm el-Sheikh in brotherly Egypt in 2008,
rejected the Court’s proceedings and decisions with
regard to the Sudan. We would like to commend the
strong position taken by the Afro-Arab summit held in
Sirte, Libya, in September 2010; that meeting also
rejected the decisions of the Court.
In conclusion, the delegation of the Sudan, while
participating in these deliberations on the report of the
International Criminal Court, would like to express its
deeply held belief that peace-loving countries and
countries that are guided by the values of justice,
freedom and equality cannot accept the politicization
of the Court nor its deviation from the objective for
which it was established. We are firmly confident that
all States Members of the United Nations, including
States parties to the Rome Statute, are fully aware of
the just position of the Sudan, in which it totally
refuses to deal with the Court in any way, since that
body has deviated from the path of law and justice,
before which all are equal and are treated without
selectivity or discrimination. We believe that people
are aware of and feel the hegemony of certain
influential States over the Court, which has led the
targeting of African leaders in a way that recalls the
former abominable colonial era.
We wish to reaffirm that we will continue our
diligent efforts to reach a timely, comprehensive,
political and sustainable settlement of the conflict in
Darfur regardless of the Court’s actions and its

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

destructive role. At the same time, we will make every
effort to hold accountable anyone who has perpetrated
crimes or violations during the conflict in Darfur.
Justice will be served in all cases.
In that regard, I would like to refer to the
statement made by the President of the Court that it
was not the Court’s objective to replace national legal
systems. I would respond to that by saying that the
International Criminal Court, in its present form and its
legal basis, which is completely flawed, cannot replace
the Sudanese legal system, now or ever.
The Sudanese judiciary has had a brilliant record
and a strong legacy of integrity, credibility and
professionalism. That legacy goes beyond the Sudan to
many other African, Arab and Asian countries. Many
legal figures of the Sudan have worked and still work
in those countries, using their legal expertise and
professionalism and an integrity and credibility
testified to by all. They are in a much better position to
bring about justice in the Sudan, and no one else can
do that.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin my statement by expressing my
condolences and those of the Colombian Government
on the death of The Honourable David Thompson,
Prime Minister of Barbados, and of former President of
Argentina Néstor Kirchner.
My delegation thanks the President of the
International Criminal Court for submitting to the
General Assembly the Court’s sixth report, covering
the period 1 August 2009 to 31 July 2010 (see
A/65/313).
In taking note of the report, the delegation of
Colombia wishes to highlight the contribution of the
International Criminal Court to the continuing
development and strengthening of international
criminal law. We also welcome the Court’s own
strengthening as an independent institution in fulfilling
its mandate to investigate and prosecute crimes under
its jurisdiction.
Among the elements highlighted in the report
submitted by the Court, we underscore the efforts to
support national jurisdictions in their primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute alleged
perpetrators of the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community, as well as the Court’s

10-61179

efforts to develop the complementary aspects of its
jurisdiction.
In addition, I would like to mention some aspects
considered during the Review Conference of the Rome
Statute, held in Kampala from 31 May to 11 June.
Among the achievements of the Conference, we
highlight the adoption of the Kampala Declaration, in
which States reaffirmed their commitment to observe
the duties and responsibilities agreed to under the
Rome Statute, as well as to guarantee its full
application, universality and integrity.
We also highlight the 102 pledges of support to
the International Court made by 37 States, the thematic
reviews undertaken to take stock of international
criminal justice and various resolutions on some of
those issues, progress in the review of the Statute in
connection with the crime of aggression, the resolution
on the amendment that seeks to include the use of
certain weapons as war crimes under the Court’s
jurisdiction, the resolve to keep in force the existing
article 124 in its current form and the provisions
adopted on the execution of sentences.
Colombia had made significant progress in
harmonizing its domestic legislation with the principles
and rules of the Rome Statute. In that regard, it should
be noted that in April 2009 my country acceded to the
Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the
International Criminal Court. Similarly, as stated in the
Court’s report, it is worth mentioning that on
1 November 2009 the seven-year transition period that
the Colombian State had set with regard to the entry
into force of the Rome Statute with regard to the
Court’s competence to recognize certain acts as crimes
of war came to an end.
The Government of Colombia believes that the
work of the Court is decisive in preventing and
combating impunity and in encouraging States to
determine that national judicial bodies should carry out
investigations and trials of alleged perpetrators of
serious crimes, bearing in mind the complementarity of
the Court’s jurisdiction. In that regard, it is important
to highlight that the report of the International
Criminal Court acknowledges that Colombia’s national
criminal justice system has made efforts to deal with
persons responsible for conduct proscribed by the
Rome Statute in various broad categories.
In that regard, it should be pointed out that
Colombia has achieved greater efficiency and

5

A/65/PV.41

effectiveness in its system of justice by strengthening
its criminal prosecution service. The Office of the
Attorney General has been modernized and continues
to strengthen its investigative capacity. The criminal
justice system has the competence to be seized of
alleged human rights violations committed by members
of the security forces.
In general, through a policy aimed at
strengthening democratic security, Colombia has
reaffirmed its commitment to respect for human rights
and the rule of law as an integral part of State policies.
The national Government continues to apply, with the
utmost strictness, the mechanisms available to it to
respond in an exemplary manner and to bring to justice
complaints made to it on all violations involving State
officials, including the security forces. In developing a
project within the Office of the Attorney General to
analyse cases of violations of human rights and
breaches of international humanitarian law, 301 cases
of possible arbitrary killings have been studied. Several
courts have issued convictions against perpetrators, and
they have been upheld.
Moreover, support has been provided to the
human rights unit of the Office of the Attorney
General, supplying the logistics and security
guarantees needed to form 1,973 commissions to
investigate cases of the killing of protected persons. In
our penal code, that sort of killing is defined as a crime
against persons protected by international humanitarian
law, whether by illegal armed groups or by other
actors. That support has helped to bring about trials
and, by May of this year, 50 convictions had been
handed down.
It is also worth highlighting the national efforts to
ensure the implementation of the principles of justice,
truth and full reparation with regard to victims of
violence perpetrated by illegal armed groups. The State
of Colombia has developed an operational system of
reparations for victims through an administrative
procedure. A total of 121 defence lawyers have been
employed to represent victims. Through that
programme, trial representation has been provided to
111,118 victims in the past two years.
In addition, the Government of President Juan
Manuel Santos has presented Congress with a new bill
on reparations to victims, including the restitution of
land to those who were dispossessed during the
violence. This shows that our State is giving the utmost

6

national priority to combating impunity. To that end,
all branches of the Government continue to work to
strengthen access to and the administration of justice.
The United Nations is called on to promote the
universality of the Rome Statute. It is important that
the States that have not yet ratified this instrument
consider doing so promptly. Full and effective
collaboration among States, multilateral organizations
and the International Criminal Court is essential for the
Court to achieve its objectives. We therefore reiterate
our call on States represented here and to the United
Nations to continue to support the Court in order to
ensure that it can become established as a decisive
international entity in combating the most serious
crimes and ensuring that such crimes do not go
unpunished.
Mrs. Smith (Norway): Let me start by expressing
Norway’s continuing support and full recognition of
the work of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
during the past year. Norway welcomes the sixth
annual report of the ICC (see A/65/313) and would like
to thank the President of the Court, Judge Song, for his
detailed and informative report and presentation here
yesterday.
I would like to focus on three issues that are
significant for the Court’s work. These are, first, the
cooperation of States parties and other States with the
Court; secondly, the universality of the Rome Statute;
and thirdly, the Review Conference held in Kampala in
June this year.
First, Norway welcomes the arrest of Callixte
Mbarushimana by French authorities earlier this
month. Over the past few years, Norway has increased
its efforts to strengthen the protection of civilians,
especially women and children, from the atrocities of
war. We have had a particular focus on the widespread
sexual violence that has been perpetrated during the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Sexual violence constitutes one of the most serious
international crimes. The arrest of Mr. Mbarushimana
was a crucial step in efforts to prosecute the alleged
perpetrators of the sexual crimes committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
However, eight ICC arrest warrants remain
outstanding. They pertain to the situations in Darfur,
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is a matter of grave concern to Norway, and
brings me to the issue of State cooperation.

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

The ICC depends on the cooperation of the States
parties. The recent arrest was a joint effort by many
parties, including France, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Germany. It is an excellent
example of successful cooperation among States. All
States parties must do their utmost to provide the ICC
with the best possible working conditions. Norway
expects States with legal obligations under the Statute,
or that have entered into cooperation agreements with
the ICC, to fulfil their obligations and to demonstrate
their commitment to justice in practice.
We therefore urge all States parties concerned to
fulfil their responsibility to make the outstanding arrest
warrants effective. In the Darfur situation, we call on
all States, including the Sudanese authorities, to
cooperate fully with the Court and to comply with their
legal obligations under Security Council resolution
1593 (2005). We would in this connection also
encourage the Security Council to consider measures
that would ensure compliance with this resolution.
Turning briefly to the issue of universality, we are
pleased to note that, with the entry into force of the
Rome Statute for the Republic of Moldova on
1 January 2011, there will be 114 States parties to the
Statute. The number of States parties is rising every
year. It is remarkable that so many States from all parts
of the world have ratified the Statute in such a short
time. Norway strongly hopes that the ICC will enjoy
universal adherence in the future. We believe that the
long-term interests of all nations, irrespective of their
size, region or political orientation, are best served by
strengthening the rule of law and promoting justice.
We would like to thank the Government of
Uganda and all other contributors for a successful
Review Conference. In his opening statement in
Kampala, the Norwegian Foreign Minister said that we
should not only review the Rome Statute but also
celebrate the ICC and the political, diplomatic and
legal work it took to create it. The Conference showed
us that there is still a strong political and diplomatic
commitment to furthering the legal work to strengthen
international criminal justice. In addition to reviewing
articles 8 and 124, the Conference amended the Rome
Statute to include a definition of the crime of
aggression and the conditions under which the Court
could exercise jurisdiction over that crime.
We were also pleased to see that the Norwegian
proposal on enforcement of sentences materialized in a

10-61179

resolution that calls upon States to accept in their
prison facilities persons sentenced by the ICC. The
resolution also confirmed that a sentence of
imprisonment can be served in prison facilities made
available by an international or regional organization,
mechanism or agency. Further, we also welcome the
resolutions on the stocktaking of international criminal
justice and the Kampala Declaration. In the
Declaration,
States
parties
reaffirmed
their
commitment to the Rome Statute and its full
implementation, as well as to its universality and
integrity.
On that note, I would like to reiterate Norway’s
firm and long-standing commitment to the Rome
Statute and to an effective and credible International
Criminal Court. We believe that the ICC should enjoy
the broadest possible support of all States. We all share
the universal values attached to the protection of
human dignity. This protection is enhanced by taking
concerted action to suppress the most serious crimes
affecting the international community.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by expressing the condolences of
my delegation, Government and people to the people
and Government of Barbados on the death of Prime
Minister David Thompson. Our condolences go
likewise to the people and Government of Argentina on
the death of former President Néstor Kirchner.
Costa Rica thanks the President of the
International Criminal Court and welcomes the detailed
report (see A/65/313) that he has submitted to the
General
Assembly.
We
also
express
our
acknowledgement of the work carried out by the staff
of the Court over the past year.
Since the establishment of the Court, Costa Rica
has fully supported its work. In addition to our support
for its tasks, we have repeatedly called for the
universal ratification of and full compliance with its
Statute. As in previous years, we appeal for the
cooperation of States and United Nations bodies, in
particular the Security Council, with the Court. Support
for the Court is, in effect, support for the victims of the
worst crimes against humanity, which must not go
unpunished.
We welcome Bangladesh, Seychelles, Saint Lucia
and the Republic of Moldova as new States parties to
the Rome Statute. With these new parties, there are

7

A/65/PV.41

now 114 States, including my country, that recognize
the jurisdiction of the Court.
The International Criminal Court represents a
major step forward in strengthening human rights and
international law as a whole. However, we must
continue to work on consolidating it as a key judicial
tool in combating impunity and ensuring accountability
in the international system. Our ultimate objective
should be to build an international community on the
solid foundations of justice.
Costa Rica believes that justice is a cornerstone
of the quest for comprehensive, lasting peace. We see
peace and justice as natural allies that complement
each other. One need not be sacrificed for the other. On
the contrary, peace and justice, together with
international security and stability, can be achieved
only if they are pursued together.
The Review Conference of the Rome Statute in
Kampala in June was a fine opportunity for States to
reaffirm our commitment to the Rome Statute and its
ongoing relevance, full implementation, universality
and integrity. My country reiterates its resolve to
comply fully with the commitments made at the
Conference.
Costa Rica welcomes the amendment made by
States to paragraph 2 (e) of article 8 of the Statute to
include within the Court’s jurisdiction various war
crimes when committed in armed conflicts not of an
international character. We also commend the inclusion
of a definition of the crime of aggression and the
conditions under which the Court could exercise
jurisdiction with respect to that crime. We hope that,
when that amendment comes up for adoption in 2017,
States will demonstrate their genuine commitment to
the Court and adopt the amendment without serious
delays.
The cooperation of States is essential to the work
of the International Criminal Court. Its effective
jurisdiction depends to a large extent on States’
fulfilling their obligations to cooperate with it, help in
the execution of its decisions and bolster its
independence. Among those obligations is, of course,
the execution of its arrest warrants. We are therefore
concerned that the report states that nine arrest
warrants have not yet been executed, which is rightly
seen as the most pressing challenge now facing the
Court.

8

Another task that cannot be delayed is for States
to enact enabling legislation or other appropriate
procedures in keeping with international law that will
contribute to improving understanding of the Court’s
work at the international level, as provided for in the
Declaration on cooperation adopted by States members
of the ICC in Kampala.
It is also essential to ensure the cooperation and
commitment of the Security Council. The Court’s
ability to focus on its judicial functions and fulfil its
work, free of political pressure from any State, greatly
depends on the Council’s support and its insistence on
compliance with obligations to the Court arising from
its decision.
In this connection, we reaffirm our great concern
that the report reflects yet again the Government of the
Sudan’s failure to comply with its international
commitments. We emphasize that the Sudan’s
responsibility to comply with the arrest warrants issued
by the Court derives not from the Rome Statute but
from the resolutions of the Security Council and the
very Charter of the United Nations. Therefore, its
failure to cooperate represents a breach of international
obligations voluntarily entered into by the Sudan as a
State Member of the Organization.
Lastly, we reiterate our commitment to
continuing to cooperate constructively with the Court
in its work.
Mr. Stuerchler Gonzenbach (Switzerland)
(spoke in French): My delegation would like first to
express our sincere condolences to Barbados and
Argentina.
My delegation thanks President Sang-Hyun Song
for his introduction of the sixth annual report of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) (see A/65/313). We
also express our gratitude to all of the Court’s staff
members for their daily efforts in carrying out their
difficult work.
The year 2010 marks a turning point for the
International Criminal Court and for world justice.
Twelve years after the signing of the Rome Statute and
eight years after its coming into force, the States
parties, meeting at the Review Conference of the Rome
Statute in Kampala, adopted a definition of the crime
of aggression and agreed on the conditions for the
exercise of jurisdiction with regard to that crime.
Switzerland welcomes the fact that States have found a

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

common solution by consensus, in full accord with the
Statute and the United Nations Charter. That historic
event was the result of intensive negotiations and a
spirit of compromise.
According to the compromise, States parties are
protected after ratification in accordance with
paragraph 5 of article 121. The jurisdictional regime
provided for in article 12 remains intact, with two
exceptions. States not party are excluded from the
jurisdiction of the Court in all circumstances, while
every State party may lodge an opt-out declaration if it
wishes to be excluded. That delicate compromise
shows that the States parties all seek an effective
International Criminal Court capable of fulfilling its
mandate.
Sixty-five years after the crimes against peace
tried by the International Military Tribunal at
Nuremberg and the International Military Tribunal for
the Far East in Tokyo, the crime of aggression has been
given an international definition and integrated
permanently into the jurisdiction of the ICC. That helps
to strengthen the protection afforded by international
criminal law in the form of ius contra bellum, which is
firmly anchored in the United Nations Charter. My
delegation calls on all States parties to the Rome
Statute to ratify the amendment concerning the crime
of aggression, which will activate the jurisdictional
system as of 2017.
Progress on the crime of aggression is not the
only success in Kampala that my delegation would like
to mention. The amendment on the utilization of three
kinds of weapons in non-international conflicts is
equally important. It strengthens the protection of
international humanitarian law and reduces the gap
between the Statute’s treatment of crimes in
international conflicts, on the one hand, and those in
non-international conflicts, on the other.
The convening of the Review Conference in
Kampala, Uganda — a country that has chosen to refer
its situation to the Court — was highly symbolic. It
showed once again that the Court responds above all to
the needs of those States in which the most serious
crimes have been committed. It was also edifying to
meet the victims and to come to a better understanding
of their needs and wants. Their desire to resume their
lives with dignity filled us with a feeling of great
humility.

10-61179

The role of the Court is a complementary one.
The main responsibility for bringing the perpetrators of
international crimes to justice remains in the hands of
national jurisdictions. The Rome Statute prompted the
modification of many of those national legal systems.
Amnesty is no longer an option for the most serious
crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court. The Court
has shown that it can intervene when so required by its
complementary role. The first trials have already
begun.
The Court has had a major influence on the
response to international crimes. The Rome Statute and
the Court have the potential to effect a fundamental
and lasting change in the international legal system.
However, the ICC will be able to realize this potential
only if it can count on the unshakeable support of the
States parties in the execution of arrest warrants. Nine
arrest warrants are currently awaiting execution.
Unless all States give the Court their support, it
will lose credibility and be unable to fight effectively
against impunity, pursuant to its vocation and the
unanimous desire of all the countries that ratified the
Statute. This was recognized during the Review
Conference of the Rome Statute. The declaration on
cooperation emphasizes that all States are obligated to
cooperate with the Court, whether under the Statute or
under relevant Security Council resolutions. Moreover,
it singles out the crucial role of the execution of arrest
warrants in ensuring the effectiveness of the Court.
The Court is today the main catalyst in advancing
the cause of international criminal justice. My
delegation is confident that its successes will induce
those States that have not yet ratified the Rome Statute
to do so. The system will be fully operational only
when we have achieved the universal participation of
States respecting their obligations. Such is the wish of
my delegation, which has at all times insisted on the
need for a Court that is effective, independent and
universal.
Mr. Shawabkah (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to welcome the President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Judge Sang-Hyun
Song, and to thank him for introducing the sixth annual
report of the ICC to the United Nations (see A/65/313),
which was submitted pursuant to the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the Court.
The report provides an overview of the main

9

A/65/PV.41

developments in ICC activities between 1 August 2009
and 31 July 2010.
Jordan welcomes the cooperation that the United
Nations has offered to the ICC and affirms the need
and importance of States’ cooperation with the ICC in
order to achieve its objectives and purposes. From this
rostrum, Jordan calls on all States and international and
regional organizations to fully cooperate with the Court
and to assist it in all aspects, be it by collecting
evidence, offering logistical support for field missions,
transporting witnesses, apprehending and handing over
individuals or executing sentences handed down by the
Court in order to end impunity for the most serious
crimes.
International cooperation is very important to
improving the operations of the ICC, be it in terms of
coordination or of information exchange. Jordan
reaffirms its continued support for the ICC and its
belief in the principles for which it was created. The
ICC is a main pillar in bolstering international justice,
maintaining international peace and security and
ensuring the supremacy of the rule of law.
Mrs. Cabello de Daboin (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would
like to begin by expressing our thanks for the report of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) on its activities
for 2009-2010 before the General Assembly (see
A/65/313). In the report, the Court reports to the
United Nations for the sixth consecutive year on its
main activities in bringing to justice those responsible
for the most serious crimes affecting the international
community. The report reflects the unifying work of
the ICC and we would therefore like to congratulate its
President and all its members.
Section II of the report was written for the
purpose of describing the outcomes of an event that
was extremely important to the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. As is generally known, from 31 May to
11 June the Review Conference of the Rome Statute
was held in Kampala, Uganda. We would again like to
thank the people of Uganda for their hospitality during
the Conference.
In Kampala, an amendment was adopted whereby
the definition of the crime of aggression and the
conditions under which the ICC can exercise
jurisdiction with respect to that crime were
incorporated into the Statute. The political
circumstances prevailing on the international scene in

10

1998, when the Rome Statute was adopted, made it
necessary for the crime of aggression, although
formally included in the Statute, to remain outside the
Court’s jurisdiction. A waiting period was introduced,
both for defining the crime and for the activation of the
Court’s jurisdiction with respect to it. It was hoped
that, 12 years on, the international political scene
would have evolved to the benefit of countries that,
like ours, have voiced their desire for a true
democratization of the United Nations system,
eliminating once and for all the antidemocratic system
that prevails in the Security Council. Unfortunately,
from 1998 to our meeting in Kampala, there were few
major changes in this regard.
While the definition of the crime of aggression
has finally been incorporated into the Rome Statute, we
all bore witness to the great pressure exerted by those
States which, with a view to continuing to postpone the
full operation of the ICC, proposed the establishment
of a new waiting period before which the Court could
exercise its jurisdiction over the crime of aggression.
My delegation recalls the example of one statement
made during the Conference, according to which the
International Criminal Court was not yet sufficiently
mature to include the crime of aggression and it would
therefore be necessary to await a further review
conference to discuss the question of its incorporation.
As a result, the international community will have to
wait yet again, this time until 2017, when the Court
will finally exercise jurisdiction with respect to the
crime of aggression and begin to try those responsible
for committing that serious crime and bring an end to
impunity in that regard.
Nevertheless, with a view to striking a balance at
the Kampala Conference, we were encouraged that the
amendment was adopted by the consensus of all
members of the ICC and that, as of 2017, the Court
will be able to exercise its independence and not be
subject to political filters, in compliance with its
objectives and functions.
As a State party to the Rome Statute, my country
welcomes the outcome of the Conference and notes
that, in Kampala, we not only adopted the amendment
to the Statute concerning the crime of aggression and
article 8, which we also welcome, but that States
parties also reaffirmed our commitment to the Statute
and the International Criminal Court in the aptly titled
Kampala Declaration. We also welcomed the pledging
ceremony, which our delegation considered to be an

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

important event due to its openness and inclusiveness,
and in which States parties, non-parties and regional
organizations participated. Venezuela was among those
that participated and pledged.
In this regard, we recall that, in the days prior to
the Review Conference, the Union of South American
Nations (UNASUR) and its heads of State and
Government met in special session and issued a
declaration condemning the most serious crimes of
international
concern
and
reaffirming
their
commitment to the Rome Statute and the ICC.
UNASUR represents the only region in which every
State has ratified the Rome Statute.
Today, UNASUR is mourning the untimely and
shocking passing of its Secretary-General, former
Argentinean President Néstor Kirchner, whose death is
a loss not only for Argentina but for the whole region.
In the words of our President, Hugo Chávez Frias,
Néstor Kirchner was a pillar of the continent, a
bulwark of the region, a friend of South America and a
brother of Venezuela. Our profound condolences go to
the people of Argentina and to his wife, President
Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. We will miss that great
builder of the new Latin American homeland who was,
above all, a friend and brother to Venezuela.
We would not wish to end our statement without
first thanking the co-facilitators of the ICC review for
their valuable work, which allowed the Review
Conference to take a genuine step forward in terms of
the assessment and future of international criminal
justice. Finally, the Republic of Venezuela asserts once
more its firmest commitment to the system that
includes the Rome Statute and the ICC. Proof of that is
the fact that my country was the third country of the
Latin American and Caribbean region to ratify the
Statute. In this context, my delegation stresses that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is convinced that, if
true international criminal justice is to exist, the Rome
Statute must achieve universality as soon as possible.
To that end, we commit ourselves to promoting, in the
various forums of Latin America and the Caribbean in
which we participate, its ratification by those countries
that have not yet done so. In this context, we welcome
the newest States parties to the Statute: Bangladesh,
Seychelles, Saint Lucia and Moldova.
Mr. Rodríguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Judge Sang-Hyun Song, for his

10-61179

thorough presentation of the hard work accomplished
by the Court in the past year.
Over the past year, a number of events pertinent
to the work of the Court have occurred. First,
Bangladesh, Seychelles, Saint Lucia and Moldova have
ratified the Rome Statute, so that we now total 114
States parties. This is very encouraging, but a number
of States have not yet ratified or signed. Peru therefore
calls on those States that have not yet done so to ratify
or become parties to the Statute so that it can achieve a
genuinely universal scope that will prevent the most
serious crimes of international concern from going
unpunished.
While the increase in the number of States parties
is essential, so too is strengthening cooperation among
States so that the Court can achieve its goals. To that
end, it is always important to remember that States
must comply with the provisions of the Statute by
supplying information; executing arrest warrants issued
by the Court; detaining suspects and transferring them,
where necessary, to the Court; protecting witnesses and
victims; and implementing and aligning their domestic
laws with the Statute.
Unfortunately, the Court does not always enjoy
the necessary cooperation. This is a matter of concern,
as the report of the Court (see A/65/313) indicates in
regard to arrest warrants that have not been executed,
that some persons whose arrests have been ordered by
the Court have yet to be brought to justice or
surrendered to the Court. The cooperation of States
with respect to arrest warrants is an obligation derived
both from the Statute and from the Charter of the
United Nations.
Similarly, we must support cooperation between
the ICC and the United Nations. It should be noted that
such cooperation has allowed the Court to undertake
important efforts and to publicize and raise awareness
of its work. We trust that such cooperation will become
increasingly close and coordinated, so that the Court
can rely on the support of the various organs and
entities of the United Nations.
The International Criminal Court plays a
fundamental role in promoting the rule of law in that it
is the only permanent judicial institution charged with
investigating and trying those charged with the most
serious crimes of international concern. This task
requires a balance to be struck between respecting the
rights of the accused and allowing victims to

11

A/65/PV.41

participate in the proceedings, which is one of the
innovative aspects of the Rome Statute.
The outstanding work of the Court’s judges and
staff has allowed the ICC to enjoy great legitimacy in
the eyes of the international community. We can
therefore assert that the international community, and
victims in particular, recognize the Court as a genuine
instrument of justice. This is borne out by the fact that,
during the current judicial year, it has received 559
new communications relating to article 15 of the Rome
Statute. This is noteworthy, given that behind these
communications are potential cases in which war
crimes, crimes of genocide or crimes against humanity
may have been committed.
There can be no doubt that the Review
Conference strengthened the system created by the
Rome Statute. On the one hand, the Kampala
Declaration and the exercise of submitting pledges
reflect the firm commitment of States to the Court’s
work and to international criminal justice in general.
Similarly, the stocktaking of international criminal
justice has made it possible to address crucial areas
relating to cooperation, complementarity, the impact of
the system on victims and affected communities, and
the relationship between peace and justice, as well as
to identify the challenges they present. Dealing with
this requires the involvement not only of States but
also of international organizations and, in particular, of
civil society.
Moreover, the amendments adopted will make it
possible to fully implement the provisions of article 5
of the Statute, regarding crimes that are under the
Court’s jurisdiction. It should be noted that, with
respect to the crime of aggression, through its
resolution RC/Res.6, the Review Conference expressed
its determination to make the Court’s jurisdiction
operational as soon as possible. To that end, States
agreed on a definition of the crime of aggression and
the conditions necessary for the Court to exercise
jurisdiction, such exercise of jurisdiction being subject
to a decision to be adopted by the States in 2017.
Lastly, Peru wishes to reiterate its willingness to
collaborate actively and constructively with the
International Criminal Court in order to combat
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern.

12

Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Before I begin, I would like to express my thanks for
the heartfelt condolences expressed by the delegation
of Venezuela and for the displays of sorrow and
affection received from other delegations on the death
of the former President of my country, Mr. Néstor
Kirchner.
Argentina expresses its appreciation and
recognition to the President of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Sang-Hyun Song, for his
submission of the report on the Court to the United
Nations contained in document A/65/313.
The Rome Statute and the International Criminal
Court are among the most notable achievements of
multilateral diplomacy, and their contribution to
fighting impunity for crimes against humanity, crimes
of genocide and war crimes is evident. Only a decade
after the adoption of the Rome Statute, the Court is a
fully functioning permanent international criminal
tribunal.
Since the last report of the International Criminal
Court to the Assembly (A/64/356), in addition to the
situations in Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and Darfur, the
Sudan, in November 2009 the Court assigned the
situation in Kenya to Pre-Trial Chamber II, which
authorized the Prosecutor in March 2010 to open an
investigation. Also, on 22 November 2010, the trial
against Jean-Pierre Bemba Gombo for war crimes and
crimes against humanity in the Central African
Republic will begin.
This year also finds the Rome Statute and the
International Criminal Court strengthened. To date, 114
States are parties to the Statute. Accordingly, I would
like to welcome Bangladesh, Seychelles, Saint Lucia
and Moldova to the Statute.
The other reason to be gratified is the success of
the Review Conference of the Rome Statute, which
took place in Kampala, Uganda, from 31 May to
11 June. The Conference, excellently organized by the
Republic of Uganda, was attended by a large number of
States parties, non-parties and representatives of civil
society. Attendance at the segment devoted to the
general debate and the adoption of the Kampala
Declaration was at the highest level.

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

Allow me now to refer to the achievements of the
Review Conference.
The Conference adopted, as corollary to the highlevel segment, the Kampala Declaration, whereby
States parties reaffirmed their commitment to the Rome
Statute and to its full application, universality and
integrity. They also renewed their determination to put
an end to impunity for perpetrators of the most serious
crimes of international concern, emphasizing that
justice is a fundamental building block of sustainable
peace, and decided to pursue and strengthen their
efforts to ensure full cooperation with the Court in
accordance with the Statute and to maintain their
political and diplomatic support for the Court. They
also decided to celebrate 17 July, the day of the
adoption of the Rome Statute in 1998, as the Day of
International Criminal Justice.
At the pledging ceremony, many States parties,
one observer State and one international organization
of regional integration made pledges. Argentina was
among them.
The stocktaking of international criminal justice
produced remarkable results, due undoubtedly to the
high level of the panellists and other participants and to
the active participation of States and civil society.
Argentina had the privilege of being one of the focal
points, jointly with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Switzerland, on the topic of peace and
justice. We were pleased to participate in the panel on
that topic in Kampala, whose debates reinforced the
conclusion that there can be no lasting peace without
justice and that peace and justice are thus
complementary requirements. I take this opportunity to
recognize the devoted and cooperative work of
Switzerland and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the contribution of the experts providing
background material and of States and nongovernmental organizations, which also provided
valuable material.
One of the firmest commitments made in the
Kampala Declaration was to work actively during the
Review Conference towards the satisfactory outcome
on the amendment proposals to be considered at the
Conference.
Regarding article 124, the Review Conference
decided to retain it in its current form and agreed to
further review its provisions during the fourteenth
session of the Assembly of States Parties, in

10-61179

recognition of its merely transitional nature. The
Review Conference also adopted amendments to article
8 of the Statute, adding to the list of war crimes acts
committed in the context of armed conflicts not of an
international character, employing poison or certain
poisonous weapons; asphyxiating, poisonous or similar
gases and all analogous liquids, materials and devices;
or bullets that expand or flatten easily in the human
body. Such amendments constitute a step forward in
the fight against impunity regarding breaches of
international humanitarian law. I recognize the
initiative of the delegation of Belgium in this regard.
But the definition of the crime of aggression is
the amendment that determined the historic
significance of the Review Conference. In 1945, the
founders of the modern international community and of
this Organization decided to ban the use or threat of
use of armed force by States as a pillar of the peaceful
relations among States. The Kampala Conference
reinforced that pillar through the incorporation of
articles 8 bis, 15 bis and 15 ter into the Rome Statute,
defining aggression as a crime that triggers individual
criminal liability. The adoption of articles 8 bis, 15 bis
and 15 ter fulfilled the mandate arising from the nowdeleted paragraph 2 of article 5 of the Rome Statute.
Article 8 bis contains the definition of the crime
of aggression. This definition was drawn up during
years of work by a working group open to the
participation not only of States parties, but also of
non-parties and representatives of civil society. The
elements of crimes were also adopted. Regarding the
exercise of the jurisdiction of the Court with respect to
the crime of aggression, article 15 bis, adopted in
Kampala, provides for the referral by a State and the
commencement of an investigation proprio motu by the
Prosecutor, as set forth in paragraphs (a) and (c) of
article 13 of the Rome Statute.
Referral by the Security Council in the case of
aggression is provided for in similar terms to those for
other crimes under the jurisdiction of the Court. State
referral and the commencement of an investigation
proprio motu represent a balance between the role of
the Security Council and that of the Court as an
independent judicial tribunal. In both cases, the Court
will be able to exercise its jurisdiction with respect to
crimes of aggression committed one year after the
ratification or acceptance of the amendments by
30 States parties and after the parties have adopted, as
of 2017, the decision to activate the exercise of

13

A/65/PV.41

jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with the
amendment.

Allow me to conclude by recalling, as we did in
the Kampala Declaration,

The historic significance of the incorporation into
the Rome Statute of the definition of the crime of
aggression and the conditions for the exercise of the
jurisdiction of the Court cannot be underestimated.
Negotiations began after the adoption of the Rome
Statute, as recalled by the heretofore unfulfilled
mandate contained in paragraph 2 of article 5. During
those protracted negotiations, notable progress was
made on the definition of the crime of aggression,
leaving for Kampala and the previous phase the hard
work of defining a formula containing the conditions
for the exercise of the jurisdiction of the Court.

“the aims and purposes of the Rome Statute
and ... the noble mission and the role of the
International Criminal Court in a multilateral
system that aims to end impunity, establish the
rule of law, promote and encourage respect for
human rights and achieve sustainable peace, in
accordance with international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,”

The negotiating effort was enormous. Lasting for
years, it was guided by the successive coordinators of
the Special Working Group on the Crime of
Aggression, with the active participation of States
parties, non-parties and non-governmental organizations. In
Kampala, delegations worked hard to achieve a
formula that may not have represented the ideal that
every country would have preferred with respect to the
exercise of jurisdiction, but that largely incorporated
elements of all positions and thereby reflected a
delicate compromise of the kind that can be achieved
when great effort is exerted towards a common
objective. That made it possible for the amendment on
the crime of aggression to be adopted by consensus.
We hope that the amendments adopted by the
Review Conference will soon be communicated to
States parties by the Secretary-General, in his capacity
as depository for the Statute, and we encourage all
States parties to the Statute to ratify the amendments
adopted as soon as possible, including the one on the
crime of aggression.
The International Criminal Court is the first
permanent international criminal tribunal. Cooperation
by States, particularly the States parties, is required in
order for the Court to exercise its full jurisdiction. Part
9 of the Rome Statute establishes obligations for States
parties — which were reaffirmed by the renewed
commitment set out in the Kampala Declaration — to
strengthen our efforts to ensure full cooperation with
the Court, in particular in the enforcement of Court
decisions and the execution of arrest warrants.

and to reiterate, once again, the firm commitment of
Argentina to the International Criminal Court.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
aligns itself with the statement made yesterday by the
representative of Zambia on the Rome Statute on
behalf of the Group of African States (see A/65/PV.39).
I would also like to make some comments in my
national capacity.
At the outset, I offer warm and sincere thanks to
the President of the International Criminal Court, Mr.
Sang-Hyun Song, for the detailed presentation of the
Court’s activities from 1 August 2009 to 31 July 2010.
As President Song said, during the period under
review, the Court’s activities experienced significant
developments that will undoubtedly impact the life and
the future of that body. But I am sure that Member
States will agree that the successful organization on
African soil, in Uganda, of the first Review Conference
of the Rome Statute, was the beacon that will certainly
lead to the next phase of international criminal justice
in the next decade, in view of its considerable
contribution to the strengthening of the Rome Statute
and international humanitarian law.
In fact and in line with our expectations, the
Review Conference was not simply another
opportunity to just gather together and then return
home without having seriously considered the many
challenges that must be addressed in order to fine-tune
and complete the system established by the Rome
Statute. Besides the list of subjects considered in the
stocktaking, reflecting the Court’s major concerns, the
laudable results achieved by the Review Conference
under the Statute’s mandate for the review should also
be commended.

Mr. Mac-Donald (Suriname), Vice-President, took
the Chair.

14

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

Of course, that mission was not easy, given the
many cases of reticence seen here and there mostly for
political or strategic reasons. But the challenge was
within our grasp, thanks especially to the belief and
commitment exhibited. Results were also achieved
with regard to the difficult issue of the crime of
aggression, which required more than a decade of
intensive work. The compromise reached in Kampala
was certainly not perfect — as is the case for any
compromise — but still allowed us to define the crime
of aggression and establish conditions for the Court’s
jurisdiction in that regard, even though a decision must
still be taken after 1 January 2017 in order to activate
that jurisdiction. Thus, the decision, which required
great effort to achieve, must be correctly applied. The
Court’s credibility depends on that.
We should also welcome the widening of the
Court’s competencies with regard to war crimes
resulting from certain acts committed in a
non-international armed conflict, such as the use of
certain toxins and expanding bullets, toxic
asphyxiating gases and all similar liquids, solids and
materials, as well as the use of bullets that flatten and
spread throughout the body. That is an additional step
to strengthen international humanitarian law and
should be welcomed appropriately.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the
unwavering commitment of my country, Senegal, and
its senior authorities to the ideals of peace and justice
that underpin the international criminal justice system
and form the basis of the International Criminal
Court’s creation. Senegal’s unequivocal commitment to
those fundamental values — which has translated into
visible participation in all regional and international
campaigns and initiatives to promote and create an
international criminal court — strengthens its resolve
in the quest for an apolitical, non-discriminatory and
impartial international criminal justice system that
meets the legitimate aspirations of peoples for peace
and justice.
Mr. Gevorgian (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First, allow me to express our appreciation to
Mr. Sang-Hyun Song, President of the International
Criminal Court, for his report (see A/65/313). The
Russian delegation is pleased to note the growing
momentum in the Court’s work, its strengthened role in
combating impunity and its contribution to ensuring
wider observance of international law in general. My
delegation notes the importance of the Court as the

10-61179

first full-time international organ for criminal justice
that is general in scope and not designed to consider a
particular regional situation.
The Court possesses a powerful capability for
preventing the most serious crimes, which can affect
the interests of the entire international community. The
Court’s strength is not so much that it can punish, but
that its very existence exerts a serious influence both
on the global political climate and on States’ domestic
legislation. It is important that that potential be fully
realized. It is hard to imagine achieving that goal
without the reliable support of States and international
and regional organizations.
Russia favours strengthening the authority of the
Court and is attentively following the status of cases on
its docket. In our view, the broad participation of States
in the Rome Statute is a vitally important factor for the
Court. The Court is going through a formative stage.
The extent to which it effectively and objectively
discharges its functions will largely determine its
prospects for becoming a truly universal organ for
international criminal justice.
At the Rome Diplomatic Conference Russia voted
for the Statute, and later signed it. Now, though it
remains outside the framework of the Statute, Russia is
cooperating with the Court in a fruitful manner.
An important milestone in the development of the
Court was this year’s Review Conference of the Rome
Statute in Kampala, in which our delegation
participated actively. We are grateful to the
Government of Uganda for its excellent organization of
the event and for its hospitality. The Russian
Federation has a generally positive assessment of the
results of the Conference. Of course, the main question
before the meeting was the adoption of the amendment
on the crime of aggression, without which the
jurisdiction of the Court would be incomplete.
That matter is of great importance and its
political significance far transcends the Court. The
solution that was found was, of course, a compromise.
It is important that it was based on broad consensus
including both parties and non-parties to the Statute.
The compromise formula reflects, in our opinion, the
role of the Security Council in the global system of
collective security. However, we still have some
concerns regarding the possible prospects of the Court
exercising jurisdiction over crimes of aggression

15

A/65/PV.41

without the appropriate decision by the Security
Council.

all States parties to do their utmost to provide the Court
with the best possible assistance.

We discussed that issue in Kampala, and we
re-emphasize here that the crime of aggression bears a
clear, undeniable political dimension. It is always
committed not by individuals but by leaders of States
relying on the full power of their States, so an
individual cannot possibly commit the crime of
aggression without aggression by the State. Under the
United Nations Charter, the universal treaty
superseding all other international treaties, the
prerogative of establishing that an act of aggression has
been committed belongs to the Security Council.

However, we are acutely aware of the necessity
for States to have a consistent, clear and unambiguous
framework for cooperation under the Statute. In that
regard, we note the Court’s efforts to engage in
bilateral agreements with States parties with regard to
cooperation under the Rome Statute’s general
obligation to cooperate.

That is, in our view, the objective legal situation.
The Court cannot operate in isolation from it. It has
worked and is working in an international legal context
up until now. In that regard, we are of the view that the
interpretation and application of the relevant provisions
on aggression should be implemented in full
compliance with the United Nations Charter. On that
basis, we believe it reasonable that the Conference
conditioned the application of the provisions on
aggression on the adoption of a special and separate
decision to that effect to be taken after 1 January 2017.
Mr. Moeletsi (Lesotho): We align ourselves with
the
statement
delivered
by
the
Permanent
Representative of Zambia on behalf of the African
States parties to the International Criminal Court. We
commend the Court for its comprehensive report,
contained in document A/65/313. As a State party to
the Rome Statute, Lesotho has consistently expressed
its support for the Court. Lesotho reiterates that
support today. My delegation sees the Court as an
important institution in the fight against impunity and
in the promotion of justice.
Our statement will address the cooperation of
States parties and other States with the Court, the
universality of the Rome Statute and the recent Review
Conference of the Rome Statute, which was held in
Kampala in the Republic of Uganda. Our basic premise
is that the Court cannot discharge its functions
effectively without the cooperation of States parties
and other States, but particularly the States parties. As
stressed in the report, the Court relies on the
cooperation of States parties and other States in such
areas as facilitating investigations, arresting and
surrendering persons, protecting witnesses and
enforcing sentences. It is in that context that we urge

16

Regarding the universality of the Rome Statute,
we are pleased to note that, with the ratification of the
Rome Statute by Bangladesh, Seychelles, Saint Lucia
and the Republic of Moldova, there are now 114 States
parties to the Statute. It is a remarkable achievement
that so many States from all regions have ratified the
Statute within such a short space of time. It is also a
genuine reflection of the international community’s
increasing rejection of impunity for serious crimes and
evidence that there is a rising tide in favour of the rule
of law.
The crimes falling under the jurisdiction of the
Court are universally accepted as the most serious
crimes of international concern. We share a common
responsibility to ensure that they are effectively
investigated and that the perpetrators are brought to
justice. We are now witnessing a historic shift towards
universal acceptance of the thesis that the long-term
interests of all nations, irrespective of size, region or
political orientation, are better served by strengthening
the rule of law and promoting justice. We encourage all
States that are not parties to positively consider being
States parties to the Rome Statute.
The recent Review Conference of the Rome
Statute in Kampala was undoubtedly a success. It
tackled critical questions such as the definition of the
crime of aggression and the conditions under which the
Court may exercise jurisdiction in respect of that
crime. The Conference also provided an opportune
moment to take stock of the state of criminal justice.
The stocktaking exercise covered areas such as peace
and justice and complementarity. Lesotho continues to
believe that, in the final analysis, the success of
international criminal justice founded on the Rome
Statute must partly be determined by the capacity of
domestic court systems to deal with the serious crimes
in question. We therefore deem it fitting that a
stocktaking exercise was part of the Review
Conference.

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

In conclusion, we reiterate Lesotho’s firm and
long-standing commitment to the integrity of the Rome
Statute and to an effective and credible International
Criminal Court. We believe that the Court should enjoy
the broadest possible support from all States. As United
Nations Member States, we all share the universal
values that are fundamental to the protection of human
dignity. That protection relies on concerted action on
our part to prevent the most serious crimes affecting
the international community as a whole.
Mr. Böhlke (Brazil): I thank the President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Judge Sang-Hyun
Song, for presenting the sixth report of the Court (see
A/65/313) to the General Assembly (see A/65/PV.39). I
also commend him and his fellow judges for their
significant contribution towards fostering international
justice.
International law has been under constant
development, and one of the hallmarks of that
impressive movement is the attribution of a special
condition to individuals. They are no longer only the
subject matter upon which treaties are negotiated. Now,
individuals are entitled to specific rights and also bear
responsibilities under international law.
In that context, the Rome Statute puts the human
person at the centre of international law. The ICC is the
first permanent, treaty-based court to try persons
accused of the most serious crimes of international
concern. At the same time, it allows victims of such
crimes to be part of the proceedings in order to present
their views and observations, with the possibility of
obtaining some form of reparation for their suffering.
However, the Court cannot move ahead alone. In
order for the Court to succeed in its efforts to provide
justice, it needs the vital support and cooperation of all
States. Universality is a permanent concern of those
who helped to establish the Court. My delegation
sincerely hopes that more States, large and small, may
ratify the Statute or accede to it in the near future with
a view to granting a truly universal character to the
Court.
Like previous delegations, Brazil applauds the
recent decision of the Governments of Bangladesh,
Moldova, Saint Lucia and Seychelles to ratify the
Rome Statute, making the number of States parties 114.
In becoming parties to the Rome Statute, those States
have contributed to strengthening the legitimacy of the

10-61179

Court and have joined the international community in
its endeavour to put an end to impunity.
On a different note, we wish to express our
satisfaction with the significant achievements of the
Review Conference of the Rome Statute, held in
Kampala earlier this year. At the Kampala conference
we took an important step in the fight against impunity.
Based on a consensus decision taken by all States
parties, with the valuable support of many other
interested delegations, we were able to amend the
Rome Statute to include not only the definition of the
crime of aggression, but also the conditions under
which the Court may exercise jurisdiction with respect
to that crime.
While acknowledging the role played by the
Security Council in determining the occurrence of an
act of aggression, the Conference agreed to authorize
the Prosecutor, in the absence of such determination, to
initiate an investigation on his own initiative or upon
State referral, with the prior authorization of the
Pre-Trial Division of the Court. That approach ensures
the independence of the Court.
My delegation has strongly advocated for the
need to define the crime of aggression. That position
reflects Brazil’s long-standing commitment to
international law and, specifically, the primacy of
multilateral rules on the use of force. In our view, the
adoption of the definition of the crime of aggression
strengthens the Court, fulfils an obligation undertaken
in Rome in 1998 and contributes to a more just, safe
and equitable international order.
Obviously, the successful outcome of the Review
Conference was possible only in the light of the firm
engagement and remarkable flexibility of many
delegations. The result was a compromise deal that
combined elements from all participants. Part of that
package was the decision, by the same majority of
States parties as is required for the adoption of an
amendment to the Statute, to activate the agreed
mechanism only after 1 January 2017.
Even though it was not the preference of my
delegation, we accepted that the Court does not have
jurisdiction with respect to crimes of aggression
committed on the territory of non-States parties or by
their nationals. Nor does the Court have jurisdiction
with regard to States parties that declare that they do
not accept the Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression. Otherwise, the Court continues to have

17

A/65/PV.41

jurisdiction over the crime of aggression in relation to
all States parties.

given rise to broad concern in the international
community.

In addition to the progress made with regard to
the crime of aggression, my delegation notes with great
satisfaction other important achievements of the
Review Conference, such as the adoption of
amendments to article 8 and the Kampala Declaration,
which reaffirms our commitment to the Rome Statute
and the Court. Moreover, the Review Conference
constituted a valuable opportunity to engage States
parties, observers and civil society in a more in-depth
discussion of the current status of international
criminal justice, addressing some pressing issues, such
as peace, justice, complementarity, victims and
cooperation.

The first Review Conference of the Rome Statute,
held in Kampala in June, adopted an amendment to the
article on the crime of aggression. China, as an
observer State, participated in its negotiation in a
positive and responsible manner. China has noted that
some countries still have concerns and reservations
regarding that amendment. We will closely follow
developments in that regard and are ready to further
exchange views with all countries on that issue.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to stress the
importance of further strengthening cooperation
between the International Criminal Court and the
United Nations. The work of the Court contributes to
our efforts to include the concept of the rule of law in
the many ongoing initiatives undertaken within the
United Nations system.
Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank President Song for his
report on the International Criminal Court (see
A/65/313).
China always attaches importance to the role of
international criminal justice in the advancement of
social development. China is in favour of setting up an
international criminal judicial institution that is
independent, impartial, effective and universal to serve
as a complement to national legal systems in punishing
the
gravest
international
crimes,
promoting
international peace and achieving judicial justice.
We have been closely following the activities of
the International Criminal Court. The Court has now
been established for more than seven years. Not only
has it made some progress in institution-building, but it
also has entered into full judicial functioning, initiated
the investigation and prosecution of a number of cases
and carried out explorations in judicial practice. It
should be acknowledged that the Court’s activities
have heightened the attention of the international
community with regard to international criminal law.
At the same time, we have also noted that some of the
Court’s practices have affected the stability of and the
harmony among countries in the regions concerned and

18

The Chinese delegation believes that the Court,
as part of the international community and as a
member of the world peace and security system, cannot
operate successfully without the support of countries
and relevant international organizations. The Court
must conduct its work within the current international
law system, based on the United Nations Charter.
International judicial justice and international
peace are mutually reinforcing and complementary. A
fundamental requirement for the pursuit of judicial
justice should be to safeguard the values of peace and
security and maintain a harmonious and stable
international order. Therefore, it is our hope that the
Court will exercise its functions more prudently in its
future work, further establish its credibility and,
through its objective and impartial performance, win
broader trust and support from the international
community so as to make its contribution to peace and
justice.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): At the outset, allow
me to convey my delegation’s sincere condolences to
the Government and people of Barbados and of
Argentina on the sad loss of their Prime Minister and
former President, respectively.
Let me take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for the report of the Court (see
A/65/313), which contains useful information on this
agenda item.
Botswana aligns itself with the statement
delivered at the 39th meeting by the representative of
Zambia on behalf of the African States parties. I would
like to make some general comments on a number of
issues in my national capacity.

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

The consideration of this item comes at time
when we have just witnessed the historic Review
Conference in Kampala, where we adopted some
amendments to the Statute, including a definition of the
crime of aggression.
As a State party to the Rome Statute, Botswana is
committed to maintaining the integrity of the Statute
and supporting the promotion of its universality. We
also believe that the International Criminal Court
should be given the freedom to exercise its mandate
without political or external influence.
We are, however, alive to the fact that the role
and mandate of the Court is intended to be
complementary to national judicial systems. States
have the responsibility to develop legislation that will
effectively deal with, and act as a deterrent to,
perpetrators of crimes, including crimes against
humanity. That complementary function of the Court
should not be misinterpreted as an affront to national
jurisdiction and establishments, but should simply be
understood as assisting our own efforts in closing the
impunity gap.
We should never lose sight of the deterrent value
provided by the Rome Statute in safeguarding the
interests of global peace and security. The Statute gives
the international community an excellent opportunity
to advance the ideals of the United Nations Charter, in
which there is universality in the respect for human
rights and enjoyment of fundamental freedoms for all.
Botswana — consistent with its commitment to
the ideals and principles of the United Nations Charter
and to the promotion of democracy, good governance,
respect for human rights and the rule of law — is of the
firm conviction that it is essential for Member States to
extend the necessary cooperation to the Court in order
to ensure that the perpetrators of grave crimes are
brought to justice.
Botswana fully subscribes to the notion that the
objectives of international peace and security may be
pursued jointly, with the Court exercising its judicial
mandate while the relevant organs of the United
Nations exercise their political mandate. My delegation
is fully convinced that the relationship between the
Court and the United Nations system provides a good
platform for joint initiatives aimed at resolving
conflicts and addressing the plight of victims, as well
as promoting accountability on the part of those who

10-61179

are entrusted with the rare privilege and authority to
govern.
We therefore believe that it is timely to invest our
collective energy in consolidating and strengthening
the role of the Court by building bridges between the
Court and the countries in question in order to reduce
the current negative perception about the work of the
ICC. We do not believe that the establishment of the
ICC Liaison Office at the African Union will be
contrary to that spirit, but rather that it would go a long
way in addressing the misconceptions about the role
and function of the Court.
Let me conclude by once again reaffirming
Botswana’s commitment to the preservation of the
integrity and independence of the International
Criminal Court. To that end, I am pleased to report that
Botswana is currently reviewing its domestic
legislation with a view to giving full effect to the
provisions of the Rome Statute.
Mr. Joyini (South Africa): South Africa would
like to begin its intervention by associating itself with
the statement delivered at the 39th meeting by the
Permanent Representative of Zambia on behalf of the
African States parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
I am delighted to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Song, President of the International Criminal
Court, to New York. We thank him and his team of
judges, not only for the Court’s report (see A/65/313)
but also for their tireless efforts in the promotion of
international criminal justice with the ultimate
objective of securing a peaceful world for all of us who
live in it.
We have taken note of the report of the ICC to the
General Assembly. As always, we found the report to
be comprehensive and to touch on very important
aspects relating to the Court’s work.
We have particularly taken note of section III of
the report, on judicial proceedings. As a firm believer
in judicial independence, we will restrict our comments
on that chapter. We note, however, that the effective
and efficient functioning of the ICC itself, being
independent but also accountable in its administration,
is also an important factor in bringing an end to
impunity and for setting standards for the prosecution
and adjudication of the most heinous crimes of concern
to humanity.

19

A/65/PV.41

A lot has been achieved over the past eight years,
with the ICC now having five active situations under
investigation or in the trial phase. We look forward to
the completion of the Court’s first trial, a milestone
that will make tangible the fight against impunity.
Again, we have taken note of the situations under
analysis by the Prosecutor. We are hopeful that the
Office of the Prosecutor will, with the requisite
urgency, consider those issues and come to a decision.
We welcome the draft policy on the preliminary
examinations phase, and we are in the process of
studying this policy document. We also note that the
Prosecutor, having begun to deal with the situation in
Kenya, has decided to proceed with investigations. We
trust that other situations that have been pending for
some time, including those in Georgia, Colombia and
Palestine, inter alia, will be decided upon in due
course.
In our statement of last year under this agenda
item, we urged the Office of the Prosecutor to adopt a
purposive interpretation to article 12 of the Statute in
considering whether to proceed with investigations. It
is our view that, in order for the Court to be truly
universal, it should be of benefit to victims everywhere
in the world.
The next two years are going to be significant in
the life of the Court. A new Prosecutor is to be elected
in 2012. We hope that the process of electing the new
Prosecutor, in conformity with the Rome Statute and
the relevant resolutions of the Assembly of States
Parties, has begun in earnest. We are confident that the
Assembly of States Parties will select a person of
integrity to hold that very important office.
Without question, the highlight for the Court and
for international criminal justice in general in 2010 was
the Review Conference of the Rome Statute held in
June in Kampala. We are thankful to the Government
of Uganda for hosting what we believe was a very
successful Review Conference.
My delegation was particularly pleased with the
conduct of the stocktaking exercise, which provided an
opportunity for ICC States parties to look back and
take stock of the contributions that the Court has made
to international criminal justice. In the course of the
stocktaking at the Review Conference, we were able to
consider, in a comprehensive and honest manner,
various aspects, including cooperation, peace and
justice, complementarity and the impact of the Rome

20

Statute on victims and affected communities. In all of
those areas, we were able to engage not only with each
other as States parties, but also with non-States parties
and civil society, on contributions that the Court can
make and has made to the further development of the
international criminal justice system.
As an outcome of those deliberations we were
able to adopt a number of resolutions and, importantly,
a ministerial Declaration on the Review Conference, in
which we collectively reaffirmed our commitment to
the principles and values underlying and reflected in
the Rome Statute. As we proceed to deal with issues
after the review, let us not forget those deliberations.
We should continuously look back and ask ourselves
whether our actions are in keeping with the
commitments that we made in Kampala.
My delegation was particularly pleased to serve,
together with the delegation of Denmark, as a focal
point for the topic of complementarity, which, as we all
know, is at the heart of the Rome Statute. Under that
principle, the Court can only act where States are
unable or unwilling to genuinely investigate and
prosecute crimes in their own jurisdictions. Thus, even
where serious international crimes have been
committed, a case would not be admissible to the Court
if the State concerned was itself conducting genuine
domestic proceedings. As focal points — and this idea
was affirmed by the States parties at the Review
Conference — we believe that, in order to give effect
to the principle of complementarity in the Statute,
national jurisdictions must be strengthened and enabled
to conduct genuine national investigations and trials of
the crimes included in the Rome Statute. We are
delighted to have been reappointed by the Bureau to
continue on as a focal point with a view to taking
forward the decisions reached in Kampala.
But, of course, there were other issues on the
agenda of the Review Conference, most notably the
question of article 124 and the proposal on the
enforcement of sentences. We are particularly pleased
that we were able to reach a decision to facilitate the
willingness and capability of States to offer facilities
for the enforcement of sentences.
Without question the main issue on the agenda of
the Review Conference was the definition of the crime
of aggression. At this stage, we all know that the Rome
Statute includes aggression as a crime but provides that
the Court may exercise jurisdiction only after the

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

adoption of a definition. The deliberations, both before
and during the Review Conference, brought into sharp
focus the relationship between the Court and the
Security Council. It is unnecessary to rehash the debate
on whether the Council’s mandate in the maintenance
of international peace and security is primary or
exclusive; surely we all know it is the former. Many of
us expressed serious concern about leaving the
determination of the crime of aggression in the
exclusive hands of the Security Council.
While the legally complex outcome of
Kampala — which provides for the possibility of
opting out and delays the exercise of jurisdiction — is
less than what we would have liked, my delegation is
nevertheless pleased that we were able to reach a
compromise outcome by consensus. We trust that the
required number of ratifications and a positive decision
by the Assembly of States Parties in 2017 on the
exercise of jurisdiction by the Court over the crime of
aggression will allow the operationalization of the
definition in seven years’ time.
As we end our statement, we wish to say a special
word of gratitude to the President of the Assembly of
States Parties, Ambassador Wenaweser, who will be
presiding over the Assembly for the last time in
December. We thank him for his tireless efforts in
sometimes difficult situations.
In conclusion, the International Criminal Court is
an institution designed to create a better world. We will
continue to support the Court, so that it can grow from
strength to strength.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): My delegation has taken note of the
sixth annual report of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) to the United Nations (see A/65/313), presented
by the President of the Court, Judge Sang-Hyun Song.
To begin with, we would like to concur fully with
the statement made yesterday by the representative of
Zambia, who spoke on behalf of the African States
parties to the International Criminal Court.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was voluntarily referred to the Court by our
authorities, acting on behalf of populations in our
country, which has been stricken by what some have
rightly called the first African world war. The
International Criminal Court was created, in fact, to
take on those types of situations. That is why the

10-61179

foundation of the Rome Statute, based on what to some
is a simple theory, is a reality that the peoples of the
Congo, particularly those of North and South Kivu and
the district of Ituri, are living every day.
Wars — and all forms of violence that negate the
dignity and sacred nature of human beings — have no
nationality. That reality, which some wish to confine to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to
escape their own obligations and responsibilities, is
intolerable and unacceptable. It concerns us all, and
cooperation with the Court must be the foundation for
our action. Regarding cooperation — and we will never
cease pointing this out — the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was the very first State party to develop
significant cooperation with the Court. Our country’s
efforts in that area are unquestionably a model of
cooperation with the Court, and several legal
documents testify to that fact.
First, the Democratic Republic of the Congo did
not wait for the Rome Statute to enter into force before
ratifying it. We ratified it on 30 March 2002, more than
three months before its entry into force. Secondly, my
country proactively referred its situation to the Court
as of 3 March 2004, signed an agreement on judicial
cooperation with the Court on 6 October 2004, and
concluded an agreement on judicial assistance with the
then United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Court.
Thirdly, on three occasions in connection with
proceedings before the Court and at the request of the
Court, the Democratic Republic of the Congo executed
arrest warrants from the Court against its nationals.
Clearly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
believes that peace and justice are complementary. We
recognize through our experience the irreplaceable role
of justice as a factor in social harmony, national
reconciliation, peace, security and stability. It was with
the help of justice that we were able to bring peace
back to the districts of Katanga and North Katanga. It
is with the help of justice that we intend to bring peace
back to the entire country. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the recent arrest in Paris, on an
ICC warrant, of the Executive Secretary of the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR).
Mr. Calixte Mbarushimana will have to answer for war
crimes and crimes against humanity, including murder,
rape, torture, persecution and destruction of property,
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
2009.

21

A/65/PV.41

The sixth annual report of the International
Criminal Court to the United Nations, which we are
discussing in this meeting, describes the very
significant progress made in the work of the Court,
with the start of trials in some situations and the
confirmation of charges in others, as well as the
opening of new investigations. In that regard, my
delegation would like to take this opportunity to recall
its interest in seeing the proposal for organizing trials
in situ implemented. That would fulfil a long-held
desire to grant some moral satisfaction to the victims
of the crimes and to deter potential recidivists.
Such progress in the course of international
criminal justice is being achieved in the context of a
strong campaign of hostility against the Court. The
Court should set up mechanisms that can curb such
campaigns, which risk undermining the Court’s
reputation and compromising its achievements, despite
the fact that more than half the Member States of the
Organization are now parties to the Court, less than
five years after its entry into effect. It is just as
important, however, that the Court consider its own
operations, reflect on how it works and become more
professional and less political. Politics and justice do
not necessarily go well together. As a final note to this
part of my statement, my delegation would like to
welcome to the club of States parties to the Court its
most recent members, namely, Bangladesh, Saint
Lucia, Seychelles and Moldova, which bring the
number of States parties to 114.
The Review Conference held in Kampala in May
and June was a valuable opportunity for Member States
to confirm the achievements of Rome and to strengthen
the belief that the Court is a gift of hope for future
generations and an important step forward for respect
for human rights and the rule of law. The Kampala
Declaration, in which States reaffirmed their
willingness to promote the Rome Statute and its full
implementation, as well as its universal nature; the
stocktaking of international criminal justice at
Kampala; and the modifications to the Statute, which
now includes a definition of the crime of aggression
and the conditions under which the Court may exercise
jurisdiction over that crime, are all achievements that
we should guard jealously.
In conclusion, and to reiterate my delegation’s
willingness to watch over the respect for the integrity
of the Statute of the Court, I would like once again to
call on those delegations that have not yet done so to

22

become States parties to the Court, so that together we
may contribute to the universality of the fight against
impunity.
Mr. Muhumuza (Uganda): I join other speakers
before me in expressing my delegation’s condolences
to the Governments of Barbados and Argentina during
this time of great loss to their nations.
Uganda is humbled by the words of gratitude
expressed by various delegations concerning our
hosting of the first Review Conference of the Rome
Statute from 31 May to 11 June.
To begin with, I associate my delegation with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of Zambia on behalf of the African States parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
We thank the President of the International
Criminal Court for his report (see A/65/313). Uganda
reiterates its commitment to the Court and the fight
against impunity, which it showed in making the first
State referral and, more recently, by hosting the first
Review Conference of the Rome Statute. At the
Conference, States parties reviewed and amended the
Statute, conducted a stocktaking of international
criminal justice and made significant pledges on a wide
range of issues.
Kampala was indeed a continuation of the legacy
of Rome in the pursuit of a more humane world.
Holding the Conference there offered an opportunity to
many victims from the region to interface with the
other stakeholders in the fight against impunity. The
adoption of the Kampala Declaration reaffirms our
commitment to the Rome Statute and its full
implementation, as well as its universality and
integrity. We remain particularly concerned, however,
that Joseph Kony and the Lord’s Resistance Army
continue to cause untold suffering to defenceless
women and children, in spite of the indictment.
The Court is steadily marching on the road to
universality. Accordingly, we welcome the new
members — Seychelles, Saint Lucia and Moldova —
whose ratification of the Rome Statute has brought the
total membership to 114. We call upon other States that
have not yet done so to consider ratifying the Rome
Statute. Universal ratification will send a clear message
that there is no room for impunity for anyone,
anywhere.

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

We recognize that the Court relies on the
cooperation of States, international organizations and
civil society to carry out its functions, in accordance
with the Rome Statute and international agreements
concluded by the Court. We therefore call on all States
to offer the necessary cooperation so as to enable the
Court to carry out its mandate without reserve.
Finally, unlike traditional jurisdictions, the Rome
Statute recognizes and allows victims to participate
actively in the proceedings, with the possibility of
compensation for the harm inflicted. We therefore
encourage the Court, in its recruitment of staff, to take
into account the cultural peculiarities of victims and
witnesses who are required to be in The Hague to
participate in Court proceedings. We believe that the
furtherance of justice calls for appropriate attention to
that important matter.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran expresses its
appreciation to the President of the International
Criminal Court for submitting the sixth report of the
Court, contained in document A/65/313. The report is
unique in the sense that it contains the outcome of the
first Review Conference of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, held from 31 May to
11 June in Kampala.
The Review Conference managed to reach
agreement on the definition of the crime of aggression.
That is a breakthrough in many respects and offers
hope that the most serious crimes of international
concern will not go unpunished. While we rejoiced in
seeing that long-overdue desire to criminalize
aggression bear fruit, we cannot help expressing our
dissatisfaction at the fact that the outcome of the
Conference was far from the expectation, especially
since the implementation of the most promising clauses
was postponed for at least seven years.
The Islamic Republic of Iran reiterates its
position that any act of aggression is of a grave nature,
irrespective of its consequences, and constitutes an
international crime. That finding cannot be affected by
so-called understandings. Nor can we invoke resolution
3314 (XXIX), on the definition of aggression, to
distinguish between acts of aggression, by their
consequences.

10-61179

In the view of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
inclusion of a clear reference to the Charter of the
United Nations left no doubt that any use of armed
force by a State in cases other than those stated in the
Charter of the United Nations, namely, the use of
armed force in self-defence if a State is the victim of
an armed attack and the use of armed force when
authorized by the Security Council under Chapter VII
of the Charter, is unlawful and should be qualified as a
crime of aggression under resolution 3314 (XXIX).
As a victim of an all-out act of aggression, the
Islamic Republic of Iran attaches the utmost
importance to the process of defining the crime of
aggression and including it in the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. We are delighted to have
actively engaged in the process, as a result of which
the International Criminal Court now has the necessary
legal jurisdiction to prosecute the perpetrators of the
most serious crimes of international concern. However,
the mission will not be accomplished until and unless
we make sure that the conditions for exercising such
jurisdiction are met. We look forward to see that vision
come true in 2017, and we stand ready to cooperate
constructively with others in that direction.
Also, while regretting that the Review
Conference had no chance to work towards
criminalizing the use of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly the use of nuclear weapons as the most
destructive and inhumane weapons, the delegation of
the Islamic Republic of Iran hopes that that key issue
will be kept high on the agenda of the next Review
Conference.
My delegation takes note of paragraphs 81 to 85
of the report, concerning developments in connection
with the possible exercise of jurisdiction by the Court
over the international crimes committed in the
Palestinian territories by the Israeli regime. While we
understand that the Court is still examining the
jurisdictional question, we hope that such important
technicalities will, in the end, lead to justice through
the prosecution of the perpetrators of the gravest
crimes of international concern.
The declaration filed by Palestine with the
Registrar of the Court on 22 January 2009, pursuant to
article 12, paragraph 3, of the Statute, provides
jurisdiction to the Court with respect to the crimes
committed on the territory of Palestine since 1 July
2002. It is expected that the Prosecutor will interpret

23

A/65/PV.41

article 12 of the Statute in such a manner that the main
purpose of the Court, namely, ending impunity for the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community, will be realized.
For its part, the International Criminal Court
should be faithful to its Statute and general
international law. That having been said, the Court
cannot ignore international rules relating to the
immunity of State officials, as recognized under article
98 of the Rome Statute. Likewise, the referral of cases
to the Court should not be based on political
motivation or selectivity. The Court should cautiously
take into account the consequences that its decisions
might have on the advancement of peace and stability
in such cases.
In that respect, I draw the Assembly’s attention to
the concerns raised by the African Union, the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, as well as many other countries,
concerning the recent decisions of the Court on the
Darfur situation.
Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): We join other
delegations in expressing our sincere condolences and
sympathies to the Governments and people of
Barbados and Argentina as they mourn the loss of their
esteemed and dear departed leaders.
At the outset, allow me to express my thanks and
the appreciation of my delegation to the President of
the Assembly for convening this debate on the report of
the International Criminal Court contained in document
A/65/313 and to the President of the International
Criminal Court, Judge Sang-Hyun Song, for presenting
the comprehensive report of the Court. My delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Zambia on behalf of the
African States parties to the International Criminal
Court and would like to make a few comments from a
national perspective.
Sierra Leone welcomes the annual report of the
International Criminal Court and the significant
judicial progress made by the Court. My delegation
also congratulates the Government of Uganda, the
Bureau of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome
Statute, States parties and other States, nongovernmental organizations, civil society organizations
and all those who in diverse ways contributed
immensely to the successful outcome of the Review
Conference of the Rome Statute held in Kampala from

24

31 May to 11 June. The historic achievements made in
Uganda, including the adoption of the definition of the
crime of aggression and the conditions for the exercise
of jurisdiction regarding such crimes, form a major
milestone in the development of international criminal
justice.
The universality of the Rome Statute is critical in
the fight against impunity. In that vein, my delegation
welcomes the ratification of the Rome Statute by
Seychelles, Bangladesh, Saint Lucia and the Republic
of Moldova. We encourage States that are not parties to
consider becoming members of the Rome Statute. As is
the case for other international courts and tribunals —
such as the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia and the Special Court for Sierra
Leone — cooperation continues to be the main
challenge facing the International Criminal Court. With
regard to the diversity in the situations of the various
courts in terms of mandate, local situations, political
will and methods of funding, to mention a few areas
applicable to each of those ad hoc tribunals, specific
lessons learned in terms of cooperation as experienced
in each case could be of tremendous significance to the
International Criminal Court. We therefore underline
the need for each and every State to do everything
within its power to cooperate with and provide support
for the Court in the implementation of its judicial
mandate. We should always remember that the Court’s
potential for deterrence lies mainly in the likelihood of
the threat of prosecution being carried out. Any
dilution of that threat makes the worldwide fight
against impunity and the role of the Court within that
process much more difficult and the risk of failure
greater.
As we all know, the International Criminal Court
does not have the advantage of being focused only on
one situation. It operates in situations that can be
volatile and where the security situation can vary from
day to day. It operates in situations where there are
difficulties in spreading information and where the
infrastructure is usually challenging at best. We know
that type of situation very well; not so long ago that
was the situation facing my country. Just one decade
ago we were in a state of crisis, but as of now we have
peace, we have justice and we have a functioning
democratic system. Many challenges await us, but we
are in a good position to meet those challenges. One
reason for our success is that we faced the need for

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

accountability head-on and took steps to address that
need.
Of course, the Special Court for Sierra Leone
cannot and does not claim sole responsibility for our
change of fortune. That credit may be claimed by the
good men and women of Sierra Leone and the existing
political will backed by the support and assistance of
the international community and our good bilateral
partners. Nevertheless, the Special Court has in its own
way made an important contribution to the restoration
of the rule of law, which has helped us to move
forward. It has done so by being present in the
everyday life of our country, by not interfering in
politics or internal matters and by being there and
making an effort to be known and understood and to
engage with all Sierra Leoneans. Here we want to
reaffirm and acknowledge the support and cooperation
of the international community, the people of Sierra
Leone and civil society organizations.
In the area of complementarity, we recognized the
fact that the role of national jurisdictions is crucial in
the prosecution of the perpetrators of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide. Because of that,
our Government has drafted a bill for the
domestication of the Rome Statute and is currently
collaborating with the Special Court for Sierra Leone
on the establishment of a witness and victim support
unit within the national judiciary. Thus, all actions and
activities through potential partner countries aimed at
supporting national jurisdictions in meeting their
obligations under the Rome Statute — including
related activities, like those of the Rule of Law Unit of
the United Nations, aimed at strengthening the rule of
law and domestic systems — are pivotal in the fight
against impunity.
Justice must be protected, as justice is a critical
component of peace. Without justice, there can be no
peace, and without peace the lives of hundreds of
thousands of people are put in jeopardy, right now and
for future generations. We must not allow a weakening
of international criminal justice processes; we must,
instead, support them, promote them, protect them and
defend them. This is the only way forward to lasting
peace and a prosperous future for all.
To conclude, my delegation reiterates its support
for the Court as a key element in the restoration of
peace and international rule of law. To maximize its
potential, we must continue our efforts towards the

10-61179

universal ratification and implementation of the Rome
Statute, we must provide the Court with clear and
steady cooperation and, above all, we must assist the
Court by providing it with clear guidance and
constructive support. We recognize the fact that
capacity-building is the key to the realization of that
objective.
Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Ecuador is pleased, Sir, to see you
presiding and with the way you are conducting this
portion of the debate.
The delegation of Ecuador has taken due note of
the report by the President of the International
Criminal Court, Judge Sang-Hyun Song, contained in
document A/65/313, and we thank him.
Ecuador is happy to note an increase in the
number of States parties to the Rome Statute, with the
accession of four new States, Bangladesh, Seychelles,
Saint Lucia and the Republic of Moldova. The current
total of 114 States parties to the Statute confirms the
trend within the international community to take
decisive action to counter impunity.
Ecuador attended and actively participated in the
Review Conference of the Rome Statute that took place
in May and June 2010 in Kampala. We take this
opportunity to reiterate to the people and Government
of Uganda our thanks for the hospitality that we
enjoyed during the Review Conference. The subjects
discussed during the Conference are of critical
importance, and support for the objectives of that
historic event will ensure that progress is made in finetuning the international criminal justice system.
In Ecuador’s view, the principle of combating
impunity is of absolute importance; it is even written
into Ecuadorian law. Indeed, my country’s Constitution
itself states in article 80 that no statute of limitations
shall apply to crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and crimes of aggression.
Ecuador opposed article 124 of the Statute, because we
cannot condone the inclusion of a measure that might
open the way to impunity for a given State perpetrating
one of the crimes identified in Ecuador’s Constitution.
Along those lines, when it comes to taking stock
of international criminal justice, and specifically on the
theme of peace and justice, we must remain realistic.
Although the International Criminal Court has not
existed for very long, experience has shown us that

25

A/65/PV.41

impunity cannot be accepted, even in the interests of
peace, and that undertakings like truth and
reconciliation commissions will only be effective if
they go hand in hand with punishment of the guilty.
We would like to echo what was said by the
representative of Argentina, namely, that the SecretaryGeneral must be urged to submit to States parties the
amendments adopted in the Kampala Review
Conference and to urge those States to ratify them as
soon as possible.
In any case and to conclude, Ecuador, as an active
member of the Rome Statute, reiterates its support for
the International Criminal Court. We agree with the
President of the Court, Judge Sang-Hyun Song, that the
Review Conference provided an impetus to disseminate
and strengthen the influence of the Rome Statute in
national jurisdictions. Furthermore, we agree that the
United Nations is the only forum in which to carry that
process forward.
Mr. Nickels (United States of America): We wish
to join others who have expressed condolences to the
people of Barbados on the death of Prime Minister
David John Howard Thompson. We also wish to
express our condolences to the people of Argentina on
the death of former President Néstor Kirchner.
We would also like to thank President Song for
his report contained in document A/65/313 and for his
service to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Although the United States is not a party to the Rome
Statute, we too have an abiding interest in seeing the
Court successfully complete the prosecutions it has
begun. As President Obama’s national security strategy
states, “the end of impunity and the promotion of
justice are not just moral imperatives; they are
stabilizing forces in international affairs”.
The United States remains steadfastly committed
to promoting the rule of law and to helping to bring
violators of international humanitarian law to justice,
and will continue to play a leadership role in righting
wrongs of that type. As we have emphasized, we
cannot ignore the terrible crimes that have been
perpetrated, wherever they might have occured, and the
massive human suffering that the world has witnessed.
The International Criminal Court plays a key role in
bringing perpetrators of the worst atrocities to justice.
The United States was pleased to participate as an
observer at the Review Conference of the Rome Statute

26

in Kampala and at the meetings of the Assembly of
States Parties in The Hague and New York that
preceded it. We sent a large observer delegation to
Kampala and participated actively in the stocktaking
exercise, in the many important and stimulating side
events and in the substantive discussions of
amendments to the Rome Statute. The United States
Government co-sponsored a side event on positive
complementarity in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which has provided an important foundation
for our work on the issue since Kampala. Moreover, we
were the only non-party State to make pledges. We
hope that our active and principled engagement has
helped to enhance the discussions and to improve the
outcomes of Kampala, including the outcome regarding
the crime of aggression.
We recognize that the amendments adopted at
Kampala were a compromise that few if any
delegations consider perfect. My delegation’s concerns,
in particular about the possibility of investigations and
prosecutions under article 15 bis, in cases where the
Security Council has not determined that an act of
aggression has occurred, are well known. We believe
that it was wise for the States parties to subject the
exercise of ICC jurisdiction under that provision to a
decision to be taken after 1 January 2017. That will
provide breathing space in which measures that require
attention can be considered and in which progress on
other issues facing the international community — the
effort to ensure accountability for perpetrators of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide — can
be consolidated.
We note that the resolutions under which both the
aggression amendments and the amendments under the
so-called Belgian amendment were adopted in
Kampala state that the amendments are subject to
ratification or acceptance and shall enter into force in
accordance with article 121, paragraph 5, of the Rome
Statute. As such, the provisions do not provide
authority for the Court to exercise jurisdiction
regarding those crimes when committed by the
nationals of a State that does not ratify them or on the
territory of such a State.
In conclusion, the United States would like to
again extend our thanks to the States parties to the
Rome Statute for the gracious way that our
participation has been received over the past year after
such a long absence from the Assembly of States
Parties meetings. We would also in particular like to

10-61179

A/65/PV.41

thank the Government of Uganda for its warm
hospitality at the Review Conference.
We look forward to continued engagement with
the States parties to the Rome Statute.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on agenda item 73, entitled “Report of the
International Criminal Court”.
I would like to once again welcome the new
accessions to the International Criminal Court, namely,
Saint
Lucia,
the
Republic
of
Moldova,

10-61179

Bangladesh and Seychelles. Allow me also to express
sympathy and extend condolences to the Government
and people of Barbados on the passing of their Prime
Minister, Mr. David Thompson. I would also like to
express sympathy and extend condolences to the
Government and people of Argentina on the passing of
former President Néstor Kirchner.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 73.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

27
