S/PV.9097

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9097th meeting

Wednesday, 20 July 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Mathur
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Olanda
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Matar
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 June 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/530)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-43255 (E)
*2243255*

S/PV.9097

The situation in the Middle East

facility that was declared by the Syrian Arab Republic
as never having been used to produce and/or weaponize
chemical warfare agents.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 June 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/530)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/530, which contains the text of a
letter dated 30 June 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Security Council
members for this opportunity to brief them again on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Since the Council’s previous consideration of this
matter (see S/PV.9026), and consistent with established
practice, the Office for Disarmament Affairs has
been in regular contact with its counterparts at the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on its activities related to this matter.
Efforts by the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT) to clarify all the outstanding issues regarding
the initial declaration and subsequent declarations of
the Syrian Arab Republic have not progressed since the
Council last met on this issue. The OPCW Technical
Secretariat has yet to receive the requested declaration
from the Syrian Arab Republic on all undeclared
types and quantities of nerve agents produced and/or
weaponized at a former chemical weapons production
2/17

20/07/2022

The OPCW Technical Secretariat also expects
further information and documentation from the
Syrian Arab Republic regarding damage caused during
the 8 June 2021 attack on a military facility housing a
declared former chemical weapons production facility. I
have been advised that the Technical Secretariat has not
yet received a response to the request for information
regarding the unauthorized movement and the remains
of two destroyed cylinders related to the chemical
weapon incident that took place in Douma on 7 April
2018. The Syrian Arab Republic must respond with
urgency to the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s requests.
I regret to inform Council members that the
Technical Secretariat is still not in a position to conduct
the twenty-fifth round of consultations in Damascus
between the Syrian National Authority and the DAT due
to the repeated refusal by the Syrian Arab Republic to
issue an entry visa for the DAT’s lead technical expert.
Moreover, I have been advised that the Syrian National
Authority has stated that the exclusion of the same DAT
expert from a limited round of consultations in Beirut,
as proposed by the Technical Secretariat, is a condition
for its participation in those consultations.
I have also been advised that, in response to the
Technical Secretariat’s note verbale dated 20 May,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of
the Syrian Arab Republic sent a letter to the OPCW
Director-General on 31 May, agreeing with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat’s proposal to address
the shortcomings in the Syrian Arab Republic’s initial
declaration through an exchange of correspondence for
the time being.
In his letter, Syria’s Foreign Minister also
acknowledged that such an exchange could not replace
consultations between the Syrian National Authority
and the DAT, while at the same time reiterating that
the exclusion of the DAT’s lead technical expert
was a condition for holding the twenty-fifth round
of consultations.
I urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
to cooperate with the OPCW Technical Secretariat, as
set out in paragraph 7 of article VII of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, and to facilitate arrangements
for the deployment of the DAT, in accordance with
paragraph 7 of resolution 2118 (2013), including
22-43255

20/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9097

by allowing immediate and unfettered access for
all personnel designated by the OPCW Technical
Secretariat as soon as possible.

weapons were used or likely were used in the Syrian
Arab Republic. The IIT will issue further reports in
due course.

Full cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to
closing all outstanding issues. As has been stressed
repeatedly, due to the identified gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies that remain unresolved, the
Technical Secretariat continues to assess that, at this
stage, the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab
Republic cannot be considered accurate and complete
in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.

With regard to OPCW Conference of the States
Parties decision C-25/DEC.9, of 21 April 2021, entitled
“Addressing the possession and use of chemical
weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic”, I have been
informed that, unfortunately, the Syrian Arab Republic
has not yet completed any of the measures stipulated
in paragraph 5 of OPCW Executive Council decision
EC-94/DEC.2.

The OPCW Technical Secretariat remains fully
committed to ensuring the full implementation
by the Syrian Arab Republic of all its declaration
requirements and assisting Syria in fulfilling
its obligations under the Convention. I take this
opportunity to once again reiterate my full support for
the integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity
and independence of the work of the OPCW.
I regret to inform the Council that the Syrian
Arab Republic has yet to provide sufficient technical
information or explanations that would enable the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to close the issue related
to the detection of a schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah
facilities of the Scientific Studies and Research Centre
in November 2018.
Regarding the in-person meeting between the
OPCW Director-General and the Syrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates, I have been advised
that the OPCW Technical Secretariat is still awaiting
the Syrian Arab Republic’s position on the latest
version of the agenda. The proposed meeting would be
an important opportunity to strengthen dialogue and
cooperation between both parties.
Further to previous updates to the Council, the
OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) remains in
the process of studying all available information
related to allegations of the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic. I have been advised
that the FFM is continuing its engagement with the
Syrian Arab Republic and other States parties with
regard to a number of incidents and is preparing for
upcoming deployments.
I understand that the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) continues its investigations into incidents
in which the FFM has determined that chemical

The use of chemical weapons is a grave violation of
international law and an affront to our shared humanity.
We need to remain vigilant to ensure that those awful
weapons are never used again and are eliminated, not
only in Syria but everywhere.
Let me conclude by assuring the Council of the
commitment of the United Nations to work with all
Member States to reinforce the norm against chemical
weapons and ensure that those responsible for their use
are held to account.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Mrs. Nakamitsu presented us today with yet
another report, the 105th report of the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) on the implementation of resolution
2118 (2013) (see S/2022/530). It is unfortunate that,
like previous reports, it is built on the same pattern
and geared towards the achievement of the same
goal, namely, to create the impression that Syria is
supposedly unhelpful and uncooperative. As a matter
of fact, Damascus continues to fulfil its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and
to engage actively with the OPCW.
I think that our Syrian colleagues will today
describe in detail the work that has been done, giving
the Security Council an opportunity to have a more
objective view of what is taking place. The reports of the
Director-General still prevent that from being achieved.
Any progress made in cooperation with Damascus,
such as the decision to extend until the end of the
year the tripartite agreement among Syria, the OPCW
and the United Nations Office for Project Services,

22-432553/17

S/PV.9097

The situation in the Middle East

is either barely mentioned or completely omitted. We
have repeatedly pointed out the disadvantage of that
approach at previous meetings of the Security Council
on the Syrian chemical file. In order to be able to state
this again, it is more than enough to convene an open
Council meeting once every three months.
During today’s meeting, we expected to see OPCW
Director-General Arias among the briefers. We have a
significant list of questions for him. We are grateful
to the Brazilian presidency for sending an invitation
to the Director-General. We understand that many are
on holiday in Europe at present; however, we expect
the OPCW Director-General to find an opportunity to
address the members of the Security Council at the next
meeting. For the moment, questions to him and the body
he leads are not fewer in number. The majority of those
questions continue to be linked to the misinformation
in the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission report on the
incident in Douma and the persecution of those who are
not afraid to speak the truth in that regard.
We are also surprised by other things. For example,
we have repeatedly drawn attention to the fact that, in all
the years of his work, Mr. Arias has not found the time to
visit Syria in person. He eagerly visits other countries;
he recently visited the United States of America, for
example. His attitude towards Syria is completely
different and it cannot be said that this country is
outside the focus of the OPCW. Nearly one quarter of
the comprehensive statement by Mr. Arias at the 100th
session of the Executive Council held, on 5 July, was
devoted specifically to the Syrian issue. Incidentally,
in that speech the OPCW Director-General took the
liberty of saying something quite odd. He noted that
“in any event, [he] cannot justify travelling to a State
party deprived of certain rights by the Conference of
the States Parties”. We would be curious to know what
is behind such statements by the Director-General of
the OPCW. On the contrary, logically Mr. Arias should
be making every effort, including through regular
visits to Damascus, to turn this shameful page in the
Organization’s history as soon as possible — from
a time when at the behest of Western States and in
violation of the CWC and the principle of consensus,
a State that had been conscientiously complying with
its obligations under the Convention was for the first
time stripped of its rights. Perhaps Mrs. Nakamitsu can
help to shed light today on the CWC norms that prevent
Mr. Arias from visiting Syria.
4/17

20/07/2022

Another issue that is repeatedly presented in the
report as evidence of Syria’s alleged non-cooperation
is the delay of more than a year of the twenty-fifth
round of consultations of the Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT). The fact that the Technical Secretariat is
guided in this by a presumption of Syria’s guilt is clear
simply from the phrase that the resolution of this issue
hinges only on what is termed a change in attitude. The
facts, however, say otherwise. I will list them briefly.
The Syrians have never had any principled objections
to holding those consultations. However, at a Security
Council meeting in June of last year (see S/PV.8785),
Director-General Arias himself said that he was not
ready to send the DAT to Syria in the summer because
the weather was too hot. The result was a serious delay.
Later, Syria was willing to hold the consultations in
The Hague, but at that point the Technical Secretariat
refused to cover the costs of its experts’ visit. After
that, it was given out that all bilateral cooperation
between the Technical Secretariat and Syria would
be conducted through a single OPCW expert, without
whose involvement they said that no consultations
could take place. When it was proposed to hold the
twenty-fifth round in Beirut, they again included in the
mission the same expert, whose rejection Syria, like any
sovereign State, has every right to insist on. But at that
point Damascus once again demonstrated goodwill and
agreed provisionally to continue cooperating with the
DAT through an exchange of documentation. It is clear
that it was not Damascus that created the problem — and
which has every right to refuse the participation of any
expert in the discussion of confidential issues — but
rather the DAT, which turned the issue into a matter
of principle.
However it is important to remember that
cooperation with the Declaration Assessment Team is
part of the voluntary bilateral commitments that Syria
undertook. The Team’s mandate does not envisage any
investigative activities. Its job is simply to assist the
Syrians in drafting their initial declaration. However,
for more than a year now, what we have seen in the
reports is a different approach, with an ever-increasing
number of reasons put forward as to why the Technical
Secretariat is allegedly cannot do this.
Damascus has continued to demonstrate
unprecedented openness. I should point out that
Syria joined the CWC under exceedingly difficult
circumstances of military and political instability and
under threats of terrorism supported from outside,
22-43255

20/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

and despite all of that, conscientiously complied with
all of its related obligations. The Secretary-General
reported that to the Security Council back in June 2014,
while the definitive elimination of Syria’s military
chemical capacity was confirmed in 2016 by the OPCW
Conference of the States Parties and Executive Council.
The Technical Secretariat has no right to impose any
enhanced verification requirements on Syria. However,
the differences in the approach to this issue where
Syria is concerned versus other countries that have
encountered similar problems are clear to anyone.
The bias against Damascus is long-standing, and it
is often difficult to call it mere bias. It is enough to recall
the infamous report of the Fact-Finding Mission on the
incident in Douma in 2018. I have already mentioned
that its final version underwent radical redaction by
comparison with the original, which was confirmed
by various sources, including former inspectors of the
OPCW itself who were directly involved in investigating
the issue.
The same applies to the activities of the illegitimate
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT), whose
creation was forced through the OPCW Executive
Council in violation of the principle of consensus and
article XV of the CWC. I would like to once again make
it clear that we reject any of the IIT reports, current
or future, as illegitimate products of an illegitimate
mechanism. Their purpose is not to establish an
accurate picture of events but rather to shape a narrative
that fits with the conclusions of Damascus’s guilt. The
flawed methodology of both the IIT and the FactFinding Mission directly violates the Convention itself
in terms of the principles for conducting investigations,
particularly where the collection of evidence and
maintaining the chain of custody are concerned. We
cannot take seriously any documents that are drafted
on the basis of information collected remotely and
retroactively, including from sources that have been
shown to be unreliable, such as the White Helmets,
who were directly involved in staging chemical-weapon
incidents in Douma, again, and in Khan Shaykhun.
Against that backdrop, other, more pressing and
genuine problems that do not fit the picture of the
Syrian authorities’ alleged guilt, have received far less
attention. They include threats of the use of chemical
weapons by terrorists on the territory of the Syrian Arab
Republic and in neighbouring States. There is evidence
that terrorist groups in the Middle East have access to
chemical warfare agents. The conclusions of the United

S/PV.9097

Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) suggest that ISIL has a fullfledged military chemical programme. However, we
still hear nothing about any measures being developed
to combat those threats.
We have repeatedly pointed out that Western
countries’ politicization of the OPCW has damaged the
chemical-weapon prohibition regime as a whole and
undermined its ability to respond to the real threats
facing the international community in the area of the
disarmament and non-proliferation of chemical weapons.
I would like to point out that at a meeting on 29 April
(see S/PV.9026), the Security Council commemorated
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the entry into force of
the Chemical Weapons Convention. In the Council’s
related press statement (SC/14876), we all reaffirmed
that the OPCW must ensure the impartial, independent
and professional implementation of all the provisions
of the Convention. I call on our Western colleagues to
finally exchange words for deeds and to abandon their
perverse efforts to exploit the Organization as a blunt
instrument for punishing States that they do not like.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
leadership of the OPCW still has every opportunity to
comply with its obligations in good faith, ensuring, as
the Convention requires, a transparent and objective
investigative process that distinguishes between staged
incidents and imaginary threats and real instances of
the use of chemical weapons. In order to do that, it is
necessary to correct the mistakes made and restore the
spirit of professional depoliticized cooperation based on
the consensus that once prevailed at the organization.
We trust that, in the very near future, Mr. Arias will be
able to personally share with the Security Council his
plans in that regard.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her briefing. We appreciate her persistent
efforts and those of the experts of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
to provide independent, thoroughly researched and
detailed information on Syria’s chemical weapons
programme and its use of chemical weapons.
I think we should take stock of where we are as
we meet once again to address this issue. The Syrian
regime has still not provided the information requested
in October 2020 on the nerve agents produced and

22-432555/17

S/PV.9097

The situation in the Middle East

weaponized at a weapons production facility that
the regime declared to not be involved in chemical
weapons production.
The regime has also not provided the information
requested in July 2021 on the declared chemical
weapons production facility that was reportedly
damaged in an attack in June 2021. Syria claimed
that two chlorine cylinders implicated in that Douma
chemical weapons attack were destroyed at that site as a
result of the purported attack. But as we just heard from
the High Representative, the regime has not responded
to multiple requests for information or provided an
explanation for the movement of those cylinders to the
site of their purported destruction.
The regime has not provided information or
explanations on the Barzah facility of the Syrian
Scientific Studies and Research Centre, where chemicals
that can either be used as chemical weapons themselves
or as precursors were detected in November 2018.
The regime has not completed any of the measures
requested by the OPCW Executive Council in its
July 2020 decision that the regime should declare the
production and stockpiling facilities implicated in three
chemical weapons attacks in March 2017, declare all
of the chemical weapons it possesses and resolve all
the outstanding issues with regard to its initial chemical
weapons programme declaration.
The regime has refused to grant all the visas
requested by the Declaration Assessment Team, despite
its clear obligations to do so under resolution 2118 (2013).
It has also refused to participate in a meeting with the
full Declaration Assessment Team outside Syria.
Through deteriorating cooperation with the OPCW
and the failure to hold the next round of consultations
for more than a year, Syria has left unresolved the 20
issues in its still incomplete initial declaration. The
Al-Assad regime and its supporters, in particular
Russia, as we just heard, have repeatedly claimed that
the OPCW is biased and unprofessional.
That claim is absurd. The regime itself has
amended its own declaration 17 times, but only after
OPCW experts identified discrepancies between what
the regime had told them and the clear, observable
facts. Was the OPCW biased when it uncovered the
discrepancies that the regime belatedly admitted to?
The Security Council has a responsibility to address this
issue seriously, and Russia shares in that responsibility.
6/17

20/07/2022

After 105 reports from the OPCW DirectorGeneral, the Technical Secretariat assesses that Syria’s
initial declaration cannot be considered accurate and
complete in accordance with its obligations. The OPCW
attribution effort continues in the face of relentless
obstruction by the Al-Assad regime and its supporters.
We look forward to the release of the report of the
OPCW Investigation and Identification Team on the use
of chemical weapons in 2018 in Douma. We must recall
that the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team
has already attributed four separate chemical weapons
attacks in Syria to the Al-Assad regime, in addition
to the four chemical weapons attacks attributed to the
Al-Assad regime by the former OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism.
But of course, tragically, the regime’s most grievous
transgression of all is still to the Syrian people — to the
dead and injured, for whom there is no justice, to the
surviving loved ones, for whom there is no comfort or
closure, and to all those Syrians who still live in fear
that Al-Assad’s chemical weapons might once again be
unleashed on them at any moment. We continue to call
on Syria to engage in meaningful cooperation with the
OPCW and fully comply with its obligations.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): I join
others in thanking Mrs. Nakamitsu for her very detailed
and comprehensive briefing.
This is a bitter situation, one that has changed
little since the previous meeting of the Security
Council on this item (see S/PV.9026). There has been
no progress in discussions between the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
and the Syrian Government, and no progress on
the forthcoming inspections in Syria. That impasse
prevents the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013),
and Syria’s chemical weapons programme remains
outside the control of the international community.
We deeply regret the deliberate, continued and
obtuse obstruction of the OPCW by Syria. Any excuse
is good enough to postpone the visit of the team of
inspectors. Syria wants to choose the inspectors, and
yet, as stipulated by paragraph 7 of resolution 2118
(2013), it does not have the right to do so.
We have before us the 105th report of the OPCW
(see S/2022/530), which comes to the same conclusion
that we have heard here many times before. The gaps,
the inconsistencies and the discrepancies identified
22-43255

20/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

in the declaration of the Syrian regime on its already
identified chemical weapons programme persist. As a
result, the OPCW — as we just heard — is still unable
to confirm the completion of the declaration. The
regime systematically fails to provide the necessary
information that is crucial to revealing the true scope
of its chemical weapons programme.
We therefore wait for Syria to demonstrate
concretely and clearly its willingness to cooperate with
the OPCW on all questions posed in their reports, in
accordance with resolution 2118 (2013). We urge Syria
to change its attitude and fully cooperate with the
Technical Secretariat. The refusal of their authorities
to cooperate with the Technical Secretariat, supported
by their allies, is irresponsible and unacceptable.
Albania reiterates its firm condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic and its
non-respect of its international obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
The international regime of non-proliferation
involves our collective security. It is one of the most
effective disarmament regimes at the global level.
Albania reiterates its full support for the unbiased,
impartial and professional work of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat. We reject all attempts to politicize the work
of the OPCW. Such an attitude serves only to slow down
Syria’s implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), which
damages the reputation of the Security Council as well.
For those reasons, we call on Council members to
act in a unified manner for the implementation of the
resolution. Albania reiterates its firm condemnation of
the use of chemical weapons by any actor, under any
circumstance. We support collective efforts to ensure
that the perpetrators of chemical weapons attacks
are held to account. Impunity for the use of chemical
weapons must not and will not be tolerated. The
perpetrators need to be brought to justice.
Finally, we remain convinced that the swift
conclusion of investigations into the use of chemical
weapons in Syria will help the country and its citizens
and will allow the Council and, in a broader sense, the
international community to effectively support the
Syrian people, who now more than ever need to see and
commit to a clear vision of peace and prosperity. The
key to the future is in the hands of the authorities.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing. Nine years ago, Bashar
Al-Assad killed more than 1,000 Syrians in the suburbs

S/PV.9097

of Damascus. That has never been disputed by anyone.
Following that massacre, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2118 (2013). I want to reiterate
that resolution 2118 (2013) was adopted unanimously,
including by those who have contested Syria’s use of
chemical weapons today.
It has been almost nine years since Syria joined the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). In spite of that, we must once again deplore
the complete lack of progress that has been made. The
situation is not evolving. Syria’s initial declaration
remains incomplete. The report we just heard from
the Director-General of the OPCW is very clear. In
particular, he informed us that cylinders containing
chemicals were destroyed in a place where they should
not have been. We have to keep on saying it: Syria must
be completely transparent about its entire stockpile.
The Syrian regime continues to obstruct the work
of the OPCW. In the total absence of cooperation
from it for more than a year, and after six refusals, the
Technical Secretariat finally gave up deploying the
Declaration Assessment Team to the territory. That
attitude of systematic obstruction is unacceptable.
We appeal firmly to the Syrian regime to respond in
writing and as soon as possible to the 20 questions that
are still pending. Syria must comply with its obligations
if it wants to restore the rights and privileges that were
suspended by the decision taken by the Conference of
the States Parties in April 2021.
Despite the obstacles, the OPCW teams have
continued their investigation with independence
and professionalism, and I want to commend them
once again. Any attempts to question the legitimacy
and working methods of the Technical Secretariat
are impermissible. We will pay very close attention
to the conclusions of the next two reports of the
Investigation and Identification Team on the Douma
and Marea incidents.
The fight against impunity and the total ban on the
use of chemical weapons remain our priorities. This fight
is the foundation of the effectiveness and credibility
of the prohibition regime. It is essential to ensure
that the perpetrators of chemical-weapon attacks are
identified and held to account. That is why we continue
to mobilize in support of the international partnership
against impunity for the use of chemical weapons.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I thank Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing today.

22-432557/17

S/PV.9097

The situation in the Middle East

Ireland welcomes today’s meeting. Through the
Council’s consistent engagement, these meetings
remain important in holding Syria to its obligations
under resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC), and in supporting the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in
its mandated task. That is vital, as it has been more
than a year since we have seen any progress on this
file. During that time, Syrian cooperation with the
OPCW has gone into reverse. Twenty issues remain
outstanding regarding Syria’s declarations. While
Syria continues to claim that it is cooperating with the
Technical Secretariat, we have seen no real effort from
Syria to comply with its obligations.
OPCW requests for information go unanswered.
They include requests about the chemical agents
produced at a mis-declared chemical-weapon production
facility, the schedule 2 chemicals from Busra and
chlorine canisters, which form part of the evidence
from Douma and were moved without the OPCW being
informed and supposedly destroyed. That is against
a background of multiple chemical-weapon attacks
documented by the OPCW and the United Nations and
attributed to the Syrian authorities. At the same time,
Syria has blocked or sought to place conditions on the
OPCW’s work. That is contrary to its obligations under
resolution 2118 (2013) to accept personnel designated
by the OPCW or the United Nations and to provide
immediate and unfettered access. In response to
Syria’s obstructive actions, the OPCW has continued
to demonstrate flexibility and willingness to make
progress, most recently by seeking to continue the work
of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) through
written correspondence.
We are also concerned about the fact that
arrangements for a bilateral meeting between DirectorGeneral Arias and Mr. Fayssal Mekdad, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab
Republic, are still outstanding after more than a year.
Syria’s stated interest in the meeting does not match
the six-month wait for a response to OPCW proposals
on the agenda.
As Ireland stated at the July OPCW Executive
Council meeting, Syria cannot continue to claim that
it is actively cooperating with the Technical Secretariat
of the OPCW and at the same time hinder the progress
of its work by blocking access for the DAT and delaying
the holding of bilateral meetings with the DirectorGeneral. Progress in resolving the serious gaps and
8/17

20/07/2022

inconsistencies in Syria’s declarations is essential. The
bottom line remains that Syria must engage seriously
with the OPCW to resolve these issues, urgently and
without prevarication. It is also essential that we, as
the international community, can be assured that Syria
no longer holds or produces chemical weapons. That
can only be done through the OPCW. Syria must stop
seeking to undermine the authority and independence
of the OPCW. The diligence, professionalism and
impartiality of the OPCW and the Technical Secretariat
are clear to all. The Council should support the
Organization’s work and uphold the legal norm against
chemical weapons. Closing the Syrian case file and
investigating any use of chemical weapons must remain
a priority for the international community. There can
be no impunity for those who use those illegal and
abhorrent weapons. Ireland will continue to support all
efforts, including through its membership of the OPCW
Executive Council, to resolve outstanding issues on
this file.
Mr. Mathur (India): I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her detailed briefing. We have taken note of
the latest monthly report by the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) (see S/2022/530), and we also note the recent
monthly submission by Syria to the OPCW.
We encourage continued engagement between
Syria and the OPCW Technical Secretariat to resolve
the outstanding issues. We hope that the twentyfifth round of consultations between the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Syrian national authorities,
which has been pending since April 2021, will be
organized as soon as possible, and that the OPCW
and Syria will continue to work together to overcome
the impediments.
We attach high importance to the Chemical
Weapons Convention and stand for its full, effective,
and non-discriminatory implementation. We support
the collective efforts of all the parties to ensure that the
credibility and integrity of the Convention is maintained
to the full. India is against the use of chemical
weapons by anybody, anywhere, at any time and in
any circumstances. India has consistently maintained
that any investigation into the use of chemical weapons
must be impartial, credible and objective. Such an
investigation should follow scrupulously the provisions
and procedures embedded in the Convention and should
be in conformity with the delicate balance of power
22-43255

20/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9097

and responsibility enshrined in it to establish facts and
reach evidence-based conclusions.

(DAT), we believe they can be used to build trust in order
to move forward in clarifying the outstanding issues.

India has also repeatedly cautioned against
the possibility of terrorist entities and individuals
gaining access to chemical weapons, including in the
region in question. The reports of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) have also referred to the repeated
deployments of chemical weapons by United Nationsproscribed terrorist groups and those affiliated with the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant against civilian
populations between 2014 and 2016. The international
community’s collective fight against terrorism will
be strengthened by ensuring accountability for the
grave and inhuman acts of terror committed by those
terrorists and their affiliated groups. To that end,
India has made a contribution of $200,000 to support
UNITAD investigations.

We regret that conducting a new round of
consultations remains impossible given Syria’s refusal
to issue the necessary visa to one of the DAT members.
A technical issue must not become a political issue. We
urge Syria to comply with its obligations in accordance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention and the relevant
Security Council resolutions and provide immediate
and unrestricted access to OPCW-designated personnel.
My country, Mexico, expresses its full support for the
professionalism and impartiality of the organization,
which is not only made up of a multinational team of
experts in various fields but also observes the strictest
international standards in carrying out its analyses.

India continues to believe that progress on other
tracks would also help in facilitating the overall
political peace process in Syria. In order to realize that,
all parties, in particular external players, need to show
their commitment in tangible terms to a Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned United Nations-facilitated political
process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I am grateful for the briefing by High
Representative Nakamitsu, and I also welcome the
presence of the delegations of Syria, Iran and Türkiye.
We take note of the report of the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2022/530).
We once again note that, despite the repeated
requests of the Security Council, the Syrian authorities
continue to fail to provide all the information
necessary to clarify the discrepancies with respect
to 20 outstanding issues that date from their initial
declaration. In addition, no progress been recorded on
clarifying the unauthorized transfer of cylinders related
to the April 2018 Douma incident.
On the other hand, we are pleased to note that the
Syrian authorities accepted the Technical Secretariat’s
proposal to address the discrepancies in their initial
declaration through an exchange of correspondence.
While such exchanges may not offer the same results
as the deployment of the Declaration Assessment Team

It is incumbent upon the Council to ensure
accountability for the use of chemical weapons, and
there can be no exception in the case of Syria. We
must work together to encourage developing measures
that will enable Syria and the OPCW to resolve all
outstanding issues. Diplomatic dialogue and a United
Nations-sponsored political process represent the only
option for resolving all aspects of the conflict in Syria.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): We would like
to thank the High Representative once again for her
briefing and for clearly reminding us of the facts.
We must keep those facts in mind and not
allow ourselves to be distracted by the blizzard of
disinformation that surrounds Syria’s chemical weapons
programme. The Declaration Assessment Team of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) has a mandate to ensure the Syrian Arab
Republic fulfils its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention, as well as relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The Team has been working since 2014 to resolve
the many gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies in
Syria’s initial chemical weapons declaration. Since
April, it has made extensive efforts to deploy to
Syria to continue its vital work and has also proposed
meeting outside Syria. However, the twenty-fifth round
of consultations between the Technical Secretariat
and the Syrian Arab Republic has yet to take place.
As the High Representative said, the responsibility
for that rests with the Syrian side, which has failed to
respond to letters and notes verbales from the Technical
Secretariat and has continued to refuse to issue a visa
for the lead technical expert.

22-432559/17

S/PV.9097

The situation in the Middle East

20/07/2022

As we heard today, the Syrian Arab Republic
has also failed to comply with numerous other
commitments, including with the June 2018 decision of
the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention
that it should declare all chemical weapons it possesses,
including sarin and its precursors, as well as the OPCW
Executive Council decision of July 2020 that it should
declare the facilities related to the chemical weapons
used in the sarin and chlorine attacks in Ltamenah on
24, 25 and 30 March 2017.

Through their accession, States parties committed
to upholding the provisions of the Convention, while
ensuring their inclusion in national legislation and
subsequent implementation at the national level.
Therefore, by acceding to the Convention, the Syrian
Arab Republic undertook to cooperate with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and provide the necessary support to its
Technical Secretariat, as provided for in article VII of
the Convention.

Those facts are not academic; they are deadly
serious. As we have heard many times, the 20 unresolved
issues in Syria’s initial declaration include the location
of several hundred tons of chemical weapons agents
and thousands of munitions. The OPCW Investigation
and Identification Team has found the Syrian Arab
Republic responsible for chemical-weapons attacks
against its own people. In total, the OPCW FactFinding Mission has identified 20 incidents involving
the use of chemical weapons in Syria, and there are
well-documented reports of many more.

(spoke in English)

We must keep a spotlight on those issues, not
just because of our responsibilities under Article 24
of the Charter of the United Nations but also because
we owe it to the victims of those horrific weapons in
order to ensure that their use does not go unchallenged.
There must be no impunity for any State that develops,
acquires or deploys chemical weapons, anywhere,
under any circumstances.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to deliver this joint statement on behalf of
the three African countries members of the Security
Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana and Kenya.
I thank High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs Nakamitsu for her briefing on the chemical
weapons in Syria file. We welcome the participation
of the representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Türkiye at this meeting.
Chemical weapons pose a serious threat to
international peace and security in their use for
non-peaceful purposes. Their toxic fallout can have
devastating consequences and irreversibly harm human
life and property. In acknowledging such risks, 193
States joined the Chemical Weapons Convention,
including the Syrian Arab Republic, which has been a
State party to the Convention since 2013.
10/17

In that regard, the A3 reaffirms its commitment
to the provisions of the Convention, as well as those
of resolution 2118 (2013), which provides a framework
for the rapid and verifiable destruction of chemical
weapons in Syria and calls on the country to honour
its obligations. In that respect, the A3 reiterates its
full support for the work of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, including its
Technical Secretariat, which is being prevented from
implementing its mandate in Syria. We take note of the
105th monthly report of the Director-General of OPCW
on activities relating to the destruction of chemical
weapons and chemical weapons production facilities in
the Syrian Arab Republic (see S/2022/530).
Once again, we are concerned about the Technical
Secretariat’s assessment that the statements submitted
by the Syrian authorities cannot be considered accurate
and complete in accordance with the provisions of the
Convention, resolution 2118 (2013) and the decisions of
the Executive Council. Furthermore, we are concerned
about the fact that the Secretariat has yet to receive a
declaration from the Syrian Arab Republic regarding
all the undeclared types and quantities of nerve agents
produced or militarized at a former chemical-weapon
production facility that was declared as never
having been used to produce or militarize chemical
warfare agents.
We regret that so far the convening of the twentyfifth round of consultations on Syria is still suspended,
owing to the denial of entry visas to the lead technical
expert of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT).
We stress that the on-site operations of the DAT are
vital for implementing its mandated responsibilities
and the relevant Executive Council decisions, and we
echo the appeals to the Syrian authorities to grant
unfettered access into the country for all members
of the team. In that regard, we encourage increased
22-43255

20/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

cooperation between the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and the Syrian authorities in order to make meaningful
progress and bring closure to the issue. We believe
that high-level direct exchanges between the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Director-General of the OPCW could
help to restore confidence and give the necessary
impetus for moving forward with the various aspects of
the programme and encouraging greater commitment
to strengthening cooperation.
We also welcome the extension to 31 December this
year of the tripartite agreement between the OPCW, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the United Nations Office
for Project Services, which will help facilitate the
Technical Secretariat’s mandated activities with regard
to the total elimination of the Syrian chemical-weapon
programme. We note the continued efforts of the FactFinding Mission in Syria and the Investigation and
Identification Team, in accordance with the relevant
decisions of the Executive Council, and reiterate the
importance of ensuring that they remain independent,
transparent and impartial in the execution of their
respective mandates. We also take note of the FactFinding Mission’s forthcoming deployment to the
Syrian Arab Republic and await the outcome of its work.
The A3 will continue to support measures that
are aimed at ensuring accountability and will help
strengthen deterrence and reinforce established norms
against the use of chemical weapons.
In conclusion, we reiterate our request for the
support of the Council in addressing the issues impeding
progress in the full implementation of resolution 2118
(2013) more constructively.
Ms. Matar (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing. In my
statement today, I would like to reiterate what we have
repeatedly said on the chemical dossier, while stressing
once again the principled position of the United Arab
Emirates, which rejects and forthrightly condemns the
use of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and in
any circumstances. Their use constitutes a flagrant
violation of the provisions of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and of international law.
Considering that a round of limited consultations
between the Syrian authorities and the Declaration
Assessment Team of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons was not held in
Beirut, we reiterate that such consultations and

S/PV.9097

constructive dialogue are critical to assessing the status
of outstanding issues and making progress on this
dossier. That requires that the parties concerned reach a
compromise. We hope that the obstacles to holding the
consultations will be overcome before the next meeting
of the Council on the matter. We underscore once again
that chemical weapons must be eliminated and that no
one should have access to or use them, inside or outside
Syria. If obtained by terrorist groups that seek to use
them for their dangerous purposes, such weapons pose a
serious threat to regional and international security and
stability. We underscore the importance of promoting
our efforts in the fight against the Da’esh organization
to prevent it from reorganizing its ranks or acquiring
chemical weapons, especially since we have recently
witnessed its ongoing attempts to launch attacks and
develop fighting capabilities.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses
the importance of making progress on the chemical
dossier and on all other dossiers related to resolving the
Syrian crisis.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I deeply regret the fact that Mr. Arias has declined our
invitation once again.
I would first like to reiterate that China firmly
opposes any country, organization or individual using
chemical weapons under any circumstances. China
has always called for the settlement of the outstanding
issues regarding Syria’s initial declaration on its
chemical weapons through dialogue and consultations.
We encourage the Technical Secretariat to maintain
communication with Syria regarding the inspection
of Syria’s Scientific Studies and Research Centre
and the meeting between the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and Syria’s Foreign Minister, among other
things. The twenty-fifth round of technical consultations
has been delayed for half a year due to the visa issues of
one expert. China calls on the Technical Secretariat to
respect the State party’s concerns about the visa and to
demonstrate flexibility in the matter.
The Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) is
the basis and yardstick for resolving issues related to
chemical weapons. The OPCW should strictly adhere to
the requirements of the Convention when investigating
and attributing responsibility for incidents involving
the alleged use of chemical weapons. The relevant

22-4325511/17

S/PV.9097

The situation in the Middle East

work must abide by the principles of independence,
impartiality and objectivity and ensure respect for
science and the facts in order to guarantee procedural
compliance, the collection of reliable evidence and
credible findings. I want to reiterate that from the very
beginning several countries, including China, opposed
the OPCW’s adoption by a vote of its decision entitled
“Addressing the Threat from Chemical Weapons Use”,
which goes beyond the scope of the CWC. We also
opposed the establishment of the Investigation and
Identification Team. China is deeply concerned about
the currently highly politicized work of the OPCW and
the deep divisions among its States parties. We hope that
the Director-General and the Technical Secretariat will
make earnest efforts to effectively uphold the OPCW’s
technical nature, return to the tradition of consensusbased decision-making and not allow the OPCW to be
reduced to a geopolitical tool.
In conclusion, China again calls on the Security
Council to focus on efficiency and to carefully consider
holding less frequent or combined deliberations on
Syrian issues.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We again note that no progress has been made on
this file since our last meeting (see S/PV.9026). Syria
has still not fulfilled its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). The
lack of progress is concerning not only for Syria,
but for all of us in upholding the global prohibition
against the use of chemical weapons. Norway remains
steadfast in its confidence in Director-General Arias
and the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and we
firmly reject any effort to discredit their important work.

20/07/2022

At the outset, I would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu
for her briefing. I would also like to thank the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for his latest report (see
S/2022/530). As we can infer from reading it, little
has changed in the situation on the ground or in the
relationship between the Syrian Arab Republic and
the OPCW. We hope that, in the near future, we will
see positive developments in the file and the DirectorGeneral will be able to brief the Security Council
in person.
We welcome the recent understanding to address
the shortcomings in the Syrian Arab Republic’s initial
declaration through the exchange of correspondence,
even if such exchanges cannot replace consultations
between Syria and the Declaration Assessment Team.
We hope that may constitute a further step towards the
resumption of a constructive dialogue.
Brazil continues to advocate for the need to restore
trust between the OPCW and the Syrian Arab Republic,
as well as the need to overcome the regrettable
politicization that has undermined the culture of
consensus in the OPCW and its decision-making bodies.
Finally, as my delegation has noted on previous
occasions, while the Council should pay close attention
to progress in the elimination of chemical weapons
in Syria and enforcing accountability for their use,
the periodicity of these meetings needs to be urgently
reassessed. Not having held a meeting on the topic in
June did not affect the Council’s work on the file in
any way. That reinforces our perception that the ideal
frequency for such exchanges is quarterly. Holding
monthly meetings when there is little or no relevant
development on the ground does not seem efficient in
terms of either time or resources.

We regret the fact that the twenty-fifth round of
consultations between the Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT) and Syrian authorities has not been
held, due to the Syrian authorities’ refusal to issue a
visa to the DAT’s lead technical expert. We continue
to remind Syria of its obligation to cooperate with the
OPCW and accept and provide access for the OPCW’s
personnel. Furthermore, we will continue to urge Syria
to provide sufficient information to the OPCW in
order to resolve the 20 issues outstanding from Syria’s
initial declaration.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.

Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic acceded to the

12/17

I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

22-43255

20/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Chemical Weapons Convention voluntarily and in good
faith and began implementing the Convention even
before its ratification, notwithstanding our difficult
circumstances. My country has cooperated fully with
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). We destroyed our stockpiles of
chemical weapons and their production facilities in
record time, as confirmed in OPCW reports.
Despite the politicization of the chemical weapons
file in previous years, the hostile approach of certain
States and the deliberate procrastination of the Technical
Secretariat in dealing with some aspects of the file, my
country has maintained its constructive approach and
positive engagement. In that context, I would like to
mention several positive developments that were not
mentioned by Mrs. Nakamitsu.
The Syrian Arab Republic submitted its 104th
monthly report on the elimination of its chemical
weapons and their production facilities. It also agreed
to the extension of the tripartite agreement among the
Syrian Arab Republic, the OPCW and the United Nations
Office for Project Services for an additional six months
until 31 December 2022, which should facilitate the
tasks and activities of the OPCW in Syria. A report was
also issued recently on the eighth round of inspections
of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre,
confirming the absence of any prohibited activity
under the agreement and commending Syria’s full
collaboration and excellent facilities during that round.
It is unfortunate that the Syrian National
Committee’s cooperation with the OPCW, as well as the
fact that it has been upholding its commitment under
the Convention, was met with ingratitude and denial.
The monthly reports of the OPCW Director-General,
especially the most recent one (see S/2022/530), have
focused on negative developments and ignored any
positive developments. They also provide only a partial
account of certain issues in a way that undermines the
OPCW. Therefore, in recent months the Chair of the
Syrian National Committee has sent several letters
to the Director-General, explaining the inaccuracies
included in the reports of the Technical Secretariat and
asking for them to be rectified.
I would like to address some of the issues raised in
today’s discussion.
First, with regard to the proposed high-level meeting
between the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates and the OPCW Director-General, I wish to

S/PV.9097

underscore that my country immediately welcomed the
invitation to convene that meeting. We were keen to
hold it as soon as possible, and the two parties were
asked to agree on a venue and agenda for the meeting.
During consultations, the Syrian party suggested
holding the meeting in Damascus. The DirectorGeneral, however, did not respond positively to that
proposal, for which he gave an excuse unprecedented in
the history of the OPCW. In his introductory statement
to the OPCW Executive Council earlier in the month,
he claimed that he could not hold the high-level meeting
in Damascus, stating that:
(spoke in English)
“In any event, as Director-General, I cannot
justify travelling to a State party that has been
deprived of certain rights by the Conference of the
States Parties”.
(spoke in Arabic)
Ironically, no one knows where the DirectorGeneral found that explanation. There is no mention
in the Convention or in any document of the OPCW,
either directly or indirectly, of such a justification. It
is clear that the Director-General has gone too far in
submitting to the policies of Western countries and
has started to implement the Convention based on the
political agendas of those States, demonstrating that he
has not been professional in carrying out his mandate.
The decision of the Conference of the States Parties
to suspend the rights and privileges of Syria as a member
of the OPCW — which was imposed by Western
countries through pressure and blackmail — does not
in any way mean that the Director-General can ignore
his duties to communicate with the Syrian authorities
concerned and seek lasting solutions to the outstanding
issues between the two parties. Therefore, a visit by the
Director-General to any State party is not a privilege
that he grants to that State party but rather a duty that
falls within his tasks and mandate.
The question that has to be asked is: would Mr. Arias
have visited Damascus and tried to find a solution to
those outstanding issues even before the decision of
the Conference of the States Parties to suspend Syria’s
rights and privileges as an OPCW member State? The
answer is simply no.
Secondly, as to the work of the Declaration
Assessment Team, my country welcomes the holding of

22-4325513/17

S/PV.9097

The situation in the Middle East

the twenty-fifth round of consultations and the visit of
the team to Syria, with the exception of one individual,
and that is due to valid reasons that we have already
explained. The fact that the Technical Secretariat
continues to insist on that individual at the expense of
the team as a whole, although they have other equally
qualified technical experts, reinforces us in our position
and increases our suspicions as to the professionalism
that the Technical Secretariat should show.
In that context, I would like to mention that the
Syrian National Committee has agreed to the recent
proposal of the Technical Secretariat to exchange
correspondence about the work of the team for the time
being, although we are aware of the limited results that
can be achieved through such correspondence. The
Syrian Arab Republic expresses its concern over the
hindrances that are created by the Technical Secretariat,
which prevent the resolution of outstanding issues. That
is in Syria’s highest interests. We therefore call on the
Technical Secretariat to give up those harmful tactics
and that negative behaviour and go back to constructive
work and fruitful cooperation.
Thirdly, regarding the work of the Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM), the Syrian Arab Republic, while
repeatedly condemning the use of chemical weapons
by anyone, anytime, anywhere and under any
circumstances, had notified the Technical Secretariat of
several incidents perpetrated by terrorist organizations
using chemical weapons and asked the FFM to
investigate those incidents. Unfortunately, the mission
has to date not submitted any reports regarding those
incidents, although more than five years have passed. It
has also persisted in ignoring the professional working
methodologies provided for in the Convention.
My delegation denounces that procrastination and
calls for an end to be put to that manipulation. It calls
on the mission to issue its report on those incidents and
to respect the terms of reference and the provisions of
the Convention while undertaking its tasks.
My delegation would like to recall that it has been
keen on providing the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and the Technical Secretariat
of the OPCW with information pertaining to access by
terrorists from Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and their
affiliated entities to chemical weapons and chemical
toxins in order to launch chemical attacks or fabricate
scenes so as to accuse the Syrian Arab Army.
14/17

20/07/2022

In that context, I would like to mention that my
delegation took part in the comprehensive review open
consultations for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and has called for reinforcing international
cooperation to prevent weapons of mass destruction,
including chemical weapons, from falling into the
hands of terrorist groups, thus threatening regional and
international peace and security.
Allow me, before concluding, to respond to some
of what has been said in the statements made by some
countries. My colleague the representative of the United
States used in his statement the term “regime” several
times to talk about the Syrian Government. I would like
to ask the colleague representing the United States if
the resolutions of the Security Council or the decisions
of the OPCW mention Member States as regimes or
as Governments?
The United States of America, as a permanent
member of the Security Council and as a member of
the Executive Council of the OPCW, must respect
the language that is being used in those resolutions
and decisions and must not encourage others to use
its language.
My colleague the representative of France accused
us falsely, without any grounds or evidence. His
accusation is part of the hostile policy that has been
adopted by France towards my country for 10 years now,
including by supporting terrorist organizations and
violating the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Syria. Therefore, he must, before inviting
others to respect resolutions, make sure that his country
is respecting them.
My colleague the representative of Albania said
that Syria wants to choose the experts. I would like to
tell him that such a description is wrong. Syria does
not want to choose the experts, but Syria has the right
to accept or reject with whom it is going to be dealing,
especially if Syria has information proving that some
experts are biased and non-objective.
Those kinds of hostile and non-constructive
discussions leads nowhere, but only to more
complications. I therefore call on colleagues to refrain
from such hostile declarations and to adopt a positive
approach, thus allowing the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and in total respect of the sovereignty and
independence of Member States and the principle of
non-interference in their internal affairs.
22-43255

20/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): As a major
victim of the use of chemical weapons, Iran once again
condemns in the strongest terms the use of chemical
weapons by anyone, anywhere, at any time and under
any circumstances.
We believe that only the complete destruction and
elimination of all chemical weapons on a global scale,
as well as the implementation of all essential measures
to prevent their production, can ensure that chemical
weapons are never used again.
Meanwhile, we call for the complete, effective and
non-discriminatory implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention as well as the preservation of
the authority of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Politicizing the implementation of the Convention
and exploiting the OPCW for politically driven national
goals brings about major negative consequences for
the Convention’s authority and credibility as well
as those of the organization. Therefore, the OPCW
must not be used to accomplish politically motivated
national objectives.
While Syria has fulfilled its obligations under the
Convention and continues to cooperate with the OPCW,
it has been subjected to such attempts by some State
parties in recent years.
We commend Syria’s efforts in submitting its 104th
monthly report to the OPCW regarding activities in
its territory related to the destruction of its chemical
weapons and their production facilities on 15 July.
Syria has also agreed to extend the tripartite
agreement between the Syrian Arab Republic, the
OPCW and the United Nations Office for Project
Services for six months, until 31 December 2022, in
order to facilitate planning for the organization’s tasks
and activities in Syria.

S/PV.9097

General of the OPCW is a proper move in the right
direction, as it will the parties’ discussions forward.
We note that the Syrian Government has welcomed
this meeting and hope that the Director-General of the
OPCW will do the same.
Keeping in mind the Syrian Government’s
cooperation and its fulfilment of its obligations under
the Convention, we would expect the Security Council
not to devote its meetings to the repetition of position and
unfounded allegations against the Syrian Government,
which is not conducive to Council efficiency.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Keçeli (Türkiye): We thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing, and we commend the
independence, professionalism and impartiality of
the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
The latest report of the OPCW Director-General
(see S/2022/530) shows that the outstanding issues in
relation to the Syrian regime’s initial and subsequent
declarations persist. The OPCW Secretariat is still
waiting for responses to its enquiries sent to the
regime with regard to its chemical-weapon production
facilities and chlorine cylinders used in the attack in
Douma in 2018. The regime continues to use delaying
tactics to avoid meeting with the OPCW Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT) by refusing to issue a visa
to one team member and setting the exclusion of the
same DAT expert as a condition for holding the next
round of consultations. We expect concrete action from
the Security Council to ensure that the regime fully
cooperates with the DAT and immediately declares
the full extent of its chemical-weapons programme to
the OPCW.

The Government of Syria regularly provides
information to the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW
about the possession and use of chemical materials by
some terrorist organizations as well as the fabrication
of chemical incidents in order to blame the Syrian
Army for such heinous acts.

The current investigations by the Fact-finding
Mission in Syria (FFM), and the Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT) are important to establishing
the truth about the chemical weapons used in Syria.
We note the reports of the FFM establishing the use
of chemicals as weapons in in Marea on 1 September
2015 and in Kafr Zeita on 1 October 2016. We await the
results of the further investigations carried out by the
IIT with regard to those attacks for the identification of
the perpetrators.

The proposed meeting in Damascus between the
Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Director-

Let us reiterate that the use of chemical weapons
by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances

22-4325515/17

S/PV.9097

The situation in the Middle East

is a grave violation of international law. We strongly
condemn the repeated and well-documented use of
chemical weapons by the Al-Assad regime against its
own people. It is our collective responsibility to ensure
accountability for the crimes committed in Syria. We
owe this to the victims.
It is high time that the members of the Security
Council left their political differences behind and acted
in accordance with international law. The Syrian regime
must be urged to cooperate with the OPCW without any
further delay. This is key to prevent the recurrence of
chemical-weapons use, be it in Syria or elsewhere in the
world. Ending impunity is critical if we are to achieve
peace in Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to
Mrs. Nakamitsu to respond to comments and
questions raised.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I had a specific request from
His Excellency Ambassador Polyanskiy of the Russian
Federation on some of the issues for further information.
I will therefore try to respond.
First, with regard to the Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT) of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), whose mandate, as we
know, is to verify Syria’s initial declaration through
means of bilateral consultations with Syrian national
authorities; it is therefore a means for verification. But
it is also a means to assist Syria in its implementation
of its obligations under Chemical Weapons Convention.
Why are we insisting on this particular DAT expert
whose visa has not been granted by the Syrian Republic?
I have been advised that the DAT expert has been part of
the team and in direct contact with Syrian experts and
officials ever since the DAT was established, that is,
ever since April 2014. This DAT expert has deployed to
Syria more than 20 times, so the expert is familiar with
all details provided by the Syrian experts throughout
the entire history of the assessment of the Syrian Arab
Republic’s initial declaration of its chemical-weapons
programme, including all outstanding and also resolved
issues. It should also be noted that the expert is fluent in
Arabic. Accordingly, the OPCW considers this expert
to be an indispensable member of the DAT.
Now, while the issuance of a visa is normally a
matter of national sovereignty, as Council members
are all aware, paragraph 7 of resolution 2118 (2013)
16/17

20/07/2022

established very special arrangements in this regard.
The Security Council decided that
“… the Syrian Arab Republic shall cooperate fully
with the OPCW and the United Nations, including
by complying with their relevant recommendations,
by accepting personnel designated by the OPCW or
the United Nations, by providing for and ensuring
the security of activities undertaken by these
personnel, by providing these personnel with
immediate and unfettered access to and the right
to inspect, in discharging their functions, any and
all sites, and by allowing immediate and unfettered
access to individuals that the OPCW has grounds
to believe to be of importance for the purpose of
its mandate, and […] that all parties in Syria shall
cooperate fully in this regard”.
This is the reason why it is important that this
member of the DAT be part of the rounds of consultations.
Of course, the Director-General has stated that
he cannot justify travelling to a State party to the
OPCW that has been deprived of certain rights by the
Conference of States Parties to pursue a meeting that
the Secretariat proposed in the first place. However,
at the 100th session of the OPCW Executive Council,
which was recently held — between 5 and 7 July — he
also stated:
“When the Syrian Arab Republic is ready to back
its declarations of commitment with actions,
including by engaging constructively on the
venue and agenda, the Secretariat will be ready to
engage accordingly.”
I have also been informed that the Director-General’s
Office is maintaining regular and direct contact with
the Foreign Minister’s Office, so their engagements are
still continuing.
Let me end my further remarks by stating my hope
that such meetings will be able to take place as soon
as possible and contribute to the resolution of these
unresolved discrepancies.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her clarifications.
I now give the floor once again to the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I merely wanted to comment on the observations
made by Mrs. Nakamitsu just now on the mandate
22-43255

20/07/2022

S/PV.9097

The situation in the Middle East

of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). She said that it is an investigative team.
The fact is quite otherwise. At a formal meeting
of the OPCW, the head of the DAT was asked whether
his team was an investigative or inspection team. He
replied quite clearly that it is neither one nor the other.
The DAT is therefore not an investigative team, nor an
inspection team. It is a team that was created to assist
the Syrian Arab Republic, with its consent, to enable it
to provide its initial declaration.
My second point is that the issue is not related
to the visa. Mrs. Nakamitsu clearly said that the visa
is a sovereign right of any State. That is correct.
However, it is an issue of dealing with an expert who
has lost professionalism and objectivity. Even when
the Technical Secretariat suggested another location
outside Syria for consultations, our position was that
we agreed, but without the participation of that one
expert. The issue therefore relates to the participation
of an expert who has lost his professionalism and
objectivity. It is therefore not a matter of visa, and it is
not a matter of whom we choose. The organization has
the right to choose whomever it wants, and I stress that
it has sufficient experts to do the job.

The President:
Mrs. Nakamitsu.

I

now

give

the

floor

to

Mrs. Nakamitsu: I simply want to say that I did not
use any words such as “investigation” or “inspection”.
I said that the Declaration Assessment Team’s mandate
is to verify Syria’s initial declaration through means
of bilateral consultations with the Syrian national
authorities. I added that it was a means to assist Syria
in that regard. I did not use the words “inspection” or
“investigation”.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her clarifications.
The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for asking for the floor for a second
time. However, I object to what Mrs. Nakamitsu said
again. The mandate of the Declaration Assessment
Team is not to verify Syria’s initial declaration; it is to
assist Syria in presenting its declaration. The term used
should be exact. The Team has no mandate to verify; its
mandate is to assist.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

22-4325517/17
