United Nations

S/PV.5525

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5525th meeting
Friday, 15 September 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vassilakis/Mrs. Papadopoulou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Greece)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mrs. Itoua Apoyolo
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Yankey
Mr. Oshima
Ms. Tincopa
Mr. Al-Qahtani
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Burian
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
The situation in Africa
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-52438 (E)

*0652438*

S/PV.5525

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Africa
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jan Egeland,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Egeland to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Egeland: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Uganda, where I visited last week.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I
visited Kinshasa and then went into the field in
Katanga, South Kivu and Ituri. I would like to share
three main conclusions from my mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. First, the United
Nations and the Transitional Government have made a
lot of progress, with increased security and successful
elections, but we have not been able to make enough of
an impact on impunity. Sexual abuse has become a
cancer in Congolese society that seems to be out of
control. Military and civilian authorities are still
virtually unaccountable for crimes against civilians. I
told President Kabila and the military and civilian
leaders that I met that they had to publicly condemn

2

impunity and act firmly to fire or demote perpetrators.
President Kabila replied that the contradictions in the
Transitional Government had made the latter difficult
for him, but one could act more firmly after the
elections.
In South Kivu alone, more than 1,000 women
who had been raped have been treated so far this year
at the Panzi Hospital in Bukavu, where I visited. We do
not know how many more suffer without treatment in
inaccessible parts of the province. I was deeply
shocked by the stories of the women who had been
abused by the members of the national army — the
FARDC — and by militia groups. One woman told me
she had been raped repeatedly for more than a week by
a group of soldiers who kept her bound so tightly — by
hands and by feet — that she had permanently lost the
use of her hands. Dr. Mukengere, the heroic director of
Panzi Hospital, told me that mutilations often followed
the rapes. Those required extensive surgical
interventions.
I do not believe that the FARDC is systematically
addressing this issue. Although some military
prosecutions have occurred, often because of the
efforts of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), far
too little is being done. This Council and the Member
States involved in security sector reform in that
country must exert more pressure on the FARDC to
end this pattern of abuse and violence against civilians.
Secondly, I am concerned about the impact of
FARDC military operations on the civilian population.
Since the beginning of the year more than 500,000
people have been newly displaced in eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In most cases, the
displacements follow a Government army operation
against a militia group. Too often, civilians flee
because of the fighting and then are victimized by the
FARDC, who blame them for supporting the militias.
In the Kivus and Ituri, MONUC provides logistical
support for those operations. The only long-term
security solution in the country is, of course, through
one competent national army with the exclusive right
to bear arms. Nonetheless, we cannot accept such a
huge cost on the civilian population caused by the
recent operations to disarm. The MONUC Force
Commander has invited the humanitarian community
to look at ways to reduce the humanitarian impact of
those operations. We accept this offer.

06-52438

S/PV.5525

Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has improved.
Compared to my last visit three years ago, there are
more humanitarian staff working in more areas,
including some areas that were totally inaccessible for
years. When we went out to meet with internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in remote locations in the
bush — Pweto, Luhago and Gety — I was impressed
with the work done by United Nations and NGO
colleagues, often under very difficult circumstances.
However, the humanitarian effort still lacks the
resources it requires to meet the overwhelming needs.
For example, we do not have money for the food
pipeline beyond the next three months. In 2007, we
will expand our humanitarian programmes and
intensify early recovery efforts to meet the needs of the
more than 1.6 million IDPs who returned home in the
last year, often with little assistance.
The national disarmament and reintegration
programme run by the Commission Nationale de
Désarmement,
Démobilisation
et
Réinsertion
(CONADER) is not working effectively. In Pweto, in
the southwest, I met with a group of Mayi-Mayi who
had voluntarily disarmed weeks before. However,
CONADER claimed that it no longer had resources to
serve them, and MONUC military observers had to
take it upon themselves to share their rations to avoid
looting by the Mayi-Mayi of the civilian population.
Other Mayi-Mayi groups who were ready to come out
of the bush have not because they want to be sure they
will be taken care of. In Ituri, MONUC has been
successful in disarming militia members, but the
programmes needed to reintegrate them into civilian
life have been insufficient. Unless these problems are
quickly fixed, these fighters will return to the life of
the gun.
The challenges ahead in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are enormous. It will be a marathon, and
we are still only half way. We cannot stop now or we
will lose what we have gained. The Council should
show its strong commitment to the Democratic
Republic by maintaining MONUC’s strength and
maintaining the pressure on the Government to end
impunity and promote the rule of law and good
governance. The conclusion of the elections is the
beginning of the rebuilding process, not its end. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has seen the worst
haemorrhage of human life in this generation. Four
million people — six Rwandan genocides — is the

06-52438

death toll of war and preventable disease in the last
eight years. We must not fail to stop — once and for
all — this tragedy.
Let me turn now to Uganda. The picture in
northern Uganda is more promising than it has been in
years. We can see improvement on almost every
indicator. Since the negotiations between the
Government and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
began in Juba earlier this year, security has increased
dramatically, allowing us to do much more on the
humanitarian front. We can now reach 54 of the 102
IDP camps without military escorts, up from 34 in
May. I was able to spend a memorable night in a family
hut in Opit IDP camp, something no United Nations
staff member had been able to do for many years. IDPs
in Acholiland are cautiously beginning to move
towards their homes. We stopped along the country
road to talk with a family who were making bricks for
a temporary house two kilometres from their ancestral
lands so that they could begin farming again. If peace
continued, they planned to finally move home in
January.
The number of night commuters has fallen to
10,000, from a high of 40,000 when I reported to you
last year. Few of the remaining children are moving
because of insecurity now. Most continue to move to
the towns every night because of social problems at
home related to prolonged displacement, such as
domestic violence and overcrowding.
We will use the better security environment to
continue to improve the situation in the IDP camps and
to prepare for the return of more than 1.5 million
people. The Government will need to rapidly increase
social services in the north, including the return of
teachers, doctors and nurses. The Prime Minister told
me that the Government was working on this through
the
Joint
Monitoring
Commission
and
the
Government’s peace, reconciliation and development
plan. The international community must soon make the
necessary investments in peace and hold the
Government accountable for effective protection of the
civilian population and a real reconciliation process.
As the Council is aware, Riek Machar, the VicePresident of the government of South Sudan, has been
facilitating talks between the Government of Uganda
and the LRA. On 26 August, the two sides signed a
cessation of hostilities agreement. I visited Juba on 11
September to address the humanitarian aspects of a

3

S/PV.5525

possible peace agreement. I met with Vice-President
Machar and his mediation team, the Government and
the LRA delegations, and with the Acholi religious and
cultural leaders who are observing the talks. I
commended Vice-President Machar for the progress of
this African-led peace process and offered increased
United Nations support for the South Sudanese
mediation efforts.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and UNICEF already have staff
members providing technical support to the mediation
team, and the Department of Political Affairs (DPA)
will dispatch someone over the weekend. Norway has
provided financial support for the peace talks through
OCHA, and several other European donors have
indicated their willingness to also support these efforts.
That is critical to keep the process moving forward.
The government of South Sudan does not have the
resources to support the rapid progress of the talks. In
addition, Vice-President Machar asked that the United
Nations provide monitors for the cessation of
hostilities agreement and assembly areas for LRA
fighters, along with monitors from the parties and the
African Union. I have transmitted that request to the
Secretary-General.
The cessation of hostilities agreement requires
the LRA to move to two assembly points in the
southern Sudan by 19 September. Those are shown on
the map that will be distributed. Reports from the field
confirm that LRA units are moving from northern
Uganda towards the assembly area at Owiny-Ki-Bul,
and from the northern Democratic Republic of the
Congo into Ri-Kwangba. An estimated 400 combatants
and non-combatants have so far arrived at the two
assembly points. Development Support Services
reports that most LRA members have now left northern
Uganda for the southern Sudan.
The United Nations has already assessed the
situation in the two assembly points and is prepared to
provide assistance to the women and children with the
LRA, whom the parties have agreed can be separated
from the LRA fighters. We will also help the
surrounding communities. The government of South
Sudan has moved some food supplies to the areas. The
United Nations country team in Uganda reconfirmed to
me that they have the resources necessary to receive
ex-combatants and women and children and to begin
their reintegration into northern Uganda, when agreed
by the parties.

4

While in Uganda and the southern Sudan, I
received several telephone calls from Vincent Otti, the
second-in-command in the LRA. He invited me to meet
with him at the western assembly point. I told him that
I could come only if the LRA made a humanitarian
gesture and released some of the women and children it
is holding. The LRA has not yet agreed to such a
release, but we will continue to press for the quick
release of the Sudanese and Ugandan captives.
It is important for the Council to know that the
International Criminal Court indictments were the
number one subject of discussion with the internally
displaced persons in Uganda and the parties and civil
society in Juba. All expressed a strong concern that if
the indictments were not lifted, they could threaten the
progress in these most promising talks ever for
northern Uganda. I said I believed that the indictments
had been a factor in pushing the LRA into negotiations,
that the indictments should not disrupt the talks, and
that there could be no impunity for mass murder and
crimes against humanity. The parties should look now
at the different ways to develop a solution that meets
local needs for reconciliation and universal standards
of justice and accountability. I believe that this can be
done, and that peace and justice can work together. For
the Council’s information, I have discussed that
approach with Chief Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
who repeated that the United Nations should indeed
support the peace talks, aiming for the return of women
and children, the demobilization of fighters and a
solution that makes peace and justice work together.
This is the best chance we have ever had for
peace in northern Uganda. We must pursue it to the
end. As a woman asked me around the campfire in
Opit, “If we cannot find peace now, who will we blame
for another 20 years of war?” The Security Council’s
interest in this issue has been crucial for the progress to
date. The Council should show its support for the talks
and encourage the Government and the LRA to reach a
final agreement as soon as possible. The Council
should also express its support for the Government’s
efforts to develop a recovery plan for the North, while
stressing the need for the affected communities to be
fully engaged in this process. Finally, the Council
should stress the need for a reconciliation process that
addresses the root causes of this long and terrible
conflict and ensures the future protection of the
civilian population.

06-52438

S/PV.5525

The President: I thank Mr. Egeland for his
briefing.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
would like to thank Mr. Egeland for his thorough
update on the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and northern Uganda. We
certainly would have liked to hear more about other
parts of Africa, but I hope we shall have another
opportunity to discuss and get insight on the evolving
situation in other parts of the continent.
We are delighted to hear that what used to be
called the “forgotten emergency” in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is finally getting some attention.
We urge donors, non-governmental organizations and
the international community as a whole to improve the
food pipeline and to assist the courageous nongovernmental organizations on the ground so that their
work can be effective.
We are alarmed by the reports of impunity,
especially in the area of sexual violence. It is
imperative, as the Democratic Republic of the Congo
moves towards elections and a Government elected by
the people, that the training of the armed forces be
given priority, especially in the area of discipline and
relations with the civilian population. It is very
disturbing to hear that most of the cases reported have
related to the armed forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo or elements thereof.
It is of particular importance that, in the eastern
part of the country, where the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) is effectively involved but some
armed groups remain, MONUC undertake closer
coordination with the Congolese armed forces to
address not only the security area, but the extent to
which the confidence of the population can be restored,
especially after the elections. As we watch the outcome
of the next round of elections, we hope that the
Government will take more decisive measures in
addressing the issues of discipline, even including the
dismissal of armed forces and the disbandment of
militias that have been engaged in such atrocities.
We are gratified to hear about the improvements
in the situation in northern Uganda. It should be borne
in mind that humanitarian action can greatly facilitate
the negotiations that are going on in Juba. We
appreciate Mr. Egeland’s overtures and the contacts
that he has already made. In the area of the release of

06-52438

abducted persons, we should continue to be more
vigilant, because abductions, especially of young
people and women, have been the trademark of the
Lord’s Resistance Army.
We are particularly concerned, with respect both
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern
Uganda, that the issue of disarmament and
reintegration has not received adequate resources. That
may not only entail the danger of militias’ returning to
arms, but cause continuing insecurity among the
population. It is an issue not only of food, but also of
sustainable reintegration. We are also mindful of the
need for the reintegration of refugees who are returning
from neighbouring countries and the internally
displaced persons who will need to be resettled. It has
often been a problem of resources, and in the
integrated appeals that will follow, the humanitarian
dimension should be given priority.
As I said earlier, we hope that Mr. Egeland will
be able in subsequent discussions to provide a broader
survey of the humanitarian situation in the continent —
not only in Darfur and the Horn, but also in southern
Africa, where there are still countries that are going
through humanitarian crises precipitated by several
factors, such as in Zimbabwe at the moment.
Mr. Yankey (Ghana): I wish to add a word of
appreciation
for
Under-Secretary-General
Jan
Egeland’s thought-provoking assessment of the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda. We welcome the positive
developments that he highlighted, but we are also
concerned about the remaining obstacles to the
extension of relief to displaced persons. Obviously, the
achievement of durable peace is the key to the
elimination of the humanitarian problems that he has
highlighted. It is therefore only right that the Security
Council continues to be fully seized of the
humanitarian consequences of conflict as an integral
part of its mandate.
It is well established that the forced displacement
of large segments of populations has become part of
the strategy of combatants in furtherance of their
military objectives. We need to pay close attention to
that. From our perspective, we have to focus closely on
the factors that aggravate suffering in camps for
internally displaced persons (IDPs). Those factors
include restrictions on humanitarian access and the use
of aid-dependant civilian populations as hostages and

5

S/PV.5525

political bargaining chips. Insofar as such restrictions
have potential genocidal effects on displaced
populations, there is a need to assign criminal liability
to identified offenders in that regard, and to pursue
their prosecution as far as practicable. We agree with
the Under-Secretary-General that, whatever the
outcome of the peace talks in Juba between the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) and the Government, those
liable for International Criminal Court prosecution
should meet the fate to be allotted to them.
Secondly, the deliberate targeting of humanitarian
workers, who are often the main lifelines for IDPs and
refugees, also deserves to be given much more serious
attention in the international criminal justice system.
Sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of women and
children should also not be tolerated. Related to that is
the phenomenon of human trafficking, which has been
reported to exist in certain camps in other parts of
Africa.
The proliferation of small arms in IDP camps —
and we have just heard, in the course of the briefing,
what the Mayi Mayi have been doing — is also another
problem that deserves the Council’s attention. Those
arms are frequently used to terrorize displaced persons,
and they always have the risk of turning camps into
staging grounds for bloody armed confrontations,
thereby aggravating the humanitarian situation.
There is also the risk of the permanent
displacement of IDPs. I have in mind northern Uganda,
where a whole generation of people has been born and
raised in such camps, with little prospects of return and
of being integrated into the wider society. The threat
posed by prolonged stays in those camps should not be
underestimated. Given the changing dynamics of
conflicts on the continent, those camps could be fertile
grounds to recruit mercenaries, and even terrorists.
We recognize that not much can be achieved
without adequate funding. We commend those
countries, non-governmental organizations and civil
society groups that continue to be the backbone of the
global humanitarian effort, particularly in Africa.
Nonetheless, we support the appeal for extra resources
so that the agencies and groups on the ground can carry
on with the vital work they are doing.
Finally, we believe that the African Union and
other subregional groupings bear the primary
responsibility to provide humanitarian relief for their
own kith and kin. We hope to work with other African

6

countries to explore ways to enhance our contribution
to humanitarian relief on the continent.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank the delegation of
Greece for taking the initiative of organizing this
meeting. I also wish to thank Mr. Egeland for his
briefing. It is always with great interest that we listen
to him as he explains the situation on the ground.
At the outset, I would like to commend the
progress that has been made in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The humanitarian response of
the United Nations and its partners is today more swift
than in was the past. But the improvement made should
not lead us to forget reality. The briefing just given to
us by Jan Egeland reminds us of the reality that the
situation in certain parts of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has produced one of the most lethal
humanitarian crises in world. That continues to be a
matter of great concern.
Given the scale of the movement of displaced
persons and refugees, I would first like to emphasize
the basic principle of the voluntary return of refugees
to their countries. That principle must always be very
closely monitored.
We are also concerned about the needs of local
populations that suffer the burden of large numbers of
displaced persons.
The involvement of children in the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is of particular
concern. It is my hope that Congolese authorities,
United Nations agencies and the main donors will
quickly implement the recommendations just made by
the Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.
My delegation would like to reiterate its support
for the work of United Nations agencies in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as for the
United Nations 2006 Action Plan. We urge the
Congolese Government to become closely involved in
the implementation of the Plan of Action.
Of course, we must also strengthen the
coordination of international assistance and United
Nations programmes, so as to ensure that humanitarian
assistance can meet the needs of the entire country.
I also think we should welcome the return of
institutional donors to the Democratic Republic of the

06-52438

S/PV.5525

Congo, including the European Commission and the
World Bank. I am pleased that donors are prepared to
reinvest following the transition that has taken place
with regard to infrastructure and basic services.
My country welcomes the ceasefire agreement
signed on 26 August between the Government of
Uganda and the LRA rebellion. That agreement is a
first step towards a final resolution of the conflict in
Uganda. However, the search for peace should be
reconciled with the need not to guarantee impunity,
especially for those responsible for the most serious
violations of international humanitarian law.
On the humanitarian front, France is dedicated to
the social reintegration of child soldiers — especially
those unfortunate girls who have been raped — as well
as to the provision of psychological assistance.
My delegation welcomes the work done by
UNICEF, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Ugandan Human Rights
Commission in accordance with resolution 1612
(2005).
Mrs. Itoua Apoyolo (Congo) (spoke in French):
Madam President, my delegation is very grateful to
you for having included on the agenda of the Security
Council an issue of such great concern as the
humanitarian situation in Africa. Indeed, this issue is of
concern not only to Africans but to the international
community as a whole, given that the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation is in large part related to the
outbreak of conflicts, combined with the consequences
of natural disasters, which have occurred in many
countries.
My delegation would like also to pay tribute to
Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, for his responsiveness and his dedication
to his very difficult and hazardous task. I should like
once again to assure him of the support and
cooperation of our delegation.
On the basis of Mr. Egeland’s report, prepared
following his visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to Uganda, we have very mixed feelings.
We are happy to hear of the return of many refugees in
general and of the long-overdue signing of a cessation
of hostilities agreement between the Government of
Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). On
that score, we are extremely pleased. However, we

06-52438

cannot remain indifferent to the fact that insecurity and
impunity continue to afflict millions of people, who,
thus deprived, must rely on humanitarian assistance.
It is true that the signing of the agreement
between the Ugandan Government and the LRA is a
promising sign for the peoples of the north, who have
suffered all sorts of atrocities during the last two
decades of war, as well as for stability in the Great
Lakes region as a whole. It is intolerable that women
and girls continue to be raped and that child soldiers
continue to be recruited.
Despite of the progress made in humanitarian
terms in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
Uganda, enormous challenges remain, because not all
factors of instability have been eliminated. For that
reason, my delegation believes that there is a need to
ensure the implementation of the cessation of
hostilities agreement and the peace process that is
under way, which represents an excellent opportunity
to put an end to 20 years of war in northern Uganda.
There is a need also to accelerate the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and to put an end to impunity with regard to the
perpetrators of serious violations of human rights,
through existing mechanisms. It is vital also to call on
all parties, wherever necessary, to recognize the
neutrality of humanitarian personnel and to ensure their
security. It is also imperative to encourage the
international community to continue its efforts on
behalf of humanitarian assistance in Africa by
mobilizing greater resources so as to address these
enormous challenges.
Finally, I should like to reiterate once again my
delegation’s commitment to the implementation of
resolution 1625 (2005) relating to the prevention and
settlement of conflicts, without which international
peace and security will continue to be threatened and
humanitarian problems, which we deplore, will remain
acute.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I should like to begin by
joining others in thanking Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his comprehensive briefing.
Given their gravity and serious implications, the
humanitarian crises of Africa merit more of our
attention and of our political and financial resources.
Violent conflicts, food shortages and governance crises
are some of the most widespread causes. The powers of

7

S/PV.5525

nature — floods and droughts — account for only a
fraction of these. Most humanitarian crises are
manmade, and it is fair to say that if we have the
collective will, all those causes and all those
humanitarian crises highlighted by Mr. Egeland can be
influenced and corrected through concerted action by
all parties involved.
Let me take this opportunity to comment on the
situations in the Sudan and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and on the recent positive developments
with regard to the situation in northern Uganda. I
would like also to underline the fact that the
humanitarian situation in a number of other countries
in Africa — Zimbabwe being one of them — also
requires the close attention of the international
community.
The situation in the Sudan continues to top the
agenda of the Council. While the humanitarian
situation in southern Sudan remains stable and has led
to some optimism, we are all too aware of the sharp
deterioration of the situation in Darfur. Increased
fighting, restrictions on humanitarian access and direct
targeting of humanitarian workers have pushed the
situation to the brink of catastrophe. In the absence of
eyes and ears on the ground, when not only aid
personnel but also journalists are prohibited from
accessing the most vulnerable areas, the rest of the
world has reason to be extremely worried.
An immediate strengthening of the African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) is essential, not only in
word but also in deed. A decision on extending the
mandate of AMIS will, hopefully, be taken next week,
and the resources and additional capacity must follow.
They are so desperately needed. At the same time, the
joint planning of the transfer of AMIS to the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) must continue
without delay.
If security in Darfur is allowed to deteriorate
even further, we might soon be faced with tens of
thousands of refugees crossing into neighbouring
countries, with further destabilizing consequences for
the entire region. We would also be faced with a
scenario not unlike the one we saw in Rwanda in
1994 — a scenario that we have promised ourselves
would never be repeated.
With more than 1,000 people dying every day,
mainly as a result of the continuing conflict in the east,
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic

8

of the Congo is extremely worrying. Only through
peace and stability can the humanitarian situation be
eased. In order not to lose the present window of
opportunity to achieve peace, lasting stability,
democracy and sustained economic development, the
political actors must first of all respect the electoral
process and work constructively to support democratic
development.
On a much more positive note, I would like to
welcome the cessation of hostilities agreement between
Uganda and the rebels, the Lord’s Resistance Army. It
is a very important step in the right direction, and, as
Mr. Egeland has stated, this recent development
represents the best hope for sustainable peace in the
region in some time.
We urge the parties to agree on a comprehensive
settlement which would pave the way for efforts to
help improve the deplorable living conditions of the
nearly 2 million internally displaced persons in
northern Uganda. To secure lasting peace, impunity
must be addressed, and I should like to use this
opportunity to remind Uganda of its responsibility to
find a solution consistent with its obligations under
international law.
Zimbabwe is not on the agenda for today’s
briefing. Nevertheless, I would like to stress our
continued concern regarding the humanitarian situation
in the country, a situation that, we all know, is
extremely serious and is getting worse. A huge and
growing number of Zimbabweans are suffering from
food insecurity, homelessness and/or the HIV/AIDS
pandemic. I would like to ask Mr. Egeland to give his
assessment of the present situation in that country and
to update us on the cooperation between the United
Nations and Zimbabwe.
Finally, let me conclude by commending the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Mr. Egeland for the active advocacy role they
continue to play.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Egeland
for his briefing on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda. The historic general election in the
Democratic Republic has become the most important
event in the political life of that country. Thanks to the
considerable efforts by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the International Committee

06-52438

S/PV.5525

in Support of the Transition (CIAT), as well as all
parties in the Democratic Republic, the election is
progressing smoothly.
At the same time, we have also noticed that in the
eastern part of the country there are still some issues in
the humanitarian and human rights fields. We believe
the political and security situation is interdependent
with the humanitarian situation. On the one hand, a
sound political and security situation would aid in
ameliorating the humanitarian crisis. On the other
hand, improvement of the humanitarian situation would
promote further progress in the political and security
situation.
In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially in North and South Kivu, improvement of
the humanitarian situation would impact positively on
the general election, which must be conducted in an
environment of peace, security and stability. It is hoped
that before the new Government comes into force, the
transitional Government will remain unified in
discharging its responsibilities to manage the country,
and that it will find a politically practical solution to
the humanitarian problem prevailing in the eastern part
of the country.
With regard to Uganda, for a long time that
Government has been making unremitting efforts to
find a solution to the situation in the northern part of
the country and calm the tensions existing there. We
are heartened to notice that important breakthroughs
have been made in the negotiations between the
Government and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
The LRA has agreed to lay down its weapons,
repatriate the kidnapped women and children, assemble
at designated points and implement the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. It is
believed that such an important development will have
an important bearing on the situation in the northern
part of Uganda as well as on the stability of the country
as a whole.
It is hoped that the international community can
find an early solution to the issue of the indictment by
the International Criminal Court of Kony, the head of
the LRA, as that would pave the way for an early
solution to the issue of the LRA.
Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I want to
thank Under-Secretary-General Egeland for his
informative briefing on the current state of
humanitarian affairs across the African continent, and

06-52438

particularly on his recent trip to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, northern Uganda and southern
Sudan. We are grateful to Mr. Egeland for taking on
that timely mission.
Let me say at the outset that the United States is
encouraged by what appear to be some positive
developments in resolving some of the longstanding
humanitarian problems in Africa. For example, we
would note that the return of refugees and displaced
persons in Angola and Liberia is nearly complete, and
that the process is also underway in Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and southern
Sudan.
We also share Mr. Egeland’s cautious optimism
about the situations in northern Uganda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We recognize that
support for peace and reconciliation efforts, as well as
for the basic recovery of the social and economic
infrastructure in all of those post-conflict situations,
will be critical to the sustainable resolution of those
protracted crises. We add our hope that external
financial support for the recovery of those countries is
shared more broadly by a wider donor community,
since we all benefit from the peace and security that
should result.
The United States is encouraged by the ongoing
negotiations between the Government of Uganda and
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), and we are
monitoring the results with interest. We urge both
parties to continue to work towards a viable ceasefire.
In that regard, it is important that the 2007 United
Nations Strategy and Consolidated Action Plan address
internally displaced person (IDP) returns in Uganda, as
well as assistance to IDP camps. While IDPs may well
continue to move between camps and their lands for
some time, it is important to start laying a foundation
for returns now.
The United States, however, is gravely concerned
over the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Darfur,
including the possible new flows of refugees to Chad
and weak implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. We must find a way to help reach a
cessation of hostilities in Darfur, to help provide
security for the civilians there and to support a process
of dialogue rather than use of arms. We look forward to
the outcome of next week’s meeting of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, and we reiterate our
call on the Government of the Sudan to welcome

9

S/PV.5525

deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force in
Darfur.
We deeply regret the recent deaths of
humanitarian workers in Darfur. We join others in
underscoring the need to support individuals working
in some of the most difficult areas of the world for the
benefit of those in need.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We too would like to
thank Mr. Egeland for his very powerful briefing and
very sobering description of the situation developing in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern
Uganda. At the same time, we note encouraging signs
of progress in the developments in those two countries.
As we heard in the briefing, there are still many
disturbing acts of violence against civilians, as well as
acts of gender-based violence, which the international
community cannot disregard and must pay greater
attention to.
In that regard, we believe that the international
community must pay constant attention to
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1674
(2006). We agree with Mr. Egeland that we must not
allow impunity in any country or in any region, and we
must bring all violators of human rights and
perpetrators of acts of violence and human rights
abuses to justice.
At the same time, we noted, in connection with
the negotiations between the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) and the Government of Uganda on the cessation
of hostilities, that there are some calls for the leaders
of the LRA to be guaranteed amnesty or impunity as a
condition for accepting the cessation of hostilities. We
would like to ask Mr. Egeland a question with regard to
how that issue can be addressed: on the one hand, so as
not to compromise the principles of impunity, and on
the other hand — as Mr. Egeland noted — to use it as
the last chance for peace in northern Uganda.
We share Mr. Egeland’s view that the constant
interest of the Security Council in the issue is crucial to
progress in northern Uganda. That is why we would
welcome regular briefings by him and by the
Secretariat on developments in northern Uganda, as
well as on how the Government of Uganda fulfils its
commitments to address the grave social, humanitarian
and economic situation in northern Uganda, including
by the establishment of a sustainable and coherent
recovery plan for the north.

10

Returning to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we share the opinion of
Mr. Egeland that it is of the utmost importance to
address the problem of violence committed against
women and other grave violations of human rights
perpetrated by the Congolese armed forces and
militias. We think that effectively addressing this
problem is one of the prerequisites for sustainable
peace consolidation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
That is why we believe that additional efforts and
resources are needed to speed up the process of
security-sector reform in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Again, we think that a comprehensive
action plan should be elaborated based on full
compliance with and implementation of resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1674 (2006), with special attention
given to the situation in the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In conclusion, we would like to underline the
necessity of paying equal attention to all regions in
Africa and trying to do everything possible to prevent
humanitarian crises like those we have witnessed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and northern
Uganda and to avert the humanitarian catastrophe
currently unfolding in Darfur. In this respect, we are
also concerned about the rapid deterioration of the
humanitarian situation and the social and living
conditions in Zimbabwe, which we are afraid might
lead to an internal conflict similar to those we have
witnessed in other parts of Africa. In this connection,
we would like to ask Mr. Egeland whether he thinks
that it is possible for the international community to act
to prevent these situations from turning into violent
conflicts.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, we would like to thank you
and your delegation for convening this meeting. We
would also like to welcome the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland, and to
congratulate him once more for his active efforts on
behalf of civilian populations, especially the most
vulnerable sectors. We are happy to have him once
again with us. We attach great importance to the
information that he regularly provides to the Security
Council.

06-52438

S/PV.5525

With regard to his statement today, we take note
of the positive tone of some of his comments on his
recent visit to Africa, in particular his cautious
optimism with regard to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in northern Uganda. We
know that that region has been the epicentre of the
worst humanitarian tragedies that our generation has
experienced. We trust that both countries will be able
to start to follow a path that will take them to
democratic normalcy after so much suffering and so
many mistakes. However, we are still concerned, in
particular, about the issue of sexual violence and we
think that urgent steps need to be taken on that
problem.

Finally, my delegation would like to state its
condemnation of attacks on humanitarian personnel, in
particular, the death of 12 humanitarian workers in the
last two months in Darfur, and the constant physical
aggression and harassment to which they are subject
and that the Secretary-General has so vividly described
in recent days. Attacking humanitarian personnel or
preventing their activities not only violates
fundamental principles of humanitarian law but it also
imperils the means of survival of the 3 million people
dependent on humanitarian aid. It is urgent for the
violence to cease. The international community cannot
allow innocent civilians to continue to die in the name
of the right to self-defence.

On another issue, the situation in Darfur, as we
know and as the Council knows in depth, continues to
be an urgent one. We cannot add much more to what
we have recently heard from Mr. Egeland. Almost 3
million people in the region, without counting those in
Chad, could be deprived of humanitarian assistance to
enable them to survive, due to the re-escalation of
violence in recent months. In this context, we would
like to repeat that it is absolutely imperative to
implement the provisions of resolution 1706 (2006)
without further delay.

To conclude, we would like to state our
appreciation for Mr. Egeland’s efforts in seeking to
improve the situation of civilian populations. We value
his commitment and we reaffirm that Argentina
supports him in his daily task of protecting civilians in
armed conflict.

With regard to the Juba peace process and the
slow progress that has been achieved, we think that it
is necessary once again to support this process and
invest in peace and reconciliation so as finally to put
an end to this long and painful conflict that has
afflicted the Acholi people for so many years. In this
context, we think that one cannot negotiate impunity
for the perpetrators of so much suffering for the
civilian population. So that there can be peace, there
needs to be accountability for those who have carried
out massive violations of human rights. The
Government of Uganda has voluntarily submitted the
situation to the International Criminal Court, and we
believe that the process, once initiated, should not stop.
We support the actions of the Court, and we agree with
Mr. Egeland that the international community, and in
particular the mediators that are assisting in the Juba
process, should seek innovative solutions that will
harmonize the traditional systems which are common
in reconciliation among the local civilian population
with the requirements of international law. Once again,
we state that peace cannot be achieved at the price of
justice.

06-52438

Mr. Oshima (Japan): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Egeland for his timely and informative
briefing on his recent visit to the Central African
region. We pay tribute to the Emergency Relief
Coordinator for his unstinting efforts to address
humanitarian crises in Africa and elsewhere, and
particularly for his initiatives and efforts to highlight
forgotten or neglected humanitarian crises.
We welcome some positive developments that
have taken place recently in conflict zones in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. But
we must note that these moves toward settlement of
conflict, though much welcomed, are very fragile.
Therefore, sustained support is needed from the
international community to make them stick and to
address the humanitarian concerns and needs of the
many affected people, including refugees and
internally displaced persons, and in particular, to
address the plight of the most vulnerable of the
vulnerable, namely, women and children.
The agreement on the cessation of hostilities
between the Government of Uganda and the Lord’s
Resistance Army, the result of the facilitation efforts of
the government authorities of South Sudan, is certainly
a welcome positive step. With that agreement in place,
it is now important to ensure that the cessation of
hostilities holds and is respected by the parties, and
that the favourable momentum that has been created

11

S/PV.5525

leads to further steps being taken for a peace agreement
and a lasting resolution of the conflict.
It is also important that the next steps should
continue to be led by Africans through the process that
they have set in motion. But the international
community must provide generous and sustained
support, too. As refugees have already begun to return
from their camps, the Joint Monitoring Committee,
established in May this year, needs to accelerate its
efforts to help implement the emergency humanitarian
action plan. In this regard, we expect the United
Nations, as a critical member of the Joint Monitoring
Committee, to play its role effectively.
The question of impunity must also receive due
attention. Impunity must end, and those responsible for
crimes and offences against the civilian population
must be brought to justice. At the same time, in any
conflict resolution process, promoting reconciliation
among warring parties is often a sensitive matter, and
as such the right balance needs to be struck, so that, in
the words of the Emergency Relief Coordinator, peace
and justice work together.
With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we are gratified to note the important progress
that has been made in the political process, allowing
the much-needed humanitarian space to increase. Here,
too, as internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees begin to return, the process needs to be
supported and managed carefully so that tensions and
instability are kept to a minimum. We therefore support
the observation of the Emergency Relief Coordinator
that the improvement of the humanitarian situation for
the affected people must be pursued in tandem with the
political process. A similar transition from
humanitarian assistance to reconstruction is therefore
indispensable.
Finally, I would like to say a word about the
situation in southern Sudan. Concerns have been
expressed about the recent resurgence of the activities
of the so-called other armed groups. Frequent conflict
between such groups and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army is having a negative impact on the security
situation there. Reaching an agreement among
stakeholders is therefore critically important so that
efforts can continue towards the consolidation of peace —
specifically, the further return of refugees and IDPs
after the rainy season, the progress of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes and other

12

objectives in the context of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. I would be happy to
hear Mr. Egeland’s views on the situation in southern
Sudan.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I, too,
would like to thank Jan Egeland for his briefing. I pay
tribute to him for truly being our collective conscience
and for doing so much to bring relief to all of the crises
and disasters that he deals with.
I would like to start with the situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo — an electoral process
on a knife edge and unacceptable violence from 20 to
22 August between security forces loyal to President
Kabila and those loyal to Vice-President Bemba. Those
second-round candidates owe it to the Congolese
people to restate their commitment to the peace process
and to resolve the political differences between them
by peaceful means. After the election, it will be
incumbent on all political parties to act responsibly
within the framework of the new institutions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Given the massive investment that the Council
and the United Nations have made in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we will have to be ready to
make very clear our condemnation of any violence and
to make absolutely certain, to the extent that we can,
that the democratic process comes out of this and
makes progress.
We share the alarm expressed by Jan Egeland
about the widespread and serious nature of the sexual
and gender-based violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. This is not just a human rights concern;
it has a long-term impact on peace and security. There
is a moral imperative to ensure that there is no
impunity for the perpetrators. There are also pragmatic
reasons, because ending impunity contributes to a
sustainable peace. That is why the efforts by the
Congolese authorities — and we would like to see
more of them — and the zero-tolerance approach of the
Secretary-General are crucial in tacking those abuses.
We should be clear that no one can be exempt from
punishment for such crimes.
But our efforts will come to nothing if the scale
of need in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains as immense as it is today and if we fail to
respond to it. We need a greater response delivery that
is coordinated, and we need to make sure that we do

06-52438

S/PV.5525

not spoil what has been achieved by being unable to
see it through.
Turning to the situation on the ground in Uganda,
which changes by the day, I welcome very much,
speaking from a British viewpoint, the steps now being
taken by the Ugandan Government. We have long
believed that there could never be a purely military
solution to the conflict in the north. We therefore very
much welcome the signing of the cessation of
hostilities agreement between the Lord’s Resistance
Army and the Ugandan Government.
There is no question that there is a long way to go
before we actually get a comprehensive negotiated
settlement. But such unease as I had about the process
in Juba was, I have to say, partly assuaged by the fact
that Jan Egeland himself was actually in Juba talking to
people. Despite the progress being made, however, 1.7
million people are still living in extremely difficult
conditions in camps for internally displaced persons,
and that has to be a major concern.
I hope that the arrangements being put in place by
the Government in Kampala, and the measures which
will flow out to northern Uganda through the Joint
Monitoring Committee, will, in a mix of cooperation
between
the
Government,
non-governmental
organizations, the United Nations family and those
countries that are trying to help the process, ensure
progress and actually keep up the pressure for
sustained movement. The Government of Uganda has
reacted well in recent months. It deserves our support
so that it can see through what it is trying to do.
Ending
conflict,
ensuring
stability
and
demobilizing and demilitarizing the fighters must be
the priorities. I think that we all have to recognize that
reintegration and reconciliation will be very, very
difficult. But in addition, an essential part of a better
future will be the establishment of the rule of law and
the delivery of justice — justice which ensures
stability, progress and reconciliation and which will
inevitably require an end to impunity for those who
have committed the gravest of crimes against
humanity. But there is a sequence which we should
sensibly follow.
There are, of course, many situations of
humanitarian concern in Africa which merit our
attention, and we have addressed only some of them
this morning. Darfur has been referred to. Let me stress
the need to actually implement resolution 1706 (2006),

06-52438

to get the mandate of the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS) extended and ensure that the Mission is
reinforced, and to make sure that we are taking all the
steps that we should take to deliver security in Chad,
expecting that we may have to face an influx of more
refugees into Chad — and we look forward to
proposals from the Secretary-General in that respect —
and that all of us maximize the pressure on the
Government in Khartoum to actually accept a United
Nations force to replace AMIS.
Looking beyond Chad, one of the situations that a
number of colleagues have referred to and which I, too,
want to pick up on, is the situation in Zimbabwe.
Mr. Egeland briefed the Council on this following his
mission in December (see S/PV.5331). It would be very
helpful to have an update on how he now sees it, and
some thoughts about what all of us in the United
Nations family can do to try and ameliorate what is an
increasingly grim situation.
As I understand it, more than one year after
Operation Murambatsvina, displacements continue, and
almost none of the victims of that operation have
benefited from the so-called programme of re-housing.
But the issue is not just re-housing. There is a severe
food shortage, which is not just down to the drought:
This is the fifth year in succession that there has been
such a shortage. Inflation is running in excess of 1,200
per cent, and the blatant and continuing disregard for
human rights is there for all to see.
That is not just a domestic crisis for Zimbabwe; it
is resulting in migration flows, placing enormous
burdens on neighbouring countries and producing
inherent instability. So it would be very helpful if the
Under-Secretary-General could give us his perception
of the scale of the difficulties and how we can help the
people of Zimbabwe.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Egeland for his comprehensive briefing on his
trip to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
Uganda. The humanitarian situation in those States
continues to be very complex and requires continued
comprehensive international cooperation. Major
changes in the humanitarian situation in those countries
and in other countries on the continent can take place
only with the effective long-term settlement of the
conflicts with the help of the United Nations, the

13

S/PV.5525

African Union, African subregional organizations and
other interested parties.
A successful solution to humanitarian problems in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
the problem of refugees and internally displaced
persons, will depend to a significant extent on the
peace process going forward, and in particular on the
effective implementation of the programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants.
With the help of the United Nations and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Congolese
parties must continue to work towards a political
settlement, in particular within the context of
preparations for the important second round of
elections. Of course, responsibility regarding the
humanitarian crimes that have been committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as in other conflict
zones in Africa, remains an important element of any
long-term comprehensive settlement.
The signing of a ceasefire agreement between the
Government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance
Army, with the facilitation of the government of South
Sudan, offers prospects for a final settlement of the
conflict in the northern part of the country and for an
easing of the situation of the population in that region.
We need full and strict compliance with this
agreement, and the situation in that country must be
permanently stabilized. We view as a step in the right
direction the Government of Uganda’s plan for a
gradual easing of the humanitarian situation in the
north of the country. At this crucial point for reaching a
settlement, the international community must provide
wide-ranging support and encouragement, including
financial support, so that the comprehensive
programme for the rehabilitation of northern Uganda
can be carried out successfully.
We trust that, as they gather momentum, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Central Emergency
Response Fund will help improve the humanitarian
situation in Africa and promote the successful
rehabilitation of African States recovering from
conflict. The Russian Federation, for its part, will
continue to do everything possible to promote the
solutions to these challenges.
Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We, too,
would like to thank Mr. Egeland for his update on the

14

situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Uganda. We are happy that there have been some
improvements in those countries. In that connection,
we welcome the agreement signed between the
Government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance
Army.
Although there has been major progress, I believe
that the challenges are even greater. In this context, I
would like to point to some elements that the Security
Council and the international community need to
continue to work on. The first is the humanitarian
situation. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, the situation remains critical. Although there
has been some progress, and although there have been
efforts in establishing democratic institutions and in
holding elections, the task is far broader than that. In
our view, that task needs to go hand in hand with
economic progress. The social development of the
country is of great importance, as is respect for the rule
of law.
The second element is the issue of impunity. We
consider that the Security Council and all parties
concerned need to continue to work to end impunity.
We support the International Criminal Court playing a
significant role in seeking reconciliation and
punishment for those who violate human rights. We
believe that there can be no reconciliation if those who
are responsible go unpunished and if due attention is
not paid to the victims of these crimes.
Another situation relates to violence against the
civilian population. The Security Council needs to
continue to work to protect civilians and to ensure
respect for and guarantees of their human rights.
Violence against women is unacceptable; I think that
the Security Council must send a very clear message
about putting an end to this practice, which is
becoming habitual in some African countries.
Governments need to be responsible for taking action
to put an end to this practice.
Yet another issue is that of internally displaced
persons. Assistance to these people must continue to be
a priority. We all realize the difficult situation for
internally displaced persons in Darfur, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Uganda and in
Chad. In this context, we want to stress the importance
of speedy implementation of resolution 1706 (2006)
for internally displaced persons in Darfur and in Chad.

06-52438

S/PV.5525

With regard to the financial situation, we believe
that the international community needs to continue to
provide additional resources and seek intelligent ways
and means to obtain financial assistance. Without such
assistance, populations in these African countries will
continue to suffer, and many more human lives will be
lost.
I have a question for Mr. Egeland on the process
for the forthcoming second round of elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Is there any
indication that this might lead to a resurgence of
violence or a deterioration of the security situation? Is
there a plan to prevent any aggravation of the
humanitarian crisis? Have discussions been held with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, or has Mr. Egeland’s Office undertaken a
programme to prevent that potential situation?
Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank Mr. Egeland for his briefing,
which we followed attentively.
It is very sad to note today that the rape of
women has become a spreading cancer in the society of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is sad indeed
that those who commit such crimes do so with
impunity. I ask myself: Why do we forget that crisis,
only to focus on others? Where have we been while the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
deteriorated so drastically? Clearly, the situation in that
country requires surgery to remove the spreading
cancer. We therefore agree with Mr. Egeland that the
Council should do everything in its power to end
impunity and fully to apply criminal justice in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
History proves that national dialogue and
reconciliation represent the best hope for peace in
conflict situations, as borne out by recent
developments in Uganda. We must therefore continue
to support efforts for peace in northern Uganda. In that
regard, we again agree with Mr. Egeland that the
Council must help the Government of Uganda to settle
the problem in the North and to promote reconciliation
and national dialogue to address the root causes of that
problem in order to save innocent lives.
The main thrust of the statements made by
Mr. Egeland and representatives today is that the best
hope for achieving peace in Darfur lies not in
transferring authority from the African Union Mission
in Sudan to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan,

06-52438

but in calling on the rebel movements to sign the
Darfur Peace Agreement, to enhance national
reconciliation and dialogue in Darfur, and to strengthen
the legal and judicial systems in order to bring to
justice all those who have violated international
humanitarian law and to pay the necessary
compensation to the victims of the violence there, in
accordance with the applicable legal and judicial
framework.
We reiterate our hope that such an approach and
such a philosophy will be applied to all the struggles in
Africa, not just that in Darfur.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Greece.
I would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Egeland, for
today’s very interesting briefing on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, northern Uganda
and other areas.
The political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, although still fragile, gives us
reason to be optimistic about an overall improvement
of the situation as soon as a democratically elected
Government is in place. In the meantime, violence still
poses an ongoing threat to untold numbers of
Congolese, including the sexual abuse of women,
particularly in the strife-torn eastern provinces, while
in Katanga the problem of 150,000 internally displaced
persons persists.
We should commend the efforts of the United
Nations humanitarian agencies working in the field —
engaging in a humanitarian marathon, I would say —
and, as Mr. Egeland said, saving lives on a daily basis,
despite the dire conditions in which they work.
There is also hope for a political settlement in
northern Uganda following the Juba agreement with
the Lord’s Resistance Army. The 20-year conflict has
caused immense suffering, with thousands of victims
and 2 million people displaced. Everybody has
understood that no military solution could be applied.
Only the success of the peace process can create the
sense of security necessary for the safe return of the
internally displaced persons and the rebuilding of the
Acholi and Ugandan societies. We should do our
utmost to support it. Regional actors and the
international community should spare no effort to
ensure that resources are adequately allocated to

15

S/PV.5525

northern Uganda, including for humanitarian assistance
and the sustainable reintegration of the conflictaffected population.
As far as the Sudan and, more particularly, Darfur
are concerned, in 2003 we had the largest operation in
the world, which was extremely effective. Now,
unfortunately, it is at the brink of total collapse,
touching what some have called the Rwandan
threshold. Indicatively, during the past few weeks, the
number of gross violations of human rights, including
rape, has risen dramatically. The number of internally
displaced persons has risen by 50,000, while
humanitarian access has been severely restricted due to
the fact that humanitarian workers are being targeted.
In July alone, nine humanitarian workers were killed.
In that context, we believe strongly that the only
way to improve the situation is if we all work
collectively to implement resolution 1706 (2006) and
to uphold the Darfur Peace Agreement. As we have
said before, there cannot be any military solution to the
Darfur crisis.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. Egeland to
respond to the comments and questions raised.
Mr. Egeland: I offer warm thanks to all members
of the Council for their encouraging comments, advice
and questions.
Indeed, as I have come to brief the Council on
Africa regularly these past three years, I feel as if I
have come mostly with bad tidings, including after my
first big trip in 2003 to northern Uganda and the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. I was
profoundly shocked by what I saw and deeply
pessimistic after leaving our humanitarian colleagues
on the ground.
This time, we have a very positive message that
two of the worst wars of our time, age and
generation — the wars in eastern Congo and the war in
northern Uganda — can be brought to an end. It is not
often that we have that kind of historic opportunity,
and we should not fail as we work together to bring an
end to the haemorrhage of human life in the eastern
Congo and to the enormous suffering, especially of
children, in northern Uganda. Twenty thousand
children were kidnapped in northern Uganda. That is
unparalleled anywhere in the world.

16

Now, as we see that militias are giving up their
arms in the eastern Congo and the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) is assembling at the assembly points in
the southern Sudan, we need urgent action to stabilize
the situation and we need a flexible way of responding.
We want to give the Mayi Mayi soldiers, whom I saw
giving up their arms, the $110 package and some tools
to become carpenters or to resume work as farmers.
That is not happening at the moment. The alternative
could take effect, and they could go back to raping and
pillaging the civilian population.
Hopefully, the 400 LRA fighters who have come
to the assembly points will be joined by thousands of
others, by our estimation, at the two assembly points in
the southern Sudan. We would rather have them there,
eating canned food, watching videos or doing whatever
they wish, than going back to northern Uganda and
starting the whole indiscriminate attack on the civilian
population again. That would spare a lot of human
suffering and save us a lot of money in terms of lifesaving humanitarian assistance.
The representative of the United States
commented that there should now be a consistent
recovery effort, to be included in the appeals for 2007.
Indeed, the country teams are working very hard as we
speak on a very ambitious programme covering the
areas of recovery, reconstruction and the protection of
civilians in eastern Congo and northern Uganda. That
will be included in the 2007 appeal that the SecretaryGeneral, with my assistance, will launch at the end of
November from this very building.
I also agree with those who commented that we
need more help to realize that programme. We often
feel that we round up the usual suspects when we want
to foot the bill for such historic reconstruction
programmes. That usually involves a dozen donors, the
same ones over and over again. There are five dozen
viable economies in the world, and they should all
contribute.
Many commented on reconciliation and peace, on
the one hand, and justice and accountability, on the
other. I think that Africa is a model for other continents
in terms of reconciliation, being able to build bridges
and looking to the future. Europeans, Middle
Easterners and Asians can learn from that. What is a
problem in Africa is that too often it has been forgive
and forget, and there has not seemed to be much of an
interest among political, military and economic elites

06-52438

S/PV.5525

to put an end to impunity for serious violations of
human rights, including rampant sexual abuse. What
we are therefore striving for now is peace with justice.
That can come in many ways in northern Uganda. I am
sure that we will succeed in northern Uganda.
I was very heartened to hear that the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) himself has
called for work to be done now to end the war, ensure
the demobilization of soldiers and so forth and develop
something that will satisfy national and international
laws, including the Rome Statute, as well as the local
need for reconciliation and the local interest in the use
of traditional justice mechanisms. I think that the ICC
indictments will not be a stumbling block, and that
they can actually provide impetus for future progress
towards peace in northern Uganda, which is now at
hand.
The representative of Peru asked about the
second round of elections and the chances of their
being free, fair and secure. I think there are very good
possibilities for that. I congratulate our colleagues in
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for what
they did in the first elections. I also wish to
congratulate Bill Swing, the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, for what he has done of late
with many ambassadors in Kinshasa to reconcile the
tensions between the two contenders in the second
round of presidential elections. I feel very confident
that we are now going to have good elections. I really
hope, and we all pray, that the results of the elections
will not lead to further tension.
But the marathon in the Congo has only been half
run. The billions of dollars the international
community has invested in MONUC must now be
supplemented with future investments in peace,
security and reconstruction. It was a very bad sign that
many non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have
now been told that they are likely to have less money
for humanitarian work in 2007, and that many of their
colleagues working in the area of development were
given no promises of increased funding for 2007. That
is a bad omen for our ability to finish the marathon.
The representative of Denmark, as well as the
representatives of several other countries including
Qatar, referred to Darfur. Let me just say the following
in that regard: I fear that we will return many times to
Darfur. We are growing increasingly desperate as

06-52438

humanitarian actors. Today we released $4.5 million
from the Central Emergency Response Fund for
helicopters to try to reach groups with whom we have
lost all contact by road. We will go in with those
helicopters when there is a lull in the fighting, in an
attempt to deliver food and exit quickly. That is a very
crude life-saving measure, which in a way shows how
great the desperation has become in our attempts to
keep people alive.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) is sending more staff to Darfur as we
speak, in an effort to help NGOs stay. Nongovernmental organizations are now all debating
whether to leave. One non-governmental organization
recently lost five out of seven of its vehicles to carjacking and armed robbery by various armed groups,
including rebels, Janjaweed militia and organized
crime groups on the ground. If NGOs leave, it will be
like pulling the plug. The result will be an end to
humanitarian relief. Were the African Union Mission in
the Sudan (AMIS) to leave, the effect would be exactly
the same. All who now have influence — African
neighbours, Arab States, Islamic States, China and
westerners — have to do what they can in the coming
days to impress upon the Government, the rebels and
everyone else the need to avoid a meltdown, which
would be beyond description.
The Permanent Representative of Japan asked
about the situation in southern Sudan. I was
encouraged by what I saw there. But there is also the
fear that the progress in southern Sudan will also be
threatened by a possible collapse in Darfur. We must
therefore endeavour to avoid having another conflict to
deal with. With the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
now in assembly points rather than continuing to loot,
pillage and attack, the situation has improved in
southern south Sudan. The Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) has been able to absorb several armed
groups that were on the loose earlier. The United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) has brokered
agreements between the SPLA and other local groups.
In short, the situation is now so good that the security
level was lowered from phase-IV to phase-III just a
few weeks ago. Things in southern Sudan are going in
the right direction, but they continue to be very fragile.
Several representatives mentioned the situation in
the Southern African region, and in Zimbabwe in
particular. In addition, the representative of Denmark
asked about the present humanitarian situation. When I

17

S/PV.5525

visited last year, after the disastrous eviction campaign,
Government officials showed me a number of houses
under construction. I was promised that all those who
had been evicted would end up in better housing than
they had before. The fact of the matter is that 92,460
housing structures were destroyed during Operation
Murambatsvina. That is our firm estimate based on
Government information. Very few — some 3,325
houses — have been built, as opposed to the more than
90,000 structures that were demolished. Those new
houses went to many people who had not been evicted.
Indeed, those who were in bad housing before this
operation are in even worse conditions today.
The Amnesty International report that just came
out is, in the view of our colleagues on the ground, to
the point. No inaccuracies were found. We ourselves
have tried to construct housing for the evicted, and,
altogether, some 1,400 temporary shelters were
constructed. In general, it has been very difficult to do
so, because there has not been any Government
cooperation at all to make it happen. We have released
$2 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund
for housing for those in need.
The harvest will, thankfully, be better this year
than last year in Zimbabwe. Better rains may be the
best explanation for that. Still, 1 million people will be

18

in need of food assistance. Social services are still
declining, the economy is still declining, and
vulnerability is greatly increasing. We need more
funding for our appeal, which is badly underfunded in
Zimbabwe, and we need diplomatic and other help to
try to get out of a very vicious circle in Zimbabwe — a
country that could easily feed itself and which is now
in a very steep decline in terms of social indicators.
Finally, I acknowledge the wish expressed by the
Ambassador of Tanzania that, next time, there be a
greater review of the situation in southern Africa and in
other parts of Africa. I am very grateful for the regular
invitations of the Council to brief on these situations
and I am always willing to come whenever the Council
has time to hear from me and from my humanitarian
colleagues.
The President: I thank Mr. Egeland for the
clarifications he has provided.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

06-52438
