13

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Fint Committee

in mind the need to achieve optimum co-ordination in
the work of the Secretariat to promote co-operation in
the peaceful uses of outer space;
.
8. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space for the appointment by the Secretary-General of ~ qualified in~ividual
with the full-time task of promotmg the practica! applications of space technology; 16
9. Welcomes the efforts of Member States to share
with other interested Member States the space venture
and the practica! benefits which may be derived
from their programmes in space technology;
10. W elcomes the efforts of Member States to keep
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
fully informed of their activities and invites all Member
States to do so;
11. Approves sponsorship by the United Nations
of the CELPA Mar del Plata Station17 in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1802 (XVII) of
14 December 1962 and recommends that Member
States should give consideration to the use of these
facilities for appropriate space research activities;
12. Approves continuing sponsorship by the United
Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching
Station and recommends that Member States should
give consideration to the use of these facilities for appropriate space research activities;
13. Notes with appreciation that, in accordance
with resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961,
the Secretary-General continues to maintain a public
registry of objects launched into orbit or beyond on the
basis of information fumished by Member States;
14. Requests the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Intemational
Telecommunication Union and other interested specialized agencies, the United International Bureaux for
the Protection of Intellectual Property, as well as the
broadcasting organizations of the type mentioned in
paragraph 45 of the report of the Working Group on
Direct Broadcast Satellites on its second session, to
prepare reports as suggested by the Working Group
as basic documents for the work of that Group at its
session in May 1970;
15. Requests tbe specialized agencies and the Intemational Atomic Energy Agency to examine the
particular problems which arise or which may arise
from the use of outer space in the fields within their
competence and which should in their opinion be
brought to the attention of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, and to report thereon
to the Committee for its consideration, as indicated
in paragraph 2 above;
16. Invites the specialized agencies concemed and
the International Atomic Energy Agency to furnish the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space with
progress reports on their work in the field of the peaceful uses of outer space;
17. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work as set out in the
present resolution and in previous General Assembly
resolutions, and to report to the Assembly at its twentyfifth session.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
16 lbid.,

Supplement No. 21 (A/7621), para. 12.
21A (A/7621/Add.1), paras. 9-11.

17 !bid., Supplement No.

B
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of intemational cooperation in developing the rule of law in the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space,
Confirming the terms of reference assigned to ~e
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space m
General Assembly resolution 1721 E (XVI) of 20
December 1961,
Recalling that in its resolutions 1963 (XVIII) of
13 December 1963, 2130 (XX) of 21 December
1965 and 2222 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 it requested the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space to prepare a draft agreement on liability for
damage caused by objects launched into outer space,
Recalling further that in its resolution 2345 (XXII)
of 19 December 1967, in which it commended the
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Retum
of Astronauts and the Retum of Objects Launcbed
into Outer Space, it also called upon the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to complete
urgently the preparation of the draft agreement on
liability,
Recalling also its resolution 2453 B (XXIII) of 20
December 1968 in which it requested the Committee
on the Peaceful U ses of Outer Space to complete
urgently the preparation of the draft agreement on
liability,
N oting that various proposals have been submitted
to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
and that a considerable number of provisions have
been agreed upon in its Legal Sub-Committee,
l. Regrets that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space has not been able to complete the
drafting of a liability convention, a task assigned to
it by the General Assembly during the last six years;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the efforts made
by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
at its twelfth session to complete the preparation of
this draft with a view to its submission to the General
Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
3. Notes that a certain rapprochement of views
was achieved in the negotiations on the draft convention on liability in 1969;
4. Expresses its deep dissatisfaction that efforts to
complete the convention have not been successful and,
at the same time, urges the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to complete the draft convention on liability in time for final consideration by
the General Assembly during its twenty-fifth session;
5. Emphasizes that the convention is intended to
establish intemational rules and procedures concerning
liability for damage caused by the launching of objects
into outer space and to ensure, in particular, prompt
and equitable compensation for damage.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2602 (XXIV). Question of general and complete
disarmament
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2456 D (XXIII) of 20
December 1968,

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

14

Noting with satisfaction that, on 17 November 1969,
the Govemments of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America initiated
bilateral negotiations on the limitation of offensive and
defensive strategic nuclear-weapon systems,
Expressing the hope that these negotiations will
bring about early and positive results which would
pave the way for further efforts in the field of nuclear
disarmameot,
Convinced of the necessity for creating the most
favourable conditions for the achievement of that aim,
Appeals to the Govemments of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America
to agree, as an urgent preliminary measure, on a
moratorium on further testing and deployment of new
oflensive and defensive strategic nuclear-weapon systems.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1660 (XVI) of 28 November 1961 on the question of disarmament,
Recalling further its resolution 1722 (XVI) of 20
December 1961 on the same question by which it endorsed the agreement reached on the composition of
a Disarmament Committee, the membership of which
was as follows: Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Canada,
Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, France, India, ltaly, Mexico,
Nigeria, Poland, Romania, Sweden, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland aod
United States of America,
Bearing in mind that in the debates of the First
Committee during the twenty-third session attention
was drawn to the convenience of enlarging the composition of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament in order to make it more representative of the
intemational community,
Noting that the representatives of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics aod the United States of
America have reached agreement on the inclusioo of
eight additional members, which have already been
participating in the deliberations of the Committee,18
Recognizing that all States have a deep interest in
disarmament negotiatioos,
). Endorses the agreemeot that has been reached
on the title 19 and on the following composition of the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Canada, Czechoslovakia,
Ethiopia, France, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Netherlands, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Poland, Romanía, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Arab Republic, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northem Ireland, United States of
America and Yugoslavia;
2. W elcomes the eight new members of the Cooference of the Committee on Disarmament;
3. Expresses its conviction that, to effect any change
in the composition of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament specified in paragraph 1 above,
18 See Offecial Records of the Disarmament Commission,
Suf¡Iement for 1969, document DC/232, paras. 10 and 11.
/bid., para. 12.

the procedure followed at the sixteenth session of the
General Assembly should be observed;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render the necessary assistance and provide the necessary services to the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.

e
The General Assembly,
Noting with grave concern that among the possible
effects of radiological warfare could be the destruction
of mankind,
Aware that radiological warfare may be conducted
both by maximizing the radioactive effects of nuclear
explosions and through the use of radioactive ageots
independently of nuclear explosions,
l. Invites the Conference of the Committee oo
Disarmament to consider, without prejudice to existing
priorities, effective methods of control against the use
of radiological methods of warfare conducted independently of nuclear explosions;
2. Recommends that the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament consider, in the context of
nuclear arms control oegotiatioos, the need for effective
methods of control of nuclear weapons that maximize
radioactive effects;
3. Requests tbe Conference of the Committee oo
Disarmament to inform the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session of the results of its coosideration
of this subject.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
D

The General Assembly,
N oting that continued scientific and techoological
advancemeot creates oew opportunities for the application of scieoce aod technology both for peaceful aod
for military purposes,
Noting the rapid development of laser technology,
which is becoming increasingly important in many
civiliao aod military fields,
Concerned at the possible military applications of
laser techoology,
Recommends that the Conference of the Committee
oo Disarmameot give consideratioo, without prejudice
to existiog priorities, to the implications of the possible
military applicatioos of laser technology.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.

E
The General Assembly,
Rea[firming its resolution 1378 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, in which it coosidered that the question
of general and complete disarmament was the most
important ooe facing the world today,
Rea[firming further the responsibility of the United
Nations in the attainment of disarmameot,
Recalling its resolutioo 1722 (XVI) of 20 December
1961, by which it welcomed the joiot statemeot of
agreed principies for disarmament negotiations sub-

IS

Resolutions adopted on the reportll of the First Committee

mitted on 20 September 1961 by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America, 20
and reaffirming the recommendation that further disarmament negotiations be based on those principles,
Recalling its resolution 2454 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, whereby it requested the Conference of
the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament to
make renewed efforts towards achieving substantial
progress in reaching agreement on the question of
general and complete disarmament under effective international control, and to continue its urgent efforts
to negotiate coJJatcral measures of disarmament,
Convinced that the process of disarmament would
be encouraged and stimulated by the entry into force
at the earliest possible stage and the strengthening of
multilateral international instruments in the field of
disarmament,
Convinced that the participation of all nuclear
Powers in the efforts to contain the nuclear arms race
and to reduce and eliminate all armaments is indispensable for a fu]I measure of success in these efforts,
Convinced that peace and security in the world,
like development, are indivisible, and recognizing the
universal responsibilities and obligations in this regard,
Further convinced of the need to pursue negotiations
in good faith on effective measures relating to the cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and
to nuclear disarmament, and on a treaty on general
and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control,
Having received thc report of the Conference of the
Committec on Disarmamcnt, 21
Bearing in mind the grave dangers involved in the
development of ncw nuclear weapons through a spiralling nuclear arms race,
Believing that the diversion of enormous resources
and energy, human and material, from peaceful economic and social pursuits to an unproductive and
wasteful arms race, particularly in the nuclear field,
places a great burden on both the developing and the
developed countrics,
Believing that the security and the economic and
social well-being of all countries would be enhanced
as progress is made towards the goal of general and
complete disarmament,
Reaffirming its resolution 2499 A (XXIV) of 31 October 1969, and in particular paragraph 9, in which
the General Assembly endorsed the call of the Secretary-General for the proclamation of a Disarmament
Decade, and paragraph 17, in which the Assembly
ap:pealed to all Member States to consider the possibiltty of signing or ratifying the multilateral intemational instruments in the field of disarmament,
l. Declares the decade of the 1970s as a Disarmament Decade;
2. Calls upon Governments to intensify without
delay their concerted and concentrated efforts for
effective measures relating to the cessation of the
nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament and the elimination of other weapons of
mass d~struction, and for a treaty on general and complete d1sarmament under strict and effective international control;
2º See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 19, document A/4879.
21 Official Records of the Disarmament Commission Supplement for 1969, document DC/232.
'

3. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to resume its work as early as possible,
bearing in mind that the ultimate goal is general and
complete disarmament;
4. Further requests the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, while continuing intensive negotiations with a view to reaching thc widest possible
agreement on collateral measures, to work out at the
same time a comprehensive programme, dealing with
ali aspects of the problem of the cessation of the arms
racc and general and complete disarmament under
effective international control, which would provide the
Conference with a guideline to chart the course of its
further work and its negotiations, and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
5. Decides to this effect to draw the attention of
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament to
all pertinent proposals and suggestions formulated during the debates on disarmament, referring to the Conference all documents and records of the meetings of
the First Committee relating to the itcms on disarmament;
6. Recommends further that consideration be given
to channelling a substantial part of the resources freed
by measures in the field of disarmament to promote
the economic development of developing countries and,
in particular, their scientific and technological progress;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and Governments
to publicize the Disarmament Decade by all appropriate means at their disposal in order to acquaint publíe opinion with its purposes and objectives and with
the negotiations and developments related thereto;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
appropriate facilities and assistance with a view to
furthering the fullest implementation of the present
resolution.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.

F
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the common interest of mankind in the
reservation of the sea-bed and the ocean floor exclusively for peaceful purposes,
Having considered the report of the Conference of
the C<;m1:mittee on Disarmament22 and noting with
apl?rec1at10n the work of that Committee in the elaboratton of a draft treaty on the prohibition of the
emplacement of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction on the sea-bed and the ocean floor
and in the subsoil thereof,
Noting the suggestions and proposals relating to the
draft Treaty annexed to the report of the Conference
of ~e Committee on Disarmament, 23 which were made
d1;1nng the c~mrse of the discussion of this matter in the
rrrst Comm!ttee, a~ well as the suggestions made durmg the spec1al sess1on of the Committee on the Peaceful U~es_ of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond
the Lumts of National Jurisdiction 24
Considering that the preventiod of a nuclear arms
~ace on the s~a-~~ and the ocean floor serves the
~terests of. mamtallllllg world peace, reducing intemat10nal tens1ons and strengthening friendly relations
among States,
22 Ibid.
23 Ibid.,

annex A.
Of!icial Records of the General Assembl , Twe _
fourth Sess1on, Supplement No. 22A (A/7622/Adfl). nty
24 See

16

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth SeHion

Convinced that the conclusion of a treaty on the
prohibition of the emplacement of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction on the sea-bed and
the ocean floor and in the subsoil thereof would constitute a step towards the exclusion of the sea-bed, the
ocean floor and the subsoil thereof from the arms race,
1. W eleo mes the submission to the General Assembly at its present session of the draft Treaty on the
Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear Weapons
and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the SeaBed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof,
annexed to the report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, and the various proposals and
suggestions made in regard to the draft Treaty;
2. Calls upon the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to take into account ali the proposals and
suggestions that have been made at the present session
of the General Assembly and to continue its work on
this subject so that the text of a draft treaty can be
submitted to the General Assembly for its consideration.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2603 (XXIV). Question of chernical and bacteriological (biological) weapons
A
The General Assembly,
Considering that chemical and biological methods of
warfare have always been viewed with horror and been
justly condemned by the international community,
Considering that these methods of warfare are inherently reprehensible because their effects are often
uncontrollable and unpredictable and may be injurious
without distinction to combatants and non-combatants,
and because any use of such methods would entail a
serious risk of escalation,
Recalling that successive international instruments
have prohibited or sought to prevent the use of such
methods of warfare,
Noting specifically in this regard that:
(a) The majority of States then in existence adhered
to the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War
of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva
on 17 June 1925,25
( b) Since then, further Sta tes have become parties
to that Protocol,
(e) Still other States have declared that they will
abide by its principies and objectives,
(d) These principies and objectives have commanded broad respect in the practice of States,
(e) The General Assembly, without any dissenting
vote, has called for the strict observance by all States
of the principies and objectives of the Geneva Protocol, 26
Recognizing therefore, in the light of all the above
circumstances, that the Geneva Protocol embodies the
generally recognized rules of international law prohibiting the use in international armed conflicts of all biological and chemical methods of warfare, regardless of
any technical developments,
Mindful of the report of the Secretary-General, prepared with the assistance of the Group of Consultant
2c¡ League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929),
No. 2138.
26 See resolution 2162 B (XXI) of S December 1966,
para. l.

Experts appointed by him under General Assembly
resolution 2454 A (XXIII) of 20 December 1968,
and entitled Chemical and Bacteriological (Biological)
Weapons and the Efjects of Their Possible Use, 27
Considering that this report and the foreword to it
by the Secretary-General add further urgency for an
affirmation of these rules and for dispelling, for the
future, any uncertainty as to their scope and, by such
affirmation, to assure the effectiveness of the rules and
to enable all States to demonstrate their determination
to comply with them,
Declares as contrary to the generally recognized rules
of international law, as embodied in the Protocol for
the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June
1925, the use in intemational armed conflicts of:
(a) Any chemical agents of warfare--chemical substances, whether gaseous, liquid or solid-which might
be employed because of their direct toxic effects
on man, animals or plants;
( b) Any biological agents of warfare-living organisms, whatever their nature, or infective material derived from them-which are intended to cause disease
or death in man, animals or plants, and which depend
for their effects on their ability to multiply in the person, animal or plant attacked.
1836th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2454 A (XXIII) of 20 December 1968,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled Chemical and Bacteriological (Biological)
Weapons and the Ef}ects of Their Possible Use, 27
Noting the conclusions of the report of the Secretary-General and the recommendations contained in the
foreword to the report,
Noting also the discussion of the report of the Secretary-General at the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament and during the twenty-fourth session
of the General Assembly,
Mindful of the conclusion of the report that the prospects for general and complete disarmament under effective intemational control and hence for peace
throughout the world would brighten significantly if the
development, production and stockpiling of chemical
and bacteriological (biological) agents intended for
purposes of war were to end and if they were eliminated
from all military arsenals,
Recognizing the importance of the Protocol for
the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June
1925,28
Conscious of the need to maintain inviolate the
Geneva Protocol and to ensure its universal applicability,
Emphasizing the urgency of the need for achieving
the earliest elimination of chemical and bacteriological
(biological) weapons,
27 United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.69.1.24.
28 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929),

No. 2138.
