S/2015/1027

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 December 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2228
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2016 and requested
that I report every 90 days on the implementation of the mission’s mandate. The
report provides an update and analysis of the conflict and the political situation, and
the operational environment in Darfur from 25 September 2015, the date of issuance
of my previous report (S/2015/729), until 15 December 2015. It further presents the
achievements of UNAMID in implementing its strategic priorities, endorsed by the
Security Council in resolutions 2148 (2014), 2173 (2014) and 2228 (2015), and in
achieving its benchmarks (see S/2014/279 and resolution 2228 (2015)). In addition,
the report highlights the main challenges to the effective implementation of the
mandate and provides updates on the further implementation of the 2014 strategic
review, the transfer of tasks to the United Nations country team, and the exit
strategy.

II. Conflict dynamics and security situation
A.

Current trends and conflict dynamics in Darfur
2.
The level of fighting between the government forces and the armed movements
was low during the reporting period, which coincided with the rainy season. The
number of intercommunal clashes over land and livestock also decreased from
September to December, while violence against civilians and internally displaced
persons by armed elements continued. Criminality also remained prevalent across
Darfur, while security measures adopted by State Governors ( Walis) contributed to
the significant reduction in the number of criminal incidents in some of the
population centres.
Fighting between government forces and rebel groups
3.
Clashes between the government forces and rebel groups were reported only in
relation to the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW). Owing to the
continued lack of access to East Jebel Marra, however, UNAMID was not able to

15-22604 (E)

291215

*1522604*

S/2015/1027

confirm the media reports on the exchange of artillery on 4 Novemb er purportedly
initiated by SLA/AW elements against the government forces in Deribat, South
Darfur, or of air strikes by the Sudanese Armed Forces on 9 November in the area of
Fanga Suk, North Darfur. The area remained under government control since the
takeover of Fanga Suk from SLA/AW in January 2015, with the government forces
maintaining checkpoints and regulating traffic therein, including routes along
Nertiti, Guldo, Sorong, Killing, Tera and Bardani.
4.
Similar to the previous reporting period, there was no report of military
engagement involving government forces and the Justice and Equality Mo vement
(JEM). With respect to the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM),
which the Government accused of being involved in the conflict in Libya, the
Sudanese Armed Forces enhanced their presence along the northern corridors of the
known movements of SLA/MM forces, from Tine and Wadi Hawar to the west and
the boundary between North Darfur and Northern Kordofan to the east.
5.
On 1 and 3 December, SLA/MM and JEM, respectively, claimed that the
government-allied Rapid Support Force attacked Zaghawa-populated Um Rai and
Anka in North Darfur. UNAMID confirmed with community representatives that
attacks by Arab militia on board gun-mounted vehicles had taken place from 27 to
29 November and from 1 to 3 December. In the attack against Anka on 3 December,
at least seven civilians were killed and the village was burned. Surrounding villages
were also looted and destroyed, and the majority of the population fled the area,
including approximately 150 families that reached Um Baru internally displaced
persons camp.
Local conflicts and intercommunal violence
6.
The number of intercommunal conflicts was also lower during the reporting
period. UNAMID recorded 7 incidents involving 38 fatalities, in comparison to
13 incidents involving 164 fatalities during the previous period. These clashes took
place in North, Central, and South Darfur, mostly between Arab communities (such
as Rezeigat, Beni Halbah, Habbaniya, Salamat, Ma’alia and Misseriya), over disputes
relating to land and livestock. The local governments intervened to contain the
situation by deploying security personnel and facilitating dispute settlements,
including the payment of blood money (diya).
7.
In contrast to the lull in military action, incidents of attack, harassment and
intimidation of civilians, including internally displaced persons, increased, especially
in North and West Darfur. During the reporting period, a total of 132 cases of attack,
harassment and intimidation against civilians inclusive of internally displaced
persons were recorded (38 in North Darfur, 35 in West Darfur, 32 in Central Darfur,
21 in South Darfur, and 6 in East Darfur), in comparison to 8 cases involving
31 fatalities during the previous reporting period. In the majority of these cases,
perpetrators were reported to be armed men associated with nomadic Arab tribes. In
West Darfur, on 1 October, members of the Awlad Zaid clan of Northern Rezeigat
attacked several villages in the vicinity of El Geneina (Muli, Tandikoto, Allah
Maraga, Doroti, Atya and Birtaino), all inhabited by Massalit, allegedly to retaliate
against the killing of Awlad Zaid by unidentified persons in Atya the day before.
According to witnesses and victims of the attacks, the perpetrators were in various
types of military and police attire, including those of the Sudanese Armed Forces,
the Rapid Support Force, and the Central Reserve Police. The incident resulted in

2/18

15-22604

S/2015/1027

the death of 1 Massalit and the injury of 12 others, as well as the abduction of
7 persons. The security situation in the area remained fragile, with another murder
of a Massalit on 22 October.
Land disputes
8.
On 22 October, fighting erupted between Salamat and Misseriya in Salyle,
Central Darfur, as a result of Salamat cultivating a Misseriya farm, which led to the
death of one Misseriya. The Wali of Central Darfur and the Chairperson of the
Darfur Regional Authority visited the area on 25 October to reduce tension, and
Salamat agreed to pay diya to the family of the deceased. In West Darfur, Awlad
Zaid and Zaghawa clashed in Kulbus on 12 November over a dispute involving a
water point, which resulted in the killing of two Awlad Zaid and a Zaghawa. Awlad
Zaid and Zaghawa signed an agreement on 13 December to resolve the conflict. In
another area of West Darfur, Massalit farmers and Arab pastoralists clashed in Arana
on 18 November, because of an argument over farmland. The incident led to the
injury of six persons from each side, and prompted the deployment of the Sudanese
Armed Forces and police personnel to contain the situation.
Cattle-rustling
9.
During the reporting period, four incidents of cattle-rustling were registered.
In North Darfur, on 21 October, an exchange of fire broke out between Berti and
Beni Omran supported by Zayadiya, following the theft by the latter of cattle
belonging to the former, and four Berti and two Beni Omran were injured. In South
Darfur, on 19 November, Beni Halba attacked Salamat in Kubum and Markundi
villages, in response to cattle-rustling by the latter. Four Salamat and two Beni
Halba were killed, and following the deployment of the government security forces
to the area on 21 November, the two groups agreed to resolve the tension. In East
Darfur, on 20 September, fighting erupted after Southern Rezeigat stole camels from
Ma’alia in Adola Mountain area, and 2 Ma’alia and 10 Southern Rezeigat were
killed. The Wali of East Darfur deployed troops to the area, and on 27 September,
the two communities reached a settlement on the incident. However, on 6 December,
Rezeigat stole livestock again from Ma’alia in Abu Karinka, and Ma’alia retaliated
by abducting two Rezeigat. Government forces intervened to secure the release of
the Rezeigat captives.
Access to farmland
10. The annual migrations of nomadic groups in search of pastureland and water
from May to November, as well as the crop harvest season from September to
November, rendered farmers especially vulnerable to attacks by armed herders. In
South Darfur, reports of attacks and harassments by nomads against farmers,
including crop destruction, were received from a number of localities around Graida
and Kass. In Graida, following clashes between Rezeigat and Massalit over access
to land on 20 and 27 November, which led to the death of two Rezeigat nomads and
one Massalit farmer, the local authorities deployed security personnel, and the two
groups signed a peace agreement on 11 December. Rezeigat also clashed with
Misseriya in the vicinity of Mira on 12 December, when camels belonging to
Rezeigat destroyed Misseriya farms, and four Rezeigat and seven Misseriya were
killed. The local authorities deployed troops to prevent the further mobilization of
the two groups. Similar attacks and harassment were also reported in North Darfur,

15-22604

3/18

S/2015/1027

and in the case of Tawilla, the local authorities reported that 85 per cent of the
community were displaced owing to farm-related incidents. In Thabit, another area
of North Darfur, a group of armed nomads arrived on 7 December and chased
villagers into towns to turn their farms into pastureland. In Central Darfur, two
farmers were killed in the Surray area on 4 December when they attempted to rescue
a girl from being raped by an armed Salamat. In West Darfur, near Sirba, Arab
nomads shot dead an Erenga farmer in Ma’amaga village when he attempted to stop
them from grazing their animals on his farm on 4 December, and, following an
exchange of fire between the nomads and Erenga, another Erenga was killed before
the assailants were apprehended by the Sudanese Armed Forces. A group of nomads
shot and killed two other Erenga on 7 November, when they tried to stop livestock
from grazing on their farms.
11. Internally displaced persons were particularly subjected to access restrictions
and other forms of harassment while farming. In North Darfur, internally displaced
persons reported rapes on the farms outside Fata Borno and Babanusa internally
displaced persons camps, crop destruction in the vicinity of Siniet internally
displaced persons camp, and robbery while collecting grass in Tawilla. In South
Darfur, UNAMID received reports of an attack against internally displaced farmers
from Graida camp resulting in the death of one internally displaced person,
abduction of another from Otash camp while working on a farm, and the rape of
three internally displaced women from Al Salam internally displaced perso ns camp
on farms. In Central Darfur, similar attacks and harassment of internally displaced
persons conducting farming and other livelihood activities were reported in Bindisi,
Garsila, Hamidiya, Hassahisa, Thur, and Shadad internally displaced persons cam ps,
as well as the rape of two minors gathering grass near Hassahisa internally
displaced persons camp by Arab men. In one of these incidents, on 26 October,
approximately 16 armed Arab men stopped internally displaced persons from
Garsila, New South and South internally displaced persons camps and other
civilians collecting water in Nertiti and robbed them at gunpoint. At the request of
UNAMID, the deputy commissioner of Nertiti deployed police personnel to the area
to disperse the perpetrators. In West Darfur, internally displaced persons from
Aradamata, El Hujaj, Foro Baranga, SiSi, Straha, Tanjikei and other internally
displaced persons camps in El Geneina also reported access restrictions, crop
destruction, and other incidents of harassment of them.
12. The Walis intensified efforts to curb incidents related to farm destruction,
particularly in North and South Darfur. The Wali of North Darfur established a
committee for the resolution of disputes between farmers and nomads in the western
localities, including El Fasher, Tawilla, and Darussalam, headed by the Deputy Wali.
A crop protection committee was also established in South Darfur and West Darfur,
with the participation of the National Intelligence and Security Services, the police,
and other state authorities. In East Darfur, the Wali established the state supreme
council for peace and reconciliation to examine all disputes related to farming. On
several occasions, local security personnel involved in farm protection efforts came
under fire, including during an attack against police personnel in Deleij, Central
Darfur, and in Wadi Ferjani, West Darfur.
Criminality and banditry
13. A total of 385 criminal incidents, resulting in 376 fatalities, were recorded
compared to 391 incidents and 93 fatalities in the previous reporting period. The

4/18

15-22604

S/2015/1027

most common crimes included murder (32), rape (34), shooting incidents (102),
armed robberies (63), attempted robberies (26), assault/harassment (120), burglary/
break-in (44), abductions (22), arson (8), ambushes (13) and livestock theft (26). In
addition, there was a report involving drug smuggling in East Darfur, where the
Savannah militia on gun-mounted vehicles seized approximately 80 sacks of
cannabis from drug smugglers who, in turn, ambushed the militia an d killed 12 of
them on 10 December. The Sudanese Armed Forces arrived on the scene and
arrested three of the militia members.
14. The Walis adopted security measures to curb criminality, including the
deployment of additional security forces to population centres, as in the case of
Tawilla, Mellit, Kabkabiya and Kutum in North Darfur and Labado in East Darfur,
instituting a ban on the carrying of weapons and the use of unregistered vehicles,
removing illegal checkpoints, and taking punitive action against the security
personnel involved in crimes. These measures contributed to the reduction of
criminal incidents in some population centres, including in Nyala, South Darfur
(from 42 to 24), El Daein, East Darfur (from 10 to zero), and El Geneina, West
Darfur (from 46 to 32), while the numbers remained the same in El Fasher (27) and
increased in Zalingei, Central Darfur (from 20 to 25). Overall, however, criminality
remained pervasive across Darfur, with the number of incidents increasing from
89 in August to 116 in September and 159 in October 2015 and decreasing slightly
to 158 in November.

B.

Political developments
15. The Government and the opposition groups remained divided on the process of
the national dialogue, which was launched by President Bashir on 10 October,
despite a number of major political parties, including the National Umma Party, the
Communist Party, and the Reform Now Party, and key Sudanese armed opposition
movements, boycotting the process.
16. The main opposition groups, including the coalition known as the Sudan Call
and the Sudan Revolutionary Front, had decided to reject the government -led
national dialogue. They demanded a pre-dialogue meeting in Addis Ababa under the
auspices of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel to agree on the
modalities of the dialogue, while offering a six -month cessation of hostilities, when
they met in Paris from 9 to 14 September. On 15 September, the National
Intelligence and Security Services detained the chairman of the Sudanese National
Alliance Party for several hours at the airport in Khartoum when he returned from
the meeting in Paris. Three other opposition leaders had been barred by the Services
from traveling to Paris to attend the meeting.
17. Despite the lack of consensus, President Bashir proceeded with preparations
for the national dialogue, and issued two decrees on 22 September, one to declare a
two-month ceasefire in several conflict areas, including Darfur, and another to offer
amnesty to members of the rebel groups choosing to participate in the national
dialogue.
18. The national dialogue opened as scheduled, with six committees established to
produce a “national document” in three months, each focusing on the following:
peace and unity; economy; governance and implementation of the outcome of the
dialogue; external relations; identity and culture; and freedom and basic rights.

15-22604

5/18

S/2015/1027

From Darfur, only signatory parties to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and
smaller breakaway factions of the Sudan Liberation Movement joined the process.
19. While the national dialogue was in progress, President Bashir further
announced, on 19 October, that a referendum to determine the administrative status
of Darfur would be held in April 2016, as per the terms of the Doha Document. The
signatories of the Doha Document and some Darfuri parliamentarians cautioned
against the timing of the proposed referendum and stressed the need for an inclusive
process, particularly for internally displaced persons, while other armed movements
rejected it categorically.
20. On 19 November, the High-level Implementation Panel convened talks between
the Government, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) -North, and the
Darfur armed movements in Addis Ababa on the cessation of hostilities in Darfur and
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States (“the Two Areas”). The synchronized talks
were conceived as the basis for further negotiations on humanitarian access, security
arrangements, a permanent ceasefire, and the participation of the opposition groups
and armed movements in the national dialogue. The talks on the cessation of
hostilities in Darfur were attended by SLA/MM and JEM/Gibril factions, but
SLA/AW did not participate. On 23 November, the talks ended without an agreement
on either front, since the parties could not resolve some of the contentious issues,
such as the sequencing of the ceasefire and political dialogue. The pre -dialogue
meeting demanded by the armed movements as a prerequisite for the national
dialogue, also scheduled to take place in Addis Ababa on 7 and 8 December under
the auspices of the Panel, did not materialize either. Chief among the disagreements
among the parties was the scope of participation, namely whether or not other
stakeholders, such as civil society organizations and representatives of internally
displaced persons, could be included in the meeting.
21. Meanwhile, within Darfur, there were several reports of crackdowns and
arrests involving students. In Central Darfur, on 18 November, Sudanese police
personnel were stationed in front of Zalengei University in advance of a planned
protest against the expulsion of 19 students who were alleged to be part of the
United People’s Front, a student union group accused of sympathizing with
SLA/AW and SLA/MM. On 19 November, the United People’s Front clashed with
another student group allied to the ruling National Congress Party and several
students received minor injuries. The police were deployed again to Zalengei
University in response to further demonstrations on 22 and 24 Novemb er. In South
Darfur, five students of Nyala University were detained by the National Intelligence
and Security Services on 11 November, after having participated in an event
organized by the United People’s Front inside the campus. One of them was
released on the same day, but two students who were later released claimed that they
had been subjected to torture and ill-treatment. Two others remained in detention.
On 1 December, the National Intelligence and Security Services arrested another
student of Zalengei University from the Hamidiya internally displaced persons
camp. It was reported that an unknown number of other students had also been
arrested by the National Intelligence and Security Services, but their identity and
whereabouts remained unknown.
22. On 2 December, a representative of the Popular Congress Party criticized the
death sentences pronounced on 26 November against 18 SLA/MM combatants
convicted of undermining the constitutional order and taking up arms against the

6/18

15-22604

S/2015/1027

State, citing the release of all prisoners as a necessary condition to convince the
armed movements to participate in the national dialogue. On the same day, a legal
counsel for JEM/Sudan announced the suspension of death sentences against seven
JEM/Sudan members who had been convicted by the Special Court for Darfur Crimes
of killing personnel of the Central Reserve Police personnel in South Darfur in 2010.

C.

Humanitarian situation
23. With the lull in armed confrontations, new displacements were minimal during
the reporting period. The verified number of new internally displaced persons for
2015 remained at about 100,000, while humanitarian partners were unable to
confirm reports of an additional 66,000 internally displaced persons, owing mainly
to access constraints. In Central Darfur, the absence of fighting in Jebel Marra
allowed for the return of 4,000 civilians in November out of a total of 6,000 people
estimated to have been displaced there during the second phase of the military
Decisive Summer campaign. In East Darfur, the vast majority of the 13,200
internally displaced persons who had taken refuge from fighting near the team site
of UNAMID in Labado since 2013 returned to their home villages by the end of
November.
24. There were several public health emergencies, including the outbreak of viral
haemorrhagic fever, during the reporting period. According to the Federal Ministry
of Health, 469 suspected cases of viral haemorrhagic fever, including 120 fatalities,
were reported in Darfur between 29 August and 27 Nove mber, with West Darfur
state accounting for 70 per cent of these cases. The Government activated a
response plan, and on 16 November the World Health Organization (WHO) reported
a consistent reduction in the number of deaths. In addition, as of 1 November, the
total number of confirmed cases of measles in the Sudan reached 3,438, with
71 fatalities, with the highest number of reported cases in West Darfur (667) and the
highest number of deaths reported in North Darfur (23).
25. Delays in conducting needs assessments and delivering humanitarian
assistance remained a major concern, including continued lack of access to several
areas in and around Jebel Marra. Exceptionally, on 11 November, humanitarian
organizations undertook the first assessment mission to F anga Suk in Central Darfur
since 2011, together with national counterparts and UNAMID. The mission
identified 18,000 people in urgent need of food, emergency shelter, health, and other
assistance, and a humanitarian convoy composed of 29 trucks for 7,875 i nternally
displaced persons and 10,000 members of the host communities, with UNAMID
escorts, arrived in Fanga Suk on 5 December.
26. A significant funding gap remained for the Humanitarian Response Plan for
Sudan in 2015, with only 57 per cent of the total appeal of $1.04 billion fulfilled,
forcing humanitarian organizations to scale down activities in some areas, including
Kubum and Ed Elfursan localities in South Darfur.

15-22604

7/18

S/2015/1027

D.

Operating environment
Attacks against UNAMID
27. Incidents affecting personnel and assets of UNAMID increased, with a total of
42 criminal cases during the reporting period, compared to 29 in the previous
period. These incidents consisted of the following: 1 attack on a UNAMID convoy;
3 shooting incidents at a UNAMID team site; 1 robbery, which led to the death of a
national staff member; as well as 22 cases of break-in, burglary and theft; 12 of
stone throwing; 2 threats and harassment, and 1 carjacking.
28. On 27 September, unidentified armed men ambushed a UNAMID convoy wit h
assault weapons and machine guns at a location approximately 10 kilometres north
of its team site in Mellit, North Darfur. In the ensuing exchange of fire, which lasted
nearly two hours, one peacekeeper was killed and four others were injured, while
the number of casualties among the perpetrators remained unknown. In South
Darfur, shots were fired at the team site of UNAMID in Tulus on 4 and 9 October,
and assailants fled on both occasions when UNAMID fired back. One peacekeeper
was injured in the first of the two incidents. Gunshots were heard again at the team
site in Tulus on 2 December. In Central Darfur, a UNAMID national staff member
was shot and killed on 8 October, as a result of an armed r obbery in Kunjar near
Zalingei.
Attacks against United Nations agencies, international non-governmental
organizations and humanitarian personnel
29. A total of 8 criminal incidents were recorded against humanitarian actors from
September to December 2015, compared to 25 in the previous reporting period.
They included an armed attack, two carjacking incidents and five criminal activities,
five of them taking place in North Darfur and three in South Darfur. Five incidents
involved the targeting of United Nations agencies, two involved international
NGOs, and one involved a donor agency.
Restrictions of movement, access denials and denial of clearances imposed
on UNAMID
30. While access to Jebel Marra continued to be denied, other movement
restrictions by the Sudanese authorities decreased from 13 to 9 during the reporting
period. They included the denial of a confidence-building patrol from Malha to
Tulul in North Darfur on 20 October by the Sudanese Armed Forces, on the basis of
insecurity in the area, and the stopping by the National Intelligence and Securi ty
Services of a routine patrol from El Daein to Um Haroina and Neem internally
displaced persons camps in East Darfur on 20 November, on the grounds that
UNAMID personnel were taking photographs, and further advising UNAMID on
23 November to refrain from interacting with internally displaced persons until
further notice. In Central Darfur, the Services stopped a routine patrol from Mukjar
to the nearby internally displaced persons camp in Central Darfur on 28 October,
demanding a separate clearance for UNAMID civilian personnel to join the patrol.
The Sudanese Armed Forces also stopped a UNAMID convoy from Zalingei to
Garsil on 6 November and another UNAMID verification patrol to Tridge village on
5 December, citing the lack of prior coordination and securi ty clearance. In South
Darfur, on 2 November, the National Intelligence and Security Services stopped an

8/18

15-22604

S/2015/1027

inter-agency mission comprising UNAMID and humanitarian personnel to Um Dafog ,
claiming the lack of instructions regarding the mission, after weeks of planning and
obtaining necessary approvals from various Sudanese authorities.
31. UNAMID also continued to experience flight restrictions, as Sudanese security
agencies rejected manifests or cancelled flights. During the reporting period, 8 regularly
scheduled UNAMID flights for 17 destinations were cancelled owing to the lack of
clearance.
Access denials and restrictions imposed on humanitarian actors
32. Humanitarian access to Jebel Marra remained particularly challenging. An
inter-agency monitoring mission to Adilla and Abu Karinka localities, scheduled
from 12 to 14 October, was aborted as the Military Intelligence denied clearance for
UNAMID to provide escorts. In addition, on 13 October, the Military Intelligence
advised that the United Nations must postpone the inter-agency humanitarian needs
assessment missions planned for East Jebel Marra areas on 18 October, claiming
that the area remained insecure. Repeated requests for an assessment mission to
Golo town and surrounding villages in Central J abel Marra continued to be denied.
Visas
33. During the reporting period, a total of 640 entry visas were granted to 15 civilians,
116 military and 208 police personnel, 198 contractors, and 95 consultants and
official visitors and 8 dependants, including the 12-month visa for the Deputy Joint
Special Representative, Bintou Keita. The Government denied 33 applications,
including 9 visa requests for the Security Section and 5 visa requests for the
Protection of Civilians Section. Other visa denials were concentrated on substantive
civilian areas, such as the Rule of Law, Political Affairs, Civil Affairs, Legal
Affairs, Communication and Public Information Sections, Gender Advisory Unit,
and the Office of the Deputy Special Representative, and those entit ies critical to
the sustainability of UNAMID, such as Life Support Services, Aviation Safety,
Mission Support Centre, Contingent Owned Equipment Unit, and Engineering. The
posts of the Chief of the Protection of Civilians Section and the Senior Women
Protection Adviser remained vacant, as entry visas for the selected candidates were
rejected repeatedly.
34. In October, the Government also changed the practice concerning resident visas.
Instead of renewing visas for 12 months, as was previously the case, 94 applications
submitted for the renewal of resident visas were extended for six months only. An
additional 11 resident visas were renewed for two months only, including for the
Deputy and Acting Joint Special Representative and the Head of Office for West
Darfur, while two applications for visa extension, involving communications and
engineering sections, were rejected.
35. During the reporting period, delays in customs clearance also led to a crisis
involving food rations for UNAMID peacekeepers. By early October, a total of 219
containers had been held in Port Sudan, 185 of which were carrying food rations to
sustain the military and police contingents of UNAMID for approximately 84 days.
With the level of stock down to less than 20 days, UNAMID put in pla ce contingency
plans, including the procurement of supplementary food items from the local market
that would meet the food safety and health standards applicable to United Nations
personnel. Following a series of diplomatic engagements, the Government rele ased

15-22604

9/18

S/2015/1027

130 containers on 10 November, but the remaining containers still awaited customs
clearance, including those with spare parts for helicopters contracted by UNAMID
(held since June 2015), general supplies (held since July 2015), and aviation safety
equipment and electrical supplies (held since October 2015).

III. Mandate implementation
A.

Support for an inclusive peace process
High-level mediation
36. On 10 November, the Acting Joint Special Representative/Joint Chief
Mediator met with the Deputy Prime Minister of the State of Qatar in Doha to
discuss the current state of the peace process for Darfur. The Acting Joint Special
Representative/Joint Chief Mediator thanked the State of Qatar for its support to the
implementation of the Doha Document on Peace in Darfur, while appealing for
additional funding for the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation.
37. On 13 November, UNAMID together with the United Nations Office of the
Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs participated in a preparatory meeting convened
by the High-level Implementation Panel and the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Sudan and South Sudan for talks on the cessat ion of hostilities
in Darfur and the Two Areas in Addis Ababa. The parties and the Panel addressed a
number of areas of common concern prior to the launch of the talks.
Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
38. Limited progress was made in the implementation of the Doha Document,
owing in part to the leadership struggle within the Darfur Regional Authority. On
8 September, the tenth meeting of the Implementation Follow -up Commission of the
Doha Document was convened in Doha, Qatar, in which the signatory Liberation
and Justice Movement (LJM) was represented by its two splinters, the National
Liberation and Justice Party led by Tijani Seisi and Liberation and Justice Party led
by Bahar Abu Garda. The Justice and Equality Movement-Sudan (JEM-Sudan) was
also in attendance. While reaffirming the Doha Document as the framework for
resolving the conflict in Darfur and calling on non-signatories to join it, members of
the Implementation Follow-up Commission expressed dissatisfaction with the
internal splits and disagreements among the signatory movements, and underscored
the importance of taking forward the internal dialogue and consultations process for
local-level reconciliation.
39. The second phase of the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultations continued,
with local-level meetings held in 21 localities throughout Darfur, each attended by
150 to 200 representatives of various communities, discussing the root causes of
conflict in Darfur and recommending possible solutions for long -term peace,
security and development. The continuation of the local-level consultations in an
additional 43 localities would be contingent on the disbursement of funds pledged
by the Government, in the amount of $2 million.
40. Some progress has been made in the implementation of Final Security
Arrangements. Following a series of consultations among UNAMID, the World Food
Programme (WFP), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and

10/18

15-22604

S/2015/1027

the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission, the
demobilization of 1,183 ex-combatants from LJM, JEM-Sudan, and signatories of
the 2006 Darfur Peace Agreement took place in Nyala, South Darfur. UNAMID
provided a range of logistical support, including tents, transportation arrangements,
as well as the payment of transitional safety allowance of 1,500 SDG to each
demobilized combatant. WFP provided dry rations and UNDP undertook an
assessment of reintegration options. In parallel, the Government implemented the
demobilization of 116 members of the Sudanese Armed Forces and 200 combatants
of the Popular Defence Forces from 11 September to 23 October in South Darfur,
without the support of the international community.
41. On 8 and 9 December, the First Vice President of the Sudan and the Deputy
Prime Minister of Qatar inaugurated two model villages for returnees in Thabit and
Um Dai, North Darfur. The Chairperson of the Darfur Regional Authority announced
that an additional 10 model villages, 2 for each state, would be constructed in early
2016.

B.

Protection of civilians
Provision of physical protection
42. UNAMID continued protection activities in civilian areas, with a particular
focus on internally displaced persons camps, villages and towns, markets, and areas
of internally displaced persons return. The military personnel of UNAMID
conducted a total of 18,932 patrols, compared to 19,260 during the same period in
2014, comprising 6,059 routine patrols, 7,385 short-range patrols, 335 long-range
patrols, 2,544 night patrols, 308 humanitarian esco rts, and 2,301 logistics and
administrative escorts, covering 5,398 villages and 2,293 internally displaced
persons camps. In addition, the police personnel of UNAMID conducted a total of
8,217 patrols, as compared to 7,132 patrols conducted in the same pe riod in 2014,
including 4,134 confidence-building patrols to internally displaced persons camps
and an additional 4,083 patrols to respond to the security needs of internally
displaced persons, particularly women and children, engaged in livelihood activit ies
outside camps. During these patrols, 429 criminal cases were reported to UNAMID,
compared to 398 cases reported in the same period in 2014, which resulted in
94 arrests. Seven of these cases were forwarded to the courts. A total of 128 joint
patrols were conducted with local community policing volunteers, with a view to
enhancing their participation in crime prevention within internally displaced persons
camps.
43. UNAMID has established integrated field protection teams in 19 of 34 team
sites to identify early warning indicators and recommend preventive measures.
UNAMID also continued negotiations with the Government to establish a team site
in Adilla, East Darfur, to enhance its presence and protection of civilians from
intercommunal clashes.
44. UNAMID continued to address the threat posed by explosive remnants of war
in Darfur. Since activities relating to clearance faced a setback due to delays in the
issuance of an entry visa for an international implementing partner, a greater focus
was placed on risk education to prevent accidents, involving a total of 47,167
beneficiaries comprising 19,167 men, 8,411 women, 10,146 boys and 9,443 girls. In
addition, at the request of the Government and in line with its ongoing support for

15-22604

11/18

S/2015/1027

the safe management of weapons and ammunition, UNAMID completed the
refurbishment and handover of two small containers for arms and ammunition
storage to the Sudanese police stations in Al Nahda, South Darfur, and Medeina,
West Darfur.
Logistical and security support to humanitarian operations
45. While UNAMID continued to provide humanitarian escorts, including the
protection of 17 convoys for WFP delivering 671 tons of food, the humanitarian
needs in Darfur continued to surpass the capacity of UNAMID to provide escorts.
Thus far in 2015, 33 humanitarian missions had to be cancelled, delayed or
rescheduled, owing to the competing demands on UNAMID resources. In an
additional nine cases, the Government did not grant permission for UNAMID to
accompany humanitarian missions. These challenges amounted to delays in the
assessment of needs or provision of assistance for more than 300,000 people.
46. UNAMID also assisted humanitarian partners in early warning and early
response to humanitarian crises in Darfur. For example, emergen cy relief items from
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) for East Jebel Marra were
prepositioned in two of the team sites of UNAMID in South Darfur, while
coordination and information-sharing was enhanced to allow UNICEF and other
partners to respond to crises.
Promoting a protective environment
47. During the reporting period, UNAMID documented 123 new instances of human
rights violations and abuses involving 242 victims (including 32 children), compared
to 113 incidents involving 403 victims during the previous reporting period. The
violation of the right to life accounted for 27 cases involving 38 victims, and the
right to physical integrity accounted for 48 cases affecting 139 victims, 17 of whom
were children. Sexual and gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual
violence, accounted for 34 cases involving 43 victims (including 14 children), as well
as 6 cases of attempted rape involving 6 victims. There were 6 cases of arbitrary
arrest and illegal detention involving 15 victims and 2 cases of abduction involving
2 victims were also documented. Of these cases, 34 incidents affecting 81 victims
were reported to have been perpetrated by the government security forces and their
proxy militias. In the remaining 89 cases involving 161 victims, perpetrators were
described as Arabs. UNAMID confirmed the occurrence of 77 cases, and also found
that the remaining 46 cases, though unconfirmed, were highly likely to have taken
place, on the basis of corroboration received from various sources.
48. Victims of human rights violations continued to face difficulties in pursuing
justice and accountability, due to the lack of investigation by the Sudanese police
and the low number of prosecutions. Of 58 cases reported to the Sudanese police by
victims, witnesses, and community leaders during the review period, only 21 were
investigated resulting in 14 arrests.
49. The lull in military action did not lead to a reduction in sexual and gender based violence, including conflict-related sexual violence, with a total of 40 cases
recorded during the reporting period, in comparison to 14 cases in the previous
reporting period. As occurred in the previous period, new cases of sexual violence
and rape continued to emerge in North Darfur, especially in Tawilla, Shangil
Tobaya, and Kutum localities, close to the Jebel Marra area.

12/18

15-22604

S/2015/1027

50. Efforts to raise awareness on child rights and protection through the
engagement of local communities, national institutions, and parties to the conflict
led to the increased number of participants in the training of UNAMID on the
subject. During the reporting period, 1,137 (including 597 female) participants
received training on child rights and protection issues, compared to 523 in the
previous period, inclusive of 254 police and prisons officers, 63 members of
JEM/Peace Wing and JEM-Sudan, and 820 internally displaced persons and
community members. On 9 October, the Justice and Equality Movement/Gibril
faction reissued the order for all its members to refrain from the recruitment and use
of child soldiers, and reiterated full adherence to the applicable international legal
norms and standards, as well as the Sudan Child Act of 2010.
51. In collaboration with UNAMID and UNDP, the National Com mission for
Human Rights convened a consultative workshop in Khartoum from 18 to
19 October to explore the expansion of its presence and activities across Sudan.
With support from the Government of Japan, it was agreed at the workshop that the
first sub-office of the Commission would be located in El Fasher and inaugurated in
December 2015.
52. UNAMID also continued activities to enhance the capacity of rule of law
institutions. During the month of September, UNAMID provided human rights and
prison management training for 200 newly recruited prison officers. During the
same period, UNAMID monitored two significant criminal trials at the General
Courts in El Fasher and Nyala and found that in both cases, the courts observed
procedural safeguards and delivered a fair trial. UNAMID also completed the
training of 32 rural court judges in Central and East Darfur States on mediation and
conflict resolution, in collaboration with the Federal Training Judicial Institute.
53. UNAMID provided oversight and technical support for the implementation of
a UNDP initiative entitled “Access to Justice Bridge Project 2015”, which involved
capacity-building workshops for 50 prison officers in Zalingei, Central Darfur,
induction training for four prison officers in Ardamata, Wes t Darfur, and the
provision of logistics support for other justice facilities in Shallah, North Darfur,
and Nyala, South Darfur. As part of the project, UNAMID also provided
sensitization training on human rights and legal issues for leaders in Kass internally
displaced persons camp in South Darfur, as well as supporting the rehabilitation and
refurbishing of a paralegal centre in the camp and the launch of a Criminal Justice
Forum for Darfur on 13 and 14 December in El Fasher to encourage dialogue and
coordination among Sudanese stakeholders. This initiative provided the basis and
lessons learned for developing a joint rule of law programme in preparation for the
transfer of tasks from UNAMID to the United Nations country team.
54. UNAMID, in collaboration with relevant stakeholders, continued the
implementation of 22 community-based labour-intensive projects, targeting 1,500
youths assessed to be at risk of recruitment into armed movements and criminal
gangs. Thus far, 17 of these projects have been completed and handed over to the
host communities, with a mechanism put in place by UNAMID to ensure their
sustainability through local ownership.
55. To strengthen community policing in Darfur, UNAMID conducted 41 training
courses for 1,158 (including 75 female) Sudanese police officers on human rights,
democratic policing, ethical and legal conduct, community policing and detention
and treatment of suspects, criminal investigation and first aid. UNAMID also

15-22604

13/18

S/2015/1027

provided training to 725 (including 277 female) community-policing volunteers on
roles and responsibilities of community policing, sexual and gender -based violence,
human rights and child protection. A total of 259 classes in English language were
also conducted for 7,514 (including 4,215 female) internally displaced persons and
Sudanese police offices throughout Darfur. In addition, 140 visits were conducted to
police stations across Darfur, with a view to ensuring the welfare of detainees in
juvenile detention centres or the facilities where detained mother s lived with their
young children. On 21 October, UNAMID delivered a session on gender
mainstreaming to 60 (including 12 female) corrections officers in the prison in
Zalingei, focusing on gender dimensions of prison management.

C.

Local conflict mediation
56. UNAMID continued to support the mediation of intercommunal conflicts
through the engagement of national and local governments, tribal and community
leaders, relevant institutions under the Darfur Regional Authority, and other
stakeholders, in addition to early warning, preventive measures, and capacitybuilding to address the root causes of conflicts.
57. With financial and logistical support from UNAMID, the reconciliation
conference to resolve the conflict between Salamat and Fallata in Buram, South of
Nyala resulted in a peace agreement on 22 September to address cattle -rustling,
management of water resources, as well as acts of criminality. In Mershing, Belail,
Kass, and Al Salam localities of South Darfur, UNAMID funded and facilitated
meetings between farmers and pastoralists on 3, 6, 7 and 10 October. Over 150
participants from both communities, as well as security committees of these
localities, attended these meetings and determined that an agreement on the
migration routes was essential to preventing conflicts between the two groups.
58. In Al Kuma, North Darfur, UNAMID funded and jointly facilitated with
Al Tagana Women Organization a peace forum for Zayadiya on 17 October to
explore their peaceful coexistence with Berti communities. The forum, wh ich was
attended by 67 women and 33 youths from Zayadiya, raised a number of issues,
including the need to address the root causes of intercommunal conflicts,
particularly on land issues, as well as the importance of combating drug abuse
among youth, intensifying dialogue among Darfuris, and building the capacity of
local institutions in conflict resolution and mediation. In addition, UNAMID held
five meetings on 2, 3, 4, 5, and 11 November to further promote reconciliation
between Berti and Zayadiya, which resulted in an agreement to conduct peace
campaigns in Mellit and Al Kuma. The nine-day peace campaign was launched on
6 December, led by Meidob Native Administration, with the support of UNAMID.
59. Throughout Darfur, UNAMID convened a total of 65 meetings (22 in South
Darfur, 12 in North Darfur, 11 in West Darfur, 5 in East Darfur, and 1 in Khartoum)
to facilitate peaceful coexistence between farmers and pastoralists and strengthen
joint committees to promote intergroup dialogue on practical ways to share access
to natural resources. Local authorities, leaders of farmers and pastoralists, and
representatives of the agricultural protection committees and the peaceful coexistence
committees attended these meetings and discussed mechanisms to prevent dispu tes
during the farming and migratory seasons. In East Darfur, farmers and nomads
signed an agreement on 9 December to share water resources in the area, with the
support of UNAMID.

14/18

15-22604

S/2015/1027

IV. Implementation of the strategic review recommendations
A.

Improved effectiveness and streamlining
60. UNAMID is in the process of implementing the last phase of the streamlining
exercise concerning civilian personnel. The abolition of 476 posts will take effect on
31 December 2015, beyond which these appointments will not be renewed. The vast
majority of the affected personnel were national staff, for whom UNAMID started
providing placement support.

B.

Transfer of mandated tasks to the United Nations country team
and exit strategy
61. UNAMID and the United Nations country team continued the planning
process for the gradual transfer of tasks, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2228 (2015). The United Nations Rule of Law Coordination Group for
Darfur, co-chaired by UNAMID and UNDP, convened the second meeting on
21 October and agreed on the outline for the joint United Nations Rule of Law
Programme for 2016-2019, under which the phased handover of mandated tasks
would proceed. A forum to consult national stakeholders was also held in Khartoum
on 22 November to ensure their support. Progress was also made in the transfer of
tasks related to access to justice, namely the handover from UNAMID to UNDP of
work related to paralegals and the legal aid desk in the prison in El Fasher, although
the country team continued to struggle with the mobilization of resources to secure
its field presence.
62. Regarding the transfer of tasks related to HIV/AIDS, UNAIDS and the Resident
Coordinator’s Office in Khartoum began developing a concept note in collaboratio n
with UNAMID for mobilizing resources necessary to take over outreach activities
from the Mission.
63. In compliance with resolution 2228 (2015) and the communiqués of the
African Union Peace and Security Council on 22 June and 31 July 2015, the Deputy
Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Deputy Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union, and the Foreign Minister of the Sudan held a
meeting on 29 September to discuss the framework of cooperation for achieving the
benchmarks of UNAMID, as the basis for its eventual exit from Darfur. The United
Nations and the African Union emphasized the parameters set by the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council, respectively, for the gradual
withdrawal of UNAMID and the need for tangible progr ess to be made against the
benchmarks. Further discussions on the exit strategy will be held in January 2016.

V. Financial aspects
64. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/261 B of 25 June 2015, appropriated
$1,102.2 million for the maintenance of the Operation for the period from 1 July
2015 to 30 June 2016.

15-22604

15/18

S/2015/1027

65. As at 20 November 2015, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for UNAMID amounted to $127.3 million. Total outstanding assessed contr ibutions
for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to $1,411.0 million.
66. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 31 August 2015, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 30 June 2015, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

VI. Observations
67. A political solution to the conflict in Darfur remains elusive. Without an
agreement on the national dialogue process or the cessation of hostilities,
displacement continues to be the way of life for almost one third of the population
of Darfur that are still in camps, and for the communities that host them. A
resumption of military campaigns after the rainy season risks creating new
displacement and further suffering for civilians. Intercommunal fighting and
criminality, including attacks on and harassment of internally displaced persons, are
exacerbated by the organization and arming of nomadic groups affiliated with
Government-sanctioned militia, victimizing those who rely on land for crops and
water to sustain their livelihoods.
68. An inclusive, credible and comprehensive national dialogue would provide a
chance to address the challenges facing the Sudan in a holistic manner. Conversel y,
a partial process without the participation of major opposition parties and armed
movements would not end simmering tensions. I urge the Sudanese authorities to
seize the opportunity for dialogue afforded by the proposals for a cessation of
hostilities made by the Government and the armed movements in September. I also
call on the Government to create an environment conducive to dialogue by
guaranteeing human rights and fundamental freedoms. I am concerned about the
recent detentions by the Sudanese authorities of opposition leaders and students,
which can undermine public confidence in the freedom of expression and assembly.
It is regrettable that the talks on the cessation of hostilities for Darfur and the Two
Areas adjourned without an agreement, and that plans to resume the talks and hold
the pre-dialogue meeting in December did not come to fruition. I reiterate my
support for the efforts of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel to find
peace in the Sudan and to end the conflict in Darfur. I, once again, call on all parties
to make tangible progress in the negotiations.
69. While the national dialogue and the talks facilitated by the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel face stumbling blocks, the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur has the potential to bring about concrete
improvements in the lives of the people of Darfur. Those in the leading positions of
the Darfur Regional Authority must resolve their differences and make further
progress for the benefit of the people of Darfur. I, once again, thank the State of
Qatar for its continued support to the implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur. I encourage the Government of the Sudan to fulfil its financial
pledge to continue the process of internal dialogue and reconciliation.
70. The humanitarian situation in Darfur continues to be a source of concern,
especially in the areas in and around Jebel Marra. I call upon the Government and
the armed movements to allow humanitarian access and facilitate t he delivery of

16/18

15-22604

S/2015/1027

life-saving support to those in need of assistance without hindrance, particularly in
Jebel Marra. I also urge the Government to ensure the freedom of movement of
UNAMID personnel and do more to address the continued attacks against United
Nations personnel and humanitarian actors in Darfur, including by undertaking
further efforts to ensure their safety, investigating incidents against them, and
bringing the perpetrators to justice.
71. Mechanisms of accountability must also be extended, first and foremost, to the
people of Darfur. The perpetrators of the increased attacks and harassment of
civilians, particularly armed elements associated with government forces, must be
held accountable. I welcome the steps taken by the Government, particul arly at the
State level, to address criminality and intercommunal conflicts. UNAMID stands
ready to continue providing support to community-level mediation and reconciliation
efforts.
72. I am concerned about delays in the issuance or renewal of visas and rejections
and their impact on UNAMID’s ability to implement its mandate, particularly those
sections directly involved in meeting its strategic priorities. The vacancy rates for
international personnel have reached 50 per cent in the Human Rights Section ,
40 per cent in the Protection of Civilians Section, and 30 per cent for the
Communications and Public Information Section. Visa denials have also affected
other sections that underpin the operations of UNAMID, with 50 per cent vacancy
rates in the Joint Operations Centre and 30 percent vacancy rates in the Security
Section.
73. The food rations crisis experienced during the reporting period was another
example of impediments that not only rendered the operations of UNAMID difficult
but risked the welfare of its peacekeepers. I welcome the agreement reached during
the visit of my Under-Secretary-General for Field Support to Khartoum and Darfur
from 4 to 6 December to reactivate the tripartite mechanism with the Government of
the Sudan and the African Union in order to address support issues, such as visas,
customs clearance, and freedom of movement. I count on the cooperation of the
Government on these matters, in accordance with the Status of Forces Agreement.
74. In line with the decisions of the Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, I remain committed to developing the exit strategy of
UNAMID. I seek the full support of the Government in fulfilling the benchmarks of
UNAMID, as the basis of further consultations on the subject, as mandated by the
two Councils.
75. In conclusion, I would like to welcome the new Joint Special Representative/
Joint Chief Mediator, Martin Ihoeghian Uhomoibhi, the new Deputy Joint Special
Representative, Bintou Keita, and the new Force Commander, Frank Mushyo
Kamanzi. I count on the Government of the Sudan to extend them its full
cooperation and support. I wish to thank the Acting Joint Special Representative/
Joint Chief Mediator, Abiodun Oluremi Bashua, for his stewardship of UNAMID
for more than a year. I would also like to express my gratitude to all personnel of
UNAMID, the United Nations country team and humanitarian partners who
continue to work tirelessly for the people of Darfur.

15-22604

17/18

S/2015/1027

18/18

15-22604
