General Assembly-Sixth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SECOND COMMITfEE
CONTENTS

Page

518 (VI). Technical assistance activities under General Assembly resolution
200 (Ill), 246 (Ill), and 418 (V) (12 January 1952) (item 26)
.
519 (VI). Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance ~r ~he economic
development of under-developed countries (12 January 195... ) (Item 26) ....
520 (VI). Financing of economic development of under-developed countries (12
January 1952) (item 26)
.
521 (VI). Integrated economic development (12 January 1952) (item 26)
.
522 (VI). Methods to increase world productivity (12 January 1952) (item 26).
523 (VI). Integrated economic development and commercial agreements (12
January 1952) (item 26)
.
524 (VI). Land reform (12 January 1952) (item 26)
.
525 (VI). Food and famine (26 January 1952) (item 11)
.
526 (VI). Continuation of the regional economic commissions (26 January 1952)
(item ~1)
.
527 (VI). Living standards of the working population (26 January 1952)
(item 11)
,
.
528 (VI). Production and distribution of newsprint and printing paper (26
January 1952) (item 11)
.
529 (VI). Libya: problem of war damages (29 January 1952) (item 21)
.
530 (VI). Economic and financial provisions relating to Eritrea (29 January
1952) (item 62)

15
15
17
19
19
20
20
21
23
23
23
23
24

518 (VI). Technical assistance activities under
General Assembly resolutions 200 (Ill), 246
(Ill) and 418 (V)

519 (VI). Expanded Programme of Technical
A88istance for the economic development of
under-developed countries

The General Assembly,
HmJing decided in resolutions 305 (IV) and 316
(IV) that the regular budget of the United Nations
should continue to provide for the activities authorized
by resolutions 200 (Ill) and 58 (I),
1. Directs the Secretary-General to place on a continuing basis the programme of technical assistance in
public administration authorized by resolution 246
(Ill) and to include an amount for these services in
the United Nations budget in the future;
2. Notes with approval that the Secretary-General
has included in the Fnit~d Nations budget' for the year
1952 the same amounts as were appropriated by the
General Assembly in 1951 for activities under resolutions 200 (Il!), 246 (Ill) and 418 (V) ; and
3. Recommends that additional technics I assistance
activities to be undertaken for the benefit of underdeveloped countries in the fields of economic development, public administration and social welfare should
be considered under the expanded programme of technical assistance in cases where such additional programmes cannot be financed from the budget of the
United Nations.
360th prcnary 'muting,

A

The General Assembly,
Believing that the continuation and extension of the
technical assistance programmes of the United Nations
and of the specialized agencies are of basic importance
to economic development and to effective international
co-operation to raise standards of living in underdeveloped countries,
Recognizing that governments requesting technical
assistance under the Expanded Programme have the
primary responsibility for planning and carrying out,
within the framework of available resources, their own
programmes of economic and social development,
Recoqnizing the great importance of close collaboration between agencies giving technical and financial
assistance,
1. Notes with satisfaction the action taken by the
Economic and Social Council in resolution 400 (XIII)
of 30 August 1951, the progress already achieved in
putting the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance into operation, and the collaboration which has
been developing between agencies giving technica~ and
financial assistance with regard to particular projects ;
2. rVC!C0112CS the action- taken by the Technical Assistance Committee of the Economic and Social Coun-

12 January 1952.
'See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Suppz"ment No . .S, section 28.

2 Sf"~ Official Records of the Economic and Social COtmcil,
Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 33, document E/2102.

15

16

General Assembly-Sixth Session

eil during the latter's thirteenth session recommending
that the Secretary-General and the participating organizations should interpret the rules regarding the provision of supplies and equipment more generously than
has been done in the past within the framework of
Council resolution 222 A (IX) of 15 August 1949 and
requesting the Technical Assistance Board:
(a) To study the practicability of meeting the
needs for supplies and equipment designed to increase
the effectiveness of certain economic and social services in the under-developed countries, especially in respect of the establishment of training and research
centres;
(b) To place greater emphasis on the establishment
of training and demonstration projects in the underdeveloped countries and on the provision of pilot plants
and similar facilities;
3. Requests that negotiations regarding contributions for the second financial period of the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance be carried out by
any negotiating committees for extra-budgetary funds
established during the present session of the General
Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) Subject to the provisions of any other resolution adopted by the General Assembly at its sixth regular session concerning the pledging of extra-budgetary
funds, to convene a conference for the purpose of ascertaining approximately the total amount of contributions for the second financial period available from the
participating governments, subject to the approval of
their respective legislative authorities, for the execution of the technical assistance programmes of the
United Nations and of the specialized agencies;
(b) To invite to the conference with the right to
vote all Members of the United Nations and all other
States which are members of the specialized agencies
participating in the programme; and likewise to invite,
without the right to vote, representatives of the specialized agencies;
5. Approves the financial arrangements set forth in
the annex hereto for the administration of the funds
contributed, as agreed by the Economic and Social
Council in paragraph 7 of its resolution 400 (XIII)
of 30 August 1951;
6. Urges the participating organizations, through
the Technical Assistance Board, to make such arrangements with governments contributing to the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance as would ensure
the most effective utilization of all currencies, including
particularly the contributions in currencies of limited
convertibility, contributed to the Special Account;
7. Calls on the specialized agencies participating in
the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance to
provide, in their regular budget documents, information concerning their estimates for the expenditure of
technical assistance funds; and to transmit to the General Assembly, for examination and approval, the audit
reports relating to expenditure of technical assistance
funds allocated from the Special Account after approval of the appropriate audit reports by the general
• See resolution 571 B (VI), p. 66.

conferences of their agencies or by such other authorities of the agencies as are constitutionally authorized
to approve them;
8. Expresses the hope that governments of States
which are not Members of the United Nations but are
members of participating specialized agencies will attend the conference mentioned in paragraph 4 (a)
above, and that they will associate thems~lves with the
financial and other arrangements mentioned above;
9. Urges all governments to make contributions to
the programme for the year 1952 at least equal to the
contributions which they had pledged for the first
financial period;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, the Economic
and Social Council and the specialized agencies to take
all possible measures. to ensure that technical assistance
rendered is consistent With, and makes the maximum
contribution to, integrated plans of economic and social
development;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General, in view
of the fact that certain private non-profit organizations
are engaged in rendering technical assistance to several
under-developed areas, to study the possibility of coordinating their policies and activities with those of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies;
12. Looks forward to increased collaboration between the agencies furnishing technical assistance and
financing agencies so that maximum co-ordination between technical and financial assistance can be obtained;
13. Recommends:
(a) That governments requesting technical assistance under the Expanded Programme continue to
strengthen their internal machinery for the co-ordinated
planning and implementation of development measures,
for the formulation of integrated programmes of development, including priorities, and, in general, for the
utilization of technical assistance in as effective a manner as possible, including the possibilities of financing
such development projects as may be recommended by
technical assistance missions;
(b) That governments requested to make available
experts and facilities for the Expanded Programme
take all possible steps to facilitate the availability of
such technical assistance to under-developed countries
through the United Nations and the participating specialized agencies, and further that these governments
continue to improve their co-ordinating facilities in
order to help accelerate the flow of technical knowledge in the under-developed countries.
360th plenary meetifCg,
12 January 1952.
ANNEX

Financial arrangement.
[Agreed by the Economic and Social Council ill paragraph i
of its resolution 400 (X Ill) 1
(a) The amounts allocated for the participating organizations for the first financial period shall remain available for
the purpose of assuming obligations or commitments during
the second financial period, subject to necessary adjustments
for the establishment of the Special Reserve Fund provided
for in paragraph (b) ;

--------------_._-_..•.._Resolutions adopted on reports of the Second Committee
(b) There shall be established a Special Reserve Fund
equivalent to US $3,000,000 for the purpose of assuring the
completion of projects which extend beyond the end of the
financial period for which funds are available, and of providing funds pending receipt of contributions at the beginning
of a financial year. The Special Reserve Fund shall be created
from unobligated funds remaining from the first financial
period and shall be maintained principally in convertible currencies. The size of the Special Reserve Fund may be changed
by the Technical Assistance Committee. Withdrawals from the
Special Reserve Fund may be made by the Technical Assistance Board for the purposes described above and shall be replaced as soon as contributions become available;
(c) The Secretary-General shall allot contributions received for the second financial period as follows:
(i) $10,000,000 out of contributions received for the second
financial period shall be automatically available for allocation to the participating organizations in accordance with
paragraph 9 (c) of Council resolution 222 A (IX);
(ii) The balance of contributions received shall be retained in
the Special Account for further allocation, as provided in
paragraph (d) below;
(d) Contributions retained under paragraph (c) (ii) above
shall be allotted in accordance with decisions of the Technical
Assistance Board in such manner and at such time as it may
decide, with a view to ensuring the development of wellbalanced and co-ordinated country and regional technical assistance programmes, taking into consideration all relevant factors,
in particular, the amounts and kinds of resources on hand and
receivable, the technical assistance requests received which fall
within the field of the several participating organizations, the
uncommitted balances held by them, and the need for the retention of any reserves to meet unforeseen requests from
governments;
(e) Unallocated funds remaining in the Special Account
from the first financial period after establishment of the Special
Reserve Fund shall be available for allocation by the Technical
Assistance Board in the second financial period.

B
The General Assembly,
Considering that improvement in the production techniques in industry, agriculture and other branches of
the economies of under-developed countries can be
greatly advanced by the training of groups of their
workers, foremen and technicians in countries which
are more developed in certain fields of their economy,
Considering that a valuable method of training such
workers, foremen and technicians is by actual employment in appropriate enterprises abroad,
Taking into account, further, that the experience
gained by such teams of workers, foremen and technicians has proved useful under various bilateral arrangements in the past,
Recommends that the organizations participating in
the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance give,
among other forms of technical assistance, sympathetic
consideration to requests for the placement of teams
of workers, foremen and technicians from under-developed territories in appropriate enterprises in other
countries for such periods as may be necessary for
such teams to acquire the technical proficiency necessary
for effective use in their country of origin, and also to
enable them to train other workers in those techniques
or to adapt such techniques to the conditions in their
country.
360th plenary mating,
12 January 1952.

17

520 (VI). Financing of economic development
of under-developed countries

A
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the reports of the Ec0t.t0m~c and Social Council to the General Assembly at Its Sixth regular session, the reports of the Economic, Emp}oyment
and Development Commission on its sixth session, an;!
the experts' report" entitled M easures for the Economic
Development of Under-developed Countries,
Having in mind the obligations assumed by the governments of Member States under Articles 55 and 56
of the United Nations Charter,
• Recalling its conviction, expressed in its resolution
400 (V) oCf 20 November 1950, that:
(a) Although the economic development of underdeveloped countries depends primarily upon the efforts
of the people of those countries,. the necessary accel~ra­
tion of that development requires not only technical
but also financial assistance from abroad, particularly
from the more developed countries,
(b) The volume of private capital which is currentlv flowing into under-developed countries cannot
meet the financial needs of the economic development
of those countries without an increased flow of international public funds,
Recognizing that:
(a) An urgent and practical approach to the problem of international financing of economic and social
development is essential to general progress, to the
strengthening of international co-operation and confidence and that it is, therefore, vital for the strengthening and maintenance of peace, especially in the present state of world tension,
(b) It is necessary, for these reasons, to give special attention to the solution of this problem through
international co-operation within the framework of the
United Nations,
Considering that the statistics contained in the World
Economic Report, 1949-50,7 published by the SecretaryGeneral early in 1951, show that the national incomes
of the under-developed countries do not allow a sufficient accumulation of domestic savings to provide
heavy investments for their rapid economic development,
Believing that there exists an urgent necessity for
studying the problem of creating new sources of international financing suitable for the acceleration of the
economic development of under-developed countries,
with a view to raising the standard of living of their
peoples,
C onuinced that the acceleration of the economic development of under-developed countries calls, among
other forms of international financial assistance, for an
international system of grants-in-aid to those countries,
• See 0 fficiol Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supplement No. 3.
e See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirtel'lllh Session, Supplement No. 2.
• See Report by a Group of Experts appointed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, United Nations Publications. Sales No. 1951.II.B.2.
'See United Nations Publications, Sales No. 1951.1I.C.l.
