A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/198
11 March 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 112 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/635/Add.3)]
50/198.

Situation of human rights in Cuba

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms as stated in the Charter of the
United Nations and elaborated in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 1/ the International Covenants on Human Rights 2/ and other
applicable human rights instruments,
Reaffirming also that all States have an obligation to fulfil the
commitments they have freely undertaken under the various international
instruments,
Taking particular note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1995/66
of 7 March 1995, 3/ in which the Commission recognized with deep
appreciation the efforts of the Special Rapporteur to carry out his mandate
concerning the situation of human rights in Cuba,
Expressing concern about continuing serious violations of human rights
in Cuba, of which the majority are violations of civil and political rights,

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1995,
Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1995/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
96-77113

/...

A/RES/50/198
Page 2

as outlined in the interim report on the situation of human rights in Cuba
submitted to the General Assembly by the Special Rapporteur, 4/
Welcoming the authorization granted to a delegation comprising
representatives of four international human rights organizations to visit
Cuba, and encouraging the Government of Cuba to grant further access to such
organizations,
Also welcoming the release of a number of political prisoners,
Recalling the continued failure of the Government of Cuba to cooperate
with the Commission on Human Rights with regard to its resolution 1995/66,
including its refusal to permit the Special Rapporteur to visit Cuba,
1.
Commends the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights
for his interim report on the situation of human rights in Cuba;
2.

Expresses its full support for the work of the Special Rapporteur;

3.
Calls once more upon the Government of Cuba to cooperate fully
with the Special Rapporteur by permitting him full and free access to
establish contact with the Government and the citizens of Cuba so that he may
fulfil the mandate entrusted to him;
4.
Regrets profoundly the numerous violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in Cuba, as described in the report of the Special
Rapporteur to the Commission on Human Rights 5/ and in his interim report;
4/
5.
Urges the Government of Cuba to ensure freedom of expression and
assembly and the freedom to demonstrate peacefully, including by allowing
political parties and non-governmental organizations to function freely in the
country and by reforming legislation in this area;
6.
Welcomes the ratification by the Government of Cuba of the
Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment; 6/
7.
Calls especially upon the Government of Cuba to release the
numerous persons detained for activities of a political nature, including
those specifically mentioned in the report of the Special Rapporteur who
suffer from inadequate medical care while imprisoned or whose rights as
journalists or jurists are impeded or denied;
8.
Calls upon the Government of Cuba to adopt the other measures
proposed in the interim report of the Special Rapporteur to bring the
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Cuba into conformity
with international law and international human rights instruments and to end

4/

A/50/663, annex.

5/

E/CN.4/1995/52.

6/

Resolution 39/46, annex.
/...

A/RES/50/198
Page 3

all violations of human rights by, inter alia, ratifying and effectively
implementing those international human rights instruments to which it is not
yet party, ceasing the persecution and punishment of citizens for reasons
related to freedom of expression and peaceful association, respecting due
process, and granting permission for access to the prisons by non-governmental
humanitarian organizations and international humanitarian agencies;
9.
Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its
fifty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
22 December 1995
