S/2021/154

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 February 2021
Original: English

Situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 16 of Security Council
resolution 2540 (2020) and paragraph 37 of resolution 2520 (2020). It provides
updates on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the mandates of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers significant developments in
Somalia from 5 November 2020 to 9 February 2021.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The agreement on the electoral process reached on 17 September 2020
notwithstanding, divergence persisted with respect to its implementation, as the
opposition Council of Presidential Candidates Union and some federal member states
accused the Federal Government of unilaterally appointing committee members loyal
to the President of Somalia, Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed “Farmajo”. Disputes also
emerged regarding the selection of representatives to the indirect electoral and
implementation team for Federal Parliament seats allocated to “Somaliland”. The
agreement of 17 September provides for the Jubbaland state-level electoral committee
to organize elections in Garbahaarrey, but details of the administrative and security
arrangements have not yet been fully agreed between the Jubbaland administration
and the Federal Government.
3.
To address these issues, several attempts at dialogue have been made. On
24 December, the Presidents of Galmudug and Puntland agreed to work together in
trying to resolve the dispute among various stakeholders on the implementation of
elections. From 11 to 14 December, the Prime Minister of Somalia, Mohamed Hussein
Roble, paid his first official visit to Puntland and discussed the political stalemate
over the electoral process with the President of Puntland, Said Abdullahi Deni, but
there was no breakthrough, including on the appointment of Puntland representatives
to the federal and state-level election management bodies. Between 30 December
2020 and 2 January 2021, discussions on the margins of a conference in Garoowe
among the Deputy Prime Minister, the Presidents of Puntland, Galmudug and
Jubbaland, as well as some of the opposition presidential candidates, resulted in

21-01765 (E)

190221

*2101765*

S/2021/154

proposals to resolve the political impasse impeding the advancement of the electoral
process. Those proposals were conveyed to the federal leadership by the President of
Galmudug. While all parties reportedly viewed those proposals positively, no
significant progress was made.
4.
On 15 and 25 December, protests in Mogadishu, called by opposition groups
over the Federal Government’s management of the upcoming elections, led to
violence and the use of force by the Somali Police Force, resulting in one death and
three civilians injured. Clan-affiliated militias reportedly took part in the clashes.
5.
On 9 January, the Prime Minister announced that the Federal Government was
ready to begin the electoral process in South-West State, Hirshabelle and Galmudug,
as well as the Banaadir Regional Administration. The opposition condemned the
move, warning that partial elections endangered the unity and stability of Somalia.
6.
While significant attention was focused on the national electoral impasse, in
“Somaliland”, voter registration was conducted from 30 November 2020 to
13 January 2021, ahead of parliamentary and local council elections scheduled to be
held on 31 May 2021. On 29 December, following a visit to Djibouti, the President
of “Somaliland”, Musa Bihi Abdi, attended the reopening of the border between
“Somaliland” and Djibouti at the Loyada border crossing, which had been closed
since 25 March 2020 in response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
7.
On 11 November, in Jawhar, Hirshabelle State, Abdullahi Ali Hussein
“Gudlawe” from the Hawiye-Abgaal sub-clan was elected as state President by the
regional assembly; Yusuf Ahmed Hagar “Dabageed” of the Hawiye-Hawadle
sub-clan, was elected as Vice-President. However, several Hawadle stakeholders
alleged that the elections were rigged and raised power-sharing concerns relating to
their representation in state institutions and to the location of the state capital in
Jawhar, Middle Shabelle. There were also public protests in Beledweyne. On
23 December, the regional assembly passed a resolution by which its tenure and that
of the state presidency was extended from four to five years.
8.
On 30 November, the Federal Government recalled its ambassador to Kenya and
requested the Kenyan ambassador to Somalia to leave the country, citing interference
in both the electoral process and in the relations between the Federal Government and
Jubbaland. On 14 December, Somalia severed diplomatic ties with Kenya, further
alleging interference in domestic affairs. The move came after a two-day visit to
Kenya by the President of “Somaliland”. On 15 December, Kenya and “Somaliland”
announced a cooperation agreement to expand the movement of people and goods
between Nairobi and Hargeysa, building on the existing movement of goods and
people by flight between the two cities, and the opening of a Kenyan consu late in
Hargeysa.
9.
On 20 December, during the thirty-eight Extraordinary Assembly of the Heads
of State and Government of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), participants agreed that Kenya and Somalia should resolve their differences
within the IGAD framework. Following those developments, a Djiboutian delegation,
composed of senior diplomats and military officers, visited Somalia in mid-January
as part of an IGAD-mandated fact-finding mission on Somali complaints lodged
against Kenya and reported back to the President of Djibouti, Ismaël Omar Guelleh.
On 26 January, the fact-finding team released its report, in which it said that it found
evidence that Kenya had violated Somali airspace but no evidence that it had
interfered in Somali affairs. While Kenya welcomed the report as “factual”, Somalia
rejected it as “biased”.
10. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General continued to conduct his
good offices in support of efforts to overcome the electoral impasse. Meetings were
2/18

21-01765

S/2021/154

undertaken on a regular basis between the Federal Government and federal member
state leaders. In addition, he visited all federal member states and “Somaliland”
between January and early February 2021. The United Nations also facilitated
numerous meetings between the diplomatic community and Somali political leaders.
All those efforts were aimed at supporting and facilitating continued dialogue,
compromise and consensus towards moving the electoral process forward. Numerous
statements on behalf of the international partners of Somalia were also issued in
relation to the political process.
11. On 30 January, President Farmajo announced the convening of a consultative
forum with federal member state leaders in Dhuusamarreeb, as part of efforts to
implement the agreement of 17 September. The President also announced that he
would address both houses of the Federal Parliament thereafter. The consultative
forum officially commenced in Dhuusamarreeb on 3 February, attended by the
President, the Prime Minister, all federal member state leaders and the Banaadir
Regional Governor. The forum ended on 6 February in a stalemate over the issue of
elections in Gedo.
12. On 6 February, President Farmajo briefed the House of the People on the status
of the ongoing talks and indicated his readiness to continue dialogue. On 8 February,
international partners issued a statement in which they called upon political leaders
to resume their dialogue to urgently reach a final agreement permitting national
elections to be held. In the statement, they also underscored that any alternative
outcomes, including a parallel process or partial elections, or any other actions that
lacked broad agreement, would not obtain the support of international partners. On
the same day, the Council of Presidential Candidates Union publicly stated that it
would no longer recognize the legitimacy of President Farmajo, whose constitutional
term ended on 8 February, and proposed the formation of the Transitional National
Council. On 9 February, President Farmajo announced his intention to host a federal
and state-level summit on the implementation of the agreement of 17 September in
Garoowe, Puntland.

B.

Security developments
13. The security situation remained volatile, with an average of 285 monthly
incidents recorded. Most of those incidents were Al-Shabaab attacks, including using
improvised explosive devices, both targeting Somalia security forces and for crime related killings. Nevertheless, the number of civilians killed in 2020 from improvised
explosive devices saw a 50 per cent decline compared with 2019, the first decrease in
the past five years. This is attributed in large part to the reduction in the use of vehicleborne improvised explosive devices in Mogadishu, resulting from security opera tions
in Lower Shabelle that managed to disrupt supply chains and infiltration routes, along
with the increased effectiveness of security measures within the federal capital.
Twenty-seven mortar attacks were reported during the period, compared with 16
between August and October 2020, targeting mainly the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and local security forces in Lower Shabelle, Middle Shabelle,
Bay, Bakool, Bari, Galguduud and Hiraan regions. In Galguduud, Al -Shabaab
launched a mortar attack on Dhuusamarreeb while federal and state leaders were
present in town for electoral talks between 2 and 5 February. No casualties were
reported.
14. Al-Shabaab maintained the capability to infiltrate Mogadishu and carry out
high-profile attacks. During the reporting period, the use of person-borne improvised
explosive devices by Al-Shabaab increased. On 17 November, in Mogadishu’s Xamar
Jajab district, a person-borne improvised explosive device explosion inside a
restaurant near the police academy killed six police officers and wounded four others

21-01765

3/18

S/2021/154

and two civilians. On 27 November, in Mogadishu’s Wadajir district, an Al-Shabaab
suicide bomber detonated himself at an ice cream shop frequented by government
officials, killing 8 people and wounding 10 others. On 18 December, in Gaalkacyo
district, Mudug, an Al-Shabaab person-borne improvised explosive device detonation
in a stadium where a crowd had gathered to see the visiting Prime Minister resulted
in the killing of 14 people and injuries to 14 others; several senior security officials
were among those killed. On 2 January, a person-borne improvised explosive device
explosion in Lafoole, on the outskirts of Mogadishu, targeted a road construction
project, resulting in at least five people killed and six others injured; two Turkish
nationals working on the project were among the fatalities. On 31 January, the group
conducted a complex attack on the Afrik Hotel in Mogadishu’s Waberi district.
Reports indicated that up to 10 people were killed in the attack, including retired army
general and former Minister of Defence Mohamed Nur Galal.
15. Al-Shabaab remained undeterred in attacking Somali National Army and
AMISOM forces in Lower Shabelle, Middle Shabelle, Banaadir, Bay, Hiraan, Bakool,
Lower Jubba, Gedo, Galguduud and Mudug, with a monthly average of 140 attacks
during the reporting period. The majority of the incidents were hit-and-run attacks,
many of which involved brief exchanges of heavy gunfire. In a significant incident
on 30 November, Al-Shabaab attacked a Somali National Army base in Bacadweyne,
Mudug. The attack resulted in at least 15 Somali National Army soldiers and civilians
killed. In the run-up to the elections, Al-Shabaab continued to use grenades and
improvised explosive devices to target high-level federal and state officials. The
federal Minister of Labour, the federal Minister of Agriculture, the Jubbaland
Minister of Tourism, the Governor of Lower Shabelle, the Danab Unit Commander,
district commissioners and members of the Federal Parliament were among the
officials targeted during the period. At least one parliamentarian and five electoral
delegates were killed.
16. Tensions between forces loyal to the former Minister of Security of Jubbaland,
Abdirashid Hassan Abdinur “Janan”, and the Somali National Army resumed in the
Gedo region on 25 January in Beledxaawo. The clashes in town, which lasted a few
hours, resulted in civilian casualties and displacement, although numbers were
unconfirmed.
17. No attacks were attributed to pro-Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant elements.
The United States of America conducted seven air strikes in December 2020 and
January 2021. The repositioning of United States forces from Somalia to other bases
in East Africa began in late December and was completed in January.

C.

Economic developments
18. The 2021 federal budget, as approved by the Federal Parliament on
29 December 2020 and signed by the President on 1 January 2021, projected an
increase in domestic revenues ($260 million in 2021, compared with $190 million in
2020) and tighter controls on expenditures. Given that social spending relies largely
on donor grant financing, total foreign grants for 2021 were estimated at
$277.4 million.
19. Gross domestic product contracted by 1.5 per cent, from $4.55 billion in 2019
to $4.48 billion in 2020, according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The
Somali economy was expected to rebound at 2.9 per cent growth in 2021 thanks to
private sector recovery, persistent remittances and continued investment. The
financial sector continued to demonstrate remarkable resilience: bank deposits
remained stable, the provision of credit to the private sector continued and remittances
to households and individuals surpassed 2019 levels.

4/18

21-01765

S/2021/154

20. IMF projected the Federal Government would record a small deficit of some
$11 million in 2020 owing to COVID-19 pandemic-induced uncertainty in revenue
collection. The shared view of IMF and federal authorities was that the deficit could
be absorbed by the authorities’ cash balances, if necessary. However, final year-end
data had yet to be published. Moreover, donor concerns with regard to political
instability have led to disruptions in expected budgetary support. In federal member
states, revenue performance is encouraging, especially in Puntland and Jubbaland,
which have large ports. Expenditure has been broadly in line with the 2020 budgets,
with the exception of South-West State, which has struggled with controlling
spending.
21. Somalia continued to make steady progress under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative, as documented in the IMF country report for Somalia released in
November. Currently in the interim period of the Initiative, Somalia has to meet the
completion point requirements to achieve full and irrevocable debt r elief. The World
Bank and IMF are providing joint technical assistance in debt management.
22. On 21 November, the Office of the Auditor General of Somalia released, for the
second year, a consolidated compliance audit report on 35 reporting entities of th e
Federal Government for 2019. The report highlighted lapses in expenditure controls,
deficient controls over the management of fixed assets, poor debt and weak
procurement management, and failure to prepare financial statements and register
contracts. The report represented an effort to identify and correct public financial
management gaps.

III. Support for peacebuilding and State-building efforts
23. On 2 December, the Peacebuilding Commission convened to discuss Somalia,
for the first time since 2015. Chaired by Canada, the meeting included participation
by the Prime Minister. In a statement, the Commission welcomed the commitment of
Somalia to durable peace and reconciliation and commended the use of dialogue and
consensus-building to navigate obstacles to its peacebuilding and State-building
trajectories. It highlighted the importance of the national development plan, the
national reconciliation framework and the Somali Women’s Charter in guiding
national peacebuilding efforts and international support. The Commission committed
itself to maintaining its attention on efforts aimed at addressing ongoing
peacebuilding challenges in Somalia and mobilizing international support for the
country’s peacebuilding priorities.

A.

Support for strengthening federalism

1.

Preparations for elections
24. On 14 November, the Federal Government formally requested technical,
financial, material and logistical support from the United Nations for the 2020 –2021
indirect elections. The provision of international support has been delayed as a result
of ongoing disagreements among Somali stakeholders with respect to the
implementation of the agreement of 17 September.
25. The political impasse impeded the full establishment of federal and some state level committees to oversee and implement the indirect elections. Nevertheless, the
United Nations and partners worked to support the drawing-up of an electoral budget
and to advance planning for electoral support activities at the technical level.
Currently, the electoral committees that were established did not meet the requirement
for 30 per cent women’s representation. In November and December, the Office of

21-01765

5/18

S/2021/154

the Prime Minister conducted training for the nominated electoral management
committee members on planning and managing the indirect elections.
26. A National Electoral Security Task Force meeting, supported by the United
Nations, with the participation of international assistance partners, was held from 13
to 15 December with all Federal Government and federal member state security forces
and institutions represented, including those of Jubbaland and Puntland. Each federal
member state presented its security preparations. A revised national elections security
plan, which provides for the establishment of a women’s situation desk in each Joint
Security Operations Centre, was presented and discussed.
27. On 1 December, the Joint Police Programme Executive Board met and approved
requests for funding three election security-related courses as part of the “Somali
police training plan 2020/2021”. UNSOM police assumed the responsibility for
coordinating election security training by implementing partners (United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), AMISOM, Somali Police Force) in support of the
National Electoral Security Task Force. Harmonized training manuals will be
endorsed by the police professional training board and will serve as templates for
training related to future elections.
2.

Deepening federalism
28. As part of policymaking on decentralization, the Ministry of Interior, Federal
Affairs and Reconciliation and the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs developed a
matrix on functional assignments as a tool to help to identify federal, subnational,
concurrent and local-level functions and responsibilities, and subsequently shared it
with their counterparts from the federal member states for their consideration.
Interministerial working sessions on functional assignments to consolidate state
perspectives are to be designed and conducted.

3.

Constitutional review
29. The three mandated institutions for the review of the Constitution, namely, the
Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, the joint parliamentary Oversight Committee and
the Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission, met wi th
the executive, legislative and civil society structures of South-West State, Galmudug,
Hirshabelle and Banaadir during November 2020 to discuss the reviewed chapters of
the Constitution and collect feedback. Those meetings served to distinguish between
those articles requiring only technical amendments and those requiring further
political consideration.
30. Those consultations were followed by an interregional conference for the
technical finalization of the review of the provisional Federal Constitution, attended
by the ministers of constitutional affairs of federal member states and regional
parliamentary committees. The consultations resulted in the production of the third
draft of the reviewed Constitution.
31. The United Nations advocated with the Speakers of both houses of the Federal
Parliament to introduce new rules of procedure for the joint sitting of the two houses
and a process for the adoption of the Constitution. Although the Speakers agreed to
host the joint sitting, progress has been suspended since the issuance of a decree on
24 December by Mr. Farmajo, deferring the constitutional review process to the next
Parliament.
32. Despite the good offices of the Special Representative and efforts by the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Constitutional Affairs, Puntland and Jubbaland have
declined to engage in the review of the Constitution, citing a lack of trust in the

6/18

21-01765

S/2021/154

Federal Government. Efforts are ongoing to sustain momentum to ensure that the
eleventh Parliament continues the work of the tenth one.
4.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts
33. On 4 December, the Minister of Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation
travelled to Beledweyne in a bid to address clan grievances in Hiraan region following
the election of the new President of Hirshabelle. On 3 and 4 January, the Special
Representative, in meetings with the President of Hirshabelle and the Minister of
Interior, welcomed their efforts to promote reconciliation and stressed the importance
of a broad-based dialogue among Hirshabelle partners to resolve the dispute, as well
as pledged the assistance of the United Nations to the process. Throughout the
process, the United Nations has consulted with Hirshabelle stakeholders. During his
visit to Jawhar on 28 January, the Special Representative also discussed the ongoing
reconciliation efforts with the President of Hirshabelle. On 7 January, the Hirshabelle
administration concluded the reconciliation process between the Abdalla Aroni and
Eli Oumar sub-clans, supported with United Nations funding. The sub-clans agreed,
among other things, to the payment of compensation and the release of persons
detained in connection with a land dispute between both sub-clans.
34. The Ministry of Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, with United
Nations support, conducted a conflict-mapping training in October for officials from
all federal member states and the Banaadir Regional Administration. Participants are
now collecting data using multiple sources of information to complete a conflict mapping exercise intended to contribute to state-level reconciliation plans.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and women’s rights
35. The United Nations, in coordination with partners, continued its extensive
advocacy efforts in support of the advancement of gender equality and women’s rights
and mainstreaming in key areas of mandate implementation. Somali civil society
women leaders and the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development also
continued their efforts to secure the 30 per cent quota for women in the 2020–2021
elections. In this regard, the Federal Minister and state-level ministries and women
leaders have advocated with political and clan leaders and mobilized women aspirants
in support of the 30 per cent quota. UNSOM, UNDP and the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Woman) are engaged and
offering technical advice and guidance. The Ministry, with the support of UN-Women,
also trained a team of 30 Somali Women’s Charter champions to advocate the
implementation of the 30 per cent quota.
36. On 15 December, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development
hosted a national conference, supported by UNDP and UN-Women, in Mogadishu, on
the implementation of the 30 per cent quota for women. The conference, which
brought together women leaders, federal parliamentarians and senior federal
authorities, including the Speaker of the House of the People and the Deputy Prime
Minister, saw the adoption of a communiqué with actions for realizing the 30 per cent
quota for women. Women leaders renewed calls for reserving 30 per cent of seats for
women.

2.

Youth empowerment
37. On 2 and 3 December, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) convened
a forum attended by 300 Somali young people, which included talk shows and
storytelling on peacebuilding. Additional training included the training of trainers on

21-01765

7/18

S/2021/154

youth for peace for 24 young Somalis and a two-week training-of-trainers course on
art for peace.
38. On 12 November, UNFPA conducted a forum on the role of young people in the
elections in Somalia. A total of 192 young people (80 women) representing university
students, youth-led organizations, parliamentary aspirants and political activists in
Mogadishu, attended the event. Similar forums were organized in Gaalkacyo and
Baraawe, which were intended to create intergenerational dialogues with
policymakers and elicit young people’s interest in political participation.
39. On 10 December, the “Dalbile youth initiative” was launched. The multi-year
project, implemented by UNFPA with European Union support, promotes
employability and entrepreneurship skills while fostering an enabling environment
for the development of young people. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization commenced discussions with the Ministry for Youth and Sports
on developing a physical education and sports policy for Somalia.
40. A total of 441 young people involved in the UPSHIFT innovative livelihoods
programme are now running businesses with support from partner business
development officers and United Nations Children’s Fund Youth and Innovation
Associates. The initiative targets an additional 1,000 young people in Somalia,
including children in conflict with the law, returnees, young people at risk of
migration, gender-based violence survivors, and children associated with armed
forces and armed groups.
41. The United Nations Industrial Development Organization expanded its network
of enterprise development units in Mogadishu, Kismaayo, Baidoa and Beledweyne.
The 24-member team of young experts in the units are delivering skills training and
support access to finance solutions throughout the network.

C.

Development coordination
42. On 7 December, the Federal Government, with United Nations support,
organized the Somalia Partnership Forum, the highest-level partner coordination body
in the country. The Forum, which combined a physical presence in Mogadishu and
online participation, was chaired by the Prime Minister and brought together federal
member state leaders, the Mayor of Mogadishu, Cabinet ministers, more than 35
international delegations, and civil society.
43. The discussion held at the Somalia Partnership Forum, which addressed issues
across the humanitarian-development-peace nexus, focused on the elections, the need
to strengthen political dialogue between federal and sub-federal levels, the Somalia
transition plan and the socioeconomic recovery from COVID-19 and climate-related
shocks. The United Nations urged greater collaboration between the Government and
partners on operationalizing the humanitarian-development-peace nexus. Participants
took stock of progress made since the previous Forum, held in October 2019, against
the priorities of the previous Mutual Accountability Framework and agr eed on
priority areas for action and support for a 2021 Framework, including outcomes to be
completed by the end of the current administration. The structures of the recently
operationalized refined aid architecture played a key role in preparations, repor ting
and negotiating forward-looking commitments.

8/18

21-01765

S/2021/154

IV. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
44. UNSOM recorded 363 civilian casualties during the reporting period,
comprising 200 killed and 163 injured, compared with 124 killed and 133 injure d
during the previous reporting period. Al-Shabaab remained the single largest
perpetrator, responsible for 144 casualties, followed by 115 casualties by unknown
actors, 76 by State security forces and 28 attributed to clan militias.
45. Authorities conducted 12 executions (6 in “Somaliland”, 3 in Mogadishu, 2 in
Jubbaland and 1 in Puntland) and courts, mostly military ones, issued 10 new death
sentences (23 in Mogadishu, 24 in Puntland 2 in South-West State and 1 in
Jubbaland).
46. A total of 61 individuals were arbitrarily arrested and detained, including
7 Al-Shabaab suspects, 14 journalists and 25 alleged clan militia members suspected
of being involved in the killing of a mother and her two children and the injury of
another child in Warshiikh district, Middle Shabelle, on 8 November. To date,
authorities have released 45 of the 61 individuals arrested and detained, while the
others remain detained without charges or appearing before a court as required under
the Code of Criminal Procedure.
47. On 10 December, authorities in “Somaliland” released the manager of Astaan
Cable television after he had reportedly received a presidential pardon. The manager
had been in detention in Hargeysa since 17 July 2020 on allegations of engaging in
espionage against “Somaliland” and operating a media house without a media
background. On 4 November, the Hargeysa Regional Court had sentenced him to five
years’ imprisonment.

B.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
48. UNSOM engaged partners to support human rights due diligence policy
mitigation measures for the additional 3,000 Somali security forces mandated under
resolution 2520 (2020) as eligible for UNSOS support. This engagement follows
guidance from UNSOS to the Federal Government on the applicable human rights
due diligence policy requirements to provide support. On 16 November, UNSOM
participated in a joint technical support initiative to develop a human rights policy for
the Ministry of Defence and the Somali National Army. On 29 November, UNSOM
and the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) held discussions on
measures to strengthen human rights due diligence policy compliance in the context
of UNOPS support for the Somali Police Force and the Somali National Army,
including the need to initiate a review of the 2016 and 2017 risk assessments for the
Somali National Army and the Somali Police Force, respectively.
49. UNSOM followed up on two incidents of alleged violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law by the Jubbaland police and AMISOM on
30 November. The Mission also provided leaflets for human rights due diligence
policy awareness and advocacy for the security forces.

C.

Children in armed conflict
50. The country task force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations against
children in armed conflict verified 1,121 violations affecting 1,112 children (924 boys
and 188 girls) and including 8 attacks on schools. A total of 395 children were

21-01765

9/18

S/2021/154

abducted, 254 children were killed/maimed, 375 children were recruited and used and
88 girls were victims of rape and other forms of sexual violence. The violations were
attributed to Al-Shabaab (774, or 69 per cent), unknown armed elements (161, or
14 per cent), clan militias (33, or 3 per cent) and federal and state armed forces (153,
or 14 per cent).
51. As part of the implementation of the children and armed conflict mandate,
UNSOM conducted a three-day virtual training on child protection and child rights
for 55 Somali National Army middle-ranking officers from 24 to 26 November. In
Galmudug, UNSOM held two face-to-face and additional virtual meetings in
November 2020 with the state Ministry of Internal Security on the establishm ent of
an inclusive children and armed conflict sub-working group in Galmudug, as set out
in the 2019 road map for the implementation of the 2012 action plans on the killing
and maiming of children and to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children .

D.

Prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
52. During the reporting period, 163 verified incidents of conflict-related sexual
violence were reported against 149 girls, 9 women and 5 boys. Those incidents were
attributed to unknown armed actors (56); clan militias (45); Al-Shabaab (30); the
Somali National Army (9); the Somali Police Force (7); Jubbaland security forces (9);
and Puntland security forces (7). Cases attributed to unknown armed men and clan
militias were due primarily to intensified clan attacks triggered by prolonged landbased clan disputes, as communities struggled with the impact of COVID-19 and
other humanitarian crises. The fragile security situation in settlements for internally
displaced persons also contributed to the increased targeting of women and girls.
Al-Shabaab also continued to practise forced marriage in areas under its control.
53. Continuing the advocacy for the enactment of the 2018 sexual offences bill,
UN-Women and UNFPA partnered with the National Union of Somali Journalists and
organized a campaign supporting the submission of the bill in Parliament. UN-Women
also undertook a public outreach campaign on the need to combat sexual and genderbased violence. Through 720 spot messages that were broadcast on radio and
television, it is estimated that the campaign reached approximately 30,000 people
across five federal member states.

V. Humanitarian situation
54. The triple threat of floods, COVID-19 and the desert locust upsurge aggravated
the humanitarian situation by worsening pre-existing vulnerabilities, disrupting
positive gains made in socioeconomic activities, affecting livelihoods and straining
the health-care system. Since 16 March 2020, 4,814 cases of COVID-19 have been
confirmed in Somalia, including 132 associated deaths.
55. Adverse weather patterns, including the ongoing impact of La Niña in 2020 and
2021, continued to affect many parts of the country. Cyclone Gati made landfall in Bari
region, Puntland, on 22 November, affecting 120,000 people, of whom 42,100 were
temporarily displaced. Humanitarian partners scaled up assistance to people affected by
the cyclone, aiding more than 78,000 affected persons. Emergency shelter, non-food
items and food relief assistance for some 5,000 households are still urgently needed.
56. The desert locust infestation spread to central, southern and northern parts of
the country, affecting close to 300,000 hectares of land. Almost 700,000 people
remain affected by the infestation. Crop and pasture production was estimated to be
10 to 15 per cent lower than the long-term average. The situation is expected to remain
10/18

21-01765

S/2021/154

serious until at least March 2021. In addition to aerial control efforts, partners scaled
up the response to affected populations, providing farming support to some 25,900
agricultural and agro-pastoral households during the gu and deyr seasons, with 7,468
farming households receiving cash support.
57. There was a decrease in reports of forced evictions. Through collective
advocacy, the eviction moratorium of April 2020 was extended to March 2021,
curbing the scale of evictions in parts of the country, in particular in Boosaaso,
Garoowe, Gaalkacyo, Dhuusamarreeb, Caabudwaaq, Cadaado and Baidoa.
58. Outside of major urban centres, the accessibility of some districts remained
limited, owing in large part to insecurity along main supply routes. As a result, in
some districts the provision of humanitarian assistance relied heavily on airlifts,
where the security around airfields and the physical condition of airstrips became
important factors limiting access. The scale and extent of flash and riverine flooding
had a critical impact on road access across affected parts of the country, in particular
to Xaafuun, Bari, following Cyclone Gati. Targeted violence against both
humanitarian workers and humanitarian assets continued to obstruct the ability of
humanitarian workers to reach persons in need. At least 15 humanitarian workers have
been killed, 13 injured and 24 abducted in Somalia since January 2020. There was
also a significant increase in the number of access incident reports in 2020 (245)
compared with 2019 (151).
59. By December, humanitarian partners had provided assistance to nearly 2.3
million people, having received 82 per cent of the $1.01 billion in funding required.
However, certain sectors were further from reaching funding target goals than others,
with most clusters, including key sectors such as health and water, sanitation and
hygiene, receiving less than 40 per cent of required funding.
60. The humanitarian situation will remain dire in 2021, and the total number of
people in need is expected to increase to 5.9 million from 5.2 million in 2020. The
Humanitarian Response Plan for Somalia is being finalized, and humanitarians aim
to assist 4 million people, including internally displaced persons, refugees and
returnees, to ensure access to basic services and livelihood support, while providing
life-saving food assistance to 3.1 million internally displaced persons and
non-internally displaced persons in crisis and who are facing food insecurity
emergencies. Approximately $1.09 billion will be required.

VI. Comprehensive approach to security
61. On 1 December, the Prime Minister convened a meeting of the Security and
Justice Committee involving senior representatives from the Federal Government and
the federal member states, as well as international partners. The meeting saw the
issuance of a communiqué that demonstrated a clear intent by all parties to revitalize
discussions on the political-security nexus and ensure appropriate strategic direction
of the strand committees, with key Mutual Accountability Framework commitments
on security and justice also confirmed at the Somalia Partnership Forum of
7 December. The Committee agreed to meet quarterly in 2021, with the relevant
federal security and rule of law ministries now leading the relevant strands.

A.

Operations
62. The Somalia transition plan has been finalized by the Federal Government and
will allow detailed operational planning to commence. A force generation conference,
announced by the Prime Minister on 1 December, should also be convened early in

21-01765

11/18

S/2021/154

2021, to confirm the transitional commitments and the resources required to deliver
the security transition by the end of 2021.
63. The Mine Action Service supported AMISOM and Somali security forces in
improvised explosive device threat mitigation by providing 19 threat-analysis reports,
3 supply route vulnerable point studies and 20 improvised explosive device awareness
reports.

B.

Institutional capacity-building
64. On 16 November, the House of the People of the Federal Parliament approved
five non-ex officio members to the Judicial Service Commission. Civil society
organizations such as the Somali Bar Association opposed the appointments and
claimed that they were based on clan affiliation and were unqualified in accordance
with the Commission’s Establishment Act. The Upper House has yet to endorse the
nominees. In the same session, the House of the People also approved the nominations
submitted by the Ministry of Justice for the nine members of the Somalia
Anti-Corruption Commission.
65. On 3 December, the Chief Justice of the Federal Supreme Court swore in 17
judges, including 3 justices appointed by presidential decree. Eleven justices now sit
on the Supreme Court, exceeding the five stipulated by law.
66. On 12 November, the Federal Supreme Court concluded a 10-day judicial
training for 37 judicial personnel (33 men and 4 women). The National Integrity
Coordination Unit of the Federal Ministry of Justice concluded a three-day workshop
held on 10 December on combating and preventing corruption.
67. On 10 November, the “Somaliland” Minister of Justice convened the juvenile
justice working group to strengthen the juvenile justice policy framework, and on
8 December, a three-day validation workshop of the “Somaliland” custodial corps bill
concluded.
68. On 28 December, the Commissioner General of the “Somaliland” custodial
corps reported that 32 male prisoners from Hargeysa central prison had completed a
vocational training and educational programme administered in conjunction with
Beder International University. The programme included vocational training on
plumbing and electricity, along with classes in basic education and sharia law.
69. The United Nations supported the Galmudug administration in re-establishing
the state police by coordinating training on human rights and community policing for
700 officers. UNSOM supported the state Ministry of Security in developing a
strategy for reintegrating ex-militias into civilian life.
70. On 14 November, the Somali Police Force drafted a strategic plan for the period
2020–2025. UNSOM advised the Somali Police Force to align the plan to all strategic
documents, including the national security architecture, prioritize community
engagement, expand the Federal Darwish and criminal investigation capabilities and
establish a diplomatic unit and a counter-terrorism directorate.
71. On 1 December, the joint police programme executive board approved funding
to build police stations in Cadaado, Galmudug and Kismaayo, Jubbaland, and to
procure equipment and pay stipends for police officers trained under the programme.
72. On 9 December, the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea assisted
in training 33 federal and state maritime law enforcement officials on ocean affairs
and the legislative framework required to govern the country’s maritime zones.

12/18

21-01765

S/2021/154

73. The Mine Action Service trained 39 the Somali Police Force personnel (29 men
and 10 women) under the mobile vehicle checkpoint project. Significant progress was
made in readying a base for the checkpoint teams from which to operate, as part of
efforts to equip Somali forces to assume responsibility for security.
74. In December, the joint security sector governance programme supported the
security ministries in South-West State and Galmudug in holding two workshops on
security sector reforms, human rights and gender for 50 officials (10 women and 40
men). The programme, set to end on 31 December 2020, was extended for a six-month
period to enable the design of the second phase of the programme, which will assist
in the implementation of the Somalia transition plan, the electoral process and civilian
oversight institutional development.

C.

Supporting activities
75. From 5 November 2020 to 4 February 2021, the Mine Action Service provided
explosive ordnance risk education to 1,178 women, 1,142 men, 2,233 girls and 3,016
boys. Risk education sessions were delivered in all regions of Somalia (except Middle
Jubba), including in Galguduud, which has the highest number of explosive remnants
of war/landmine accidents reported.
76. On 21 November, a new Preventing/Countering Violent Extremism Coordinator
within the Office of the Prime Minister was appointed to advance the country’s action
plan on preventing/countering violent extremism. On 17 December, a United Nations
preventing/countering violent extremism project steering committee was convened
by the Office of the Prime Minister with international partners. The current project
was extended until June 2021, and the road map of the consultant developing the new
multi-year programme, expected to start in the second half of 2021, was adopted.
77. Rehabilitation centres continue to accept low-risk former Al-Shabaab fighters.
As of 15 December, there were 302 men and 183 women beneficiaries in the centres.
For the first time in the defector rehabilitation programme’s history, 62 women
graduated, in addition to 35 men. Female participation increased from 56 in June to
183 in December. In November 2020, the Office of the National Security Adviser,
supported by the Panel of Experts on Somalia, the Mine Action Service and
international partners, led an assessment of the Halane armoury, where high
explosives are currently stored. The assessment report was circulated to all relevant
stakeholders by the Office early in January 2021. Recommendations on how to ensure
the safe management of high explosives will be taken forward.

VII. United Nations Support Office in Somalia support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali
security forces
A.

Support for African Union Mission in Somalia operations
78. In December, UNSOS completed the deployment of the contingent-owned
equipment of the Ugandan military aviation unit to Baledogle camp. The aviation
unit, under the command and control of the Force Commander, comprises a crew of
140 personnel and 4 helicopters, bringing the number of military aircraft to 7 of the
12 authorized for AMISOM.
79. In November, UNSOS completed the air movement of contingent-owned
equipment of the Ghana formed police unit to Baidoa, except for eight oversized
contingent-owned equipment vehicles that could not be flown and are currently in

21-01765

13/18

S/2021/154

Mogadishu. UNSOS awaits confirmation from the African Union, Ghana and
AMISOM to repatriate the oversized contingent-owned equipment to Ghana. The
arrival inspections of the Ghana formed police unit contingent-owned equipment and
Ugandan aviation unit were conducted virtually owing to COVID-19 restrictions. The
deployment of the Ghana formed police unit and Ugandan aviation unit are expected
to enhance the operational effectiveness of AMISOM.
80. UNSOS airlifted an additional 100 Djiboutian troops and 75 tons of field
defence stores to Dhuusamarreeb to enable the construction of a forward operating
base. Currently, 227 Djiboutian troops are deployed and the Federal Government,
AMISOM and the African Union are determining whether to establish a long-term
AMISOM presence in Galmudug.
81. The forward operating base wellness programme is progressing in all sectors,
albeit with delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and flood-damaged roads. To
date, 57 per cent of the locations under the programme have received allocated field
defence stores, with more than 4.7 km of ballistics barriers, 16 watchtowers and
11.5 km of ditches completed. UNSOS has recently received 30 armoured personnel
carriers, which will be handed over to AMISOM as part of a mission enabling unit,
to provide support in opening main supply routes. The water borehole drilling
programme also continues in all sectors.
82. UNSOS supported the rotation of 2,108 Burundian troops from 1 to
30 November, 160 personnel of the Ugandan formed police unit from 12 to
28 December, 1,450 Ugandan troops from 14 to 31 December, and 850 Djiboutian
troops from 6 January to 6 February. UNSOS has also supported the rotation of 3,416
Kenyan troops since 17 January. In accordance with COVID-19 mitigation measures,
all incoming troops underwent 14 days of quarantine in their home countries and upon
arrival in the mission. Similarly, outgoing troops were quarantined for 14 days in the
mission prior to departure to their home countries.
83. The Mine Action Service, with UNSOS assistance, continued to support
AMISOM security operations and stabilization efforts by providing improvised
explosive device threat mitigation advice, analysis, training and mentoring
concerning the use of specialized equipment, explosive detection dogs, and
community liaison and explosive ordnance clearance teams. During the reporting
period, the Mine Action Service trained 659 AMISOM uniformed personnel to
enhance their capability to locate and destroy improvised explosive devices and to
safely operate within the threat environment, specifically along the main supply
routes. The Mine Action Service contributed to the safety and security of strategic
infrastructure through the deployment of 24 teams working with 24 detection dogs to
conduct searches of 7,433 pieces of luggage, 33,339 vehicles, 42 buildings, 17,000 m2
of building areas and 2,727,300 m 2 of open areas throughout the sectors.
84. The Head of UNSOS held virtual meetings with senior officials from Burundi,
Djibouti, Ghana, Kenya and Uganda as part of her outreach to AMISOM troop - and
police-contributing countries.
85. On 23 November, the Head of UNSOS met virtually with Federal Government
senior officials, led by the Minister for Planning, Investment and Economic
Development, within the framework of the joint host country relations committee, to
discuss ongoing status-of-mission agreement-related violations. Among others, it was
agreed at the meeting that UNSOS and Federal Government counterparts would
explore the possibility of organizing a workshop to inform directors-general of federal
line ministries on the agreement and the mandate of the United Nations. UNSOS and
Federal Government counterparts would also work together to develop a standard
operating procedure to resolve future commercial disputes involving United Nations
contractors.
14/18

21-01765

S/2021/154

86. In mid-December, a Federal Government-UNSOS “contact group” was
established, with participation from the Office of the Prime Minister, to examine
issues and address concerns with respect to the employment of Somali workers and
the identification of opportunities for local Somali-owned businesses. In a subsequent
meeting, on 26 January, the contact group shared information on the opportunitie s
currently provided with regard to the employment of Somali nationals by UNSOS and
its contractors, including the number of contracts awarded to Somali contractors, and
resolved to continue to expand the range of opportunities.

B.

Support for Somalia national armed forces operations
87. UNSOS continued to support 10,900 Somali National Army troops and received
confirmation from the Federal Government of which units would fall under the
additional 3,000 Somali security forces personnel, pursuant to resolution 2520 (2020).
As advised by the Federal Government, additional support will be extended to 2,000
Somali National Army troops and 1,000 Somali Police Force personnel. As of
18 January, the balance in the United Nations trust fund in support of Somalia security
forces was $10.75 million, enough to sustain UNSOS support for the coming seven
months at current levels of expenditure. The Special Representative and the Head of
UNSOS, with the support of the Department of Operational Support, continued to
highlight the dire state of AMISOM and the trust fund and urged donors to contribute
generously to sustaining ongoing and planned security operations.
88. The Mine Action Service, with support from UNSOS, initiated the training and
equipping of five Somali National Army route search and improvised explosive
device disposal in situ teams, to enable safe operations in the high-threat improvised
explosive device environment in Lower Shabelle. Such training and equipping of a
further 15 teams are under way.

VIII. United Nations Presence in Somalia
89. United Nations entities continued to be present in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Berbera,
Boosasso, Dhooble, Dhuusamarreeb, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe, Hargeysa,
Jawhar, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. As of 8 February, 389 international staff and 1,348
national staff were deployed throughout Somalia.
90. The United Nations in Somalia continues to conduct its COVID-19 response,
including support for AMISOM personnel and operations. Adequate medical capacity
has been established to support a population at risk in excess of 25,000, which
includes the United Nations and its third-party contractors in Somalia, and AMISOM.

IX. Observations
91. Despite all the political challenges, Somali political leaders should continue to
strive to maintain dialogue to achieve the consensus necessary to press ahead with the
holding of elections. I therefore call upon all stakeholders to urgently resolve their
remaining differences on the way forward in the electoral process within the
framework of the agreement of 17 September and to hold elections within the shortest
reasonable delay possible. I also reiterate the need to maintain the provisions made in
the agreement for the attainment of at least 30 per cent representation of women in
the electoral process.
92. In this regard, I would like to underscore that it is imperative to come to a
broadly inclusive understanding on the implementation of the agreement of
21-01765

15/18

S/2021/154

17 September in order to safeguard the credibility of this process and to secure
stability in the country. I therefore encourage Somali leaders to engage in regular
dialogue until the conclusion of the election process, to identify and resolve
differences when they arise. In addition, I emphasize that the conduct of elections
must be peaceful and that the use or threat of violence is unacceptable.
93. UNSOM, jointly with UNDP and in collaboration with UNSOS, UNOPS and
UN-Women, will provide support to the electoral process through its good offices and
through technical, operational and logistical assistance to the Federal Government of
Somalia, once outstanding disputes have been resolved and within the limits of its
mandate and resources.
94. The holding of inclusive and peaceful elections as soon as possible is important
to renew the legitimacy of the Somali federal institutions and allow the further pursuit
of the many pressing tasks towards building sustainable peace in Somalia. These
would include work towards the holding of one-person, one-vote elections in 2024–
2025, to which the Somali authorities and partners committed themselves during the
previous Somalia Partnership Forum.
95. Recent progress towards the security transition in Somalia in 2021 is
encouraging. I welcome the key milestones of the past 18 months, which have led to
this point, including the conduct of the joint Federal Government of Somalia -United
Nations-African Union threat assessment, the revisions to the Somalia transition plan,
the meeting of the Security and Justice Committee, the holding of the Somalia
Partnership Forum and the report of the Independent Assessment, all of which have
advanced the discussions and laid the foundations for the security transition to take
effect in 2021. I call upon all stakeholders to continue to collaborate to sustain this
momentum. The implementation of the Somalia transition plan, as well as the
organization of a force generation conference, are important further milestones in this
regard, all of which will support the review of the AMISOM and UNSOS mandates
going forward.
96. I remain concerned about the dire state of the trust fund in support of AMISOM
and Somali security forces. In this regard, I note the ongoing efforts of my Special
Representative in Somalia, the Head of UNSOS and the Department of Operational
Support to mobilize donors to make contributions to the trust funds in support of the
transition of security responsibilities to Somali ownership and urge donors, both
traditional and new ones, to generously contribute to the trust funds.
97. In relation to humanitarian matters, I remain concerned that, during the electoral
period, there is a heightened risk of forced evictions of internally displaced persons,
which has been one of the main triggers of secondary displacement. The general
elections in 2016 saw the worst single mass eviction incidents, with more than
150,000 people evicted in Mogadishu alone. I also remain concerned about the
looming drought for parts of Somalia, with indications of water shortages in s everal
parts of the country due to poor or failed deyr rains and projected delays and a poor
upcoming gu rainfall in 2021. While recognizing the current global economic
predicament, I call upon international partners to continue to provide the funding
necessary to save lives and alleviate poverty in Somalia.
98. Notwithstanding the challenges that it faces, Somalia has demonstrated
remarkable resilience in facing COVID-19, with a low caseload. However, I remain
concerned about any lingering health and socioeconomic effects that the pandemic
may have, in particular on the country’s most vulnerable groups.
99. Continued Al-Shabaab attacks on Somali civilians, government officials,
Somali security forces, AMISOM and the international community are worrisome,
especially the corrosive effect that they can have in disrupting the elections. I urge
16/18

21-01765

S/2021/154

the Federal Government of Somalia, in collaboration with international partners, to
safeguard civilians and hold accountable those responsible for perpetrating these
egregious acts.
100. I remain concerned about the high number of cases of conflict-related sexual
violence, which disproportionately affects girls. I urge the Federal Government to
take steps to protect women and girls from sexual and gender-based violence by
enacting the 2018 sexual offences bill and by holding perpetrators of sexual violence
accountable. I also reiterate my previous calls to establish a national human rights
commission, which would contribute to improving the protection of human rights in
Somalia.
101. Progress on peacebuilding and State-building in Somalia is contingent upon the
continued support of the African Union, IGAD, the European Union, Member States,
non-governmental organizations and other partners, for which I am deeply grateful. I
pay tribute to AMISOM and Somalia security forces and remain mindful of the
tremendous sacrifices that they have made to protect the Somali people and in the
pursuit of peace and stability for the country.
102. I would like to conclude by expressing my appreciation to my Special
Representative, James Swan, and the United Nations staff in Somalia for their fir m
dedication in implementing the mandate of the Organization in Somalia in
challenging circumstances.

21-01765

17/18

S/2021/154

18/18

21-01765
