11.

38/54.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

lmplementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assemh/_1'.
Having examined the report of the Special ( ·ommittec
on the Situation with regard to the lmplemcntation of thc
Declaration on thc Granting of lndcpcndcnce to Colonial
Countries and Peoplcs. 89
Recaffing its resolutions 1514 (X V) of 14 December
1960, containing the Deelaration on the Granting of lndcpendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. 2621 (XXV)
of 12 Oetober 1970, containing the programme of action
for the full implementation of the Declaration, and 35/118
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the Plan
of Action for the Full lmplementation of the Declaration,
Recalling ali its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolution 37/35 of 23 November 1982, as well as the relevan!
resolutions of the Security Council.
Recalfing the relevant provisions of the Paris Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action on
Namibia adopted by the International Conferencc in Support of the Struggle of thc Namibian People for lndependence, held in Paris from 25 to 29 April 1983, 9 u
Condemning the continued colonialist and racist repression of millions of Africans, particularly in Namibia. by
the Govemment of South Africa through its persisten!,
illegal occupation of the international Territory and its
intransigent attitude towards ali efforts being made to
bring about an intemationally acceptablc solution to the
situation obtaining in the Territory,
Deep!y conscious of the urgent need to take ali necessary
measures to eliminate forthwith the remaining vestiges of
colonialism, particularly in respect of Namibia where desperate attempts by South Africa to perpetuate its illegal
occupation have brought untold suffering and bloodshed
to the people.
Strongly condemninx the policies of those States which,
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of thc United
Nations. have continued to collaborate with the Government of South Africa in its domination of the peoplc of
Namibia.
Conscious that the success of the national liberation
struggle and the resultant international situation have provided the international community with a unique opportunity to make a decisive contribution towards the total
elimination of colonialism in ali its forms and manifestations in Africa,
Welcoming the achievement of independence by Saint
Christopher and Nevis on 19 September 1983 and noting
with satisfaction the imminent accession to independencc
of Brunei, scheduled for 31 Decembcr 1983,
Noting with satisfaction the work accomplished by thc
Special Committee with a view to securing the effective
and complete implementation of the Declaration and the
other relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
Noting a/so with satisfaction the co-operation and active
participation ofthe administering Powers concerned in the
relevant work of the Special Committec, as well as the
continued readiness of the Governments conccrned to
receive United Nations visiting missions in the Territories
under their administration.
89 /bid., Supp/ement No. 2] (A/38/23).

90See Report ofthe lnternationa! Conferencc ,n Support of thl' Struggll' o(
the Namibian Peop/e far lndependencc, Pam·. 25-29 1¡,ri/ /983 (A/
CONF.120/13). paras.165-195 and 220-242

43

Rctlcmting its conricu,m that the total eradication of
racial discrimination. apartheid and violations ofthe basic
human rights of the pcoples of colonial Territories will be
achieved most expeditiously by the faithful and complete
implemcntation of thc Declaration. particularly in
Namibia. and by the speediest possible complete elimination of the presence of the illegal occupying régimes therefrom.
Kccn/1· awarc of the pressing needs of the newly independent and emerging States for assistance from the
U nited Nations and its system of organizations in the economic. social and other lields.
l. Rcafjirms its rcsolutions 1514 (XV), 2621 (XXV)
and 3 7/35 and ali other rcsolutions on decolonization and
calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with
those resolutions, to take ali necessary steps to enable the
dependent peoples of the Territories concerned to exercise
fully and without further delay their inalienable right to
sclf-detcrmination and independence;
2. .-1/jirms once again that the continuation of colonialism in ali its forms and manifestations-including racism,
apartheid. the exploitation by foreign and other interests of
cconomic and human resources and the waging of colonial
wars to suppress national liberation movements-is
incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 91 and the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and poses a serious threat to intemational peace and securitv:
3. Rcafjirms its dctcnnination to take ali necessary
steps with a view to the complete and speedy eradication
of colonialism and to the faithful and strict observance by
ali Statcs of thc relevan! provisions of the Charter, the
Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and the guiding principies of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
4. .--lf!irms once again its recognition of the legitimacy
of the strugglc of the peoples under colonial and alien
domination to exercise their right to self-determination
and independence by ali thc necessary means at their disposal:
5. .--lpprovcs the report ofthe Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples covering its work during 1983. including
the programme of work envisaged for 1984; 92
6. Ca/Is upon ali Statcs, in particular the administering
Powcrs. and the specialized agencies and other organizations ofthe United Nations system to give effect to the recommendations contained in the report of the Special
Committee for the speedy implementation ofthe Declaration and the other relevant resolutions of the United
Nations:
7. Condemns the continuing activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the colonial
Territories. particularly Namibia;
8. Strongly condemns ali collaboration. particularly in
the nuclear and military fields, with the Govemment of
South Africa and calls upon the States concerned to cease
forthwith ali such collaboration;
9. Requcsts ali States. directly and through their action
in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system, to withhold assistance of any kind
from the Govcrnment ofSouth Africa until the inalienable
91 Resolution 217 A (111).
9 2 O/jic,a/ Rccords ,fth<' General Assemblr, Thirtv-c1gh1h Session, Supp/emcnt Yo .'3 (A/38·'2:l). chap. l. secl. S.

General Assembly-T:..:h:..:ir:..:t,_y-:..:e~ig'.:::h:..::th::..:..:S_:_es:..:s_io_n_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

44

right of the people of Namibia to self-determination. and
independence within a united and integrated Namibia.
including Walvis Bay. has becn restored. and to. r_efram
from taking any action which might imply recognit1on ot
thc legitimacy ofthe illegal occupation of Namibia by that
régime;
10. Ca/Is upon the colonial Powers to withdraw immediately and unconditionally their military bases and installations from colonial Territories and to refrain from establishing new ones:
11. Urges ali States. directly and through thcir aetion
in the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system. to providc ali moral and material
assistance to the oppresscd people of Namibia and. in
respect of the other Territories. requests thc administcring
Powers. in consultation with the Governmcnts of thc Territories under their administration. to takc steps to cnlist
and make effectivc use ofall possible assistancc. on both a
bilateral and a multilateral basis. in the strengthcning of
the economies of those Territories:
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) in ali
Territories that have not yet attained independence and. in
particular:
(a) To formulate specific proposals for the elimination
of the remaining manifestations of colonialism and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth
sess10n;
(b) To make concrete suggestions which could assist
the Security Council in considering appropriate measures
under the Charter with regard to developments in colonial
Territories that are likely to threatcn international peacc
and security;
(e) To continue to examine the compliance of Mcmber
States with the Declaration and with other relevan! resolutions on decolonization. particularly those relating to
Namibia;
(d) To continue to pay particular attention to the small
Territories. including the sending of visiting missions to
them. as appropriate, and to recommend to the General
Assembly the most suitable steps to be taken to enable the
populations of those Territories to exercise their right to
self-determination, freedom and independence:
(e) To take ali necessary steps to enlist world-wide support among Governments. as well as national and international organizations having a special interest in
decolonization. for the achievement of the objectives of
the Declaration and the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations. particularly as concerns
the oppressed people of Namibia:
13. Ca!ls upan the administering Powers to continue to
co-operate with the Special Committee in the discharge of
its mandate and, in particular. to permit the access of visiting missions to the Territories to secure first-hand information and ascertain the wishes and aspirations of their
inhabitants;
14. Requests the Secretary-General and the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system to provide or continue to provide to the newly
independent and emerging States all possible assistance in
the economic. social and other fields;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Committee with the facilities and services required for
the implementation of the present resolution. as well as of
the various resolutions and decisions on decolonization
93 !bid., chap. 11

adopted by the General Assembly and the Special Committee.
86th p/enarr meeting
7 December 1983

38/55.

Dissemination of information on decolonization

/"he General .·L11cmh/_r.
l!aring examined the chapter ofthe report ofthe Special
Committee on thc Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for
thc work of the l ·nited Nations in the field of decolonization. 9 '
Reca/ling its rcsolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960. containing the Declaration on the Granting of Indepcndencc to Colonial Countries and Peoples. and ali other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations concerning the dissemination ofinformation on decolonization, in
particular General Assembly resolution 3 7/36 of 23
November 1982.
Rcacrating the importance ofpublicity asan instrument
for furthering the aims and purposes of the Declaration
and mindful of the continuing pressing need to take ali
possible steps to acquaint world public opinion with ali
aspects of the problems of decolonization with a view to
assisting effectively the peoples of the colonial Territories
to achieve self-determination. freedom and independence.
A 1mrc of the increasingly important role being played in
the widespread d1ssemination ofrelevant information by a
number of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in decolonization. and noting with satisfaction
the intensified efforts of the Special Committee in enlisting
the support ofthose organizations in that regard. including
its decision to organize in Europe in 1984 a seminar on
dccolonization wi th thc non-governmental organizations
conccrned.
1. Approres the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on thc Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for
the work of the l lnited Nations in the field of decolonization:
2. Reatfirms the importance of effecting the widest oossible dissemination of information on the evils and dangers of colonialism. on the determined efforts of the colonial peoples to achieve self-determination. freedom and
independence and on the assistance being provided by the
international communitv towards the elimination of the
rcmaining vestigcs of coÍonialism in ali its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General. having regard to the
suggestions of thc Special Committee. to continue to take
concrete measures through ali the media at his disposal,
including publications. radio and television. to give widespread and continuous publicity to the work of the United
Nations in the ficld of decolonization. and. inter afia:
(a) To continue. in consultation with the Special Committee. to collect. prepare and disseminate basic material.
studies and articles relating to the problems of decolonization and. in particular. to continue to publish the periodical ObJectil'e: .!11stice and other publications, special anides and studies. including the Deco/onization series, and
