NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l607)

Adoption

of the agenda

(a)

. . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .

1

. .. , . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .

1

Letter dated 4 December 1971 from the Permanent
Representatives
of
Argentina,
Belgium, Burundi, Italy, Japan, Nicaragua; Somalia, the United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 104 11);
Report of the Secretary-General (S/ 104 10 and Add. 1);
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
along the cease-fire line in
Kaslimir (S/10412)
. . . _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , ,

1

S/PV.1607

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

eld in New York

President: Mr. I. 13. TAYLOR-KAMARA

AND

on Sunday, 5 December

(Sierra Leone).

MEETING
1971, at 2.30 p.m.

statement. My attention has been drawn to an article in
today’s issue of The New York Times entitled “United
States asks Security Council ta press for a cease-fire”. The
publication appears to allege that exchanges of an unpleasant nature took place between the representative of
the USSR, my dear friend and colleague Ambassador Yakov
M&k, and myself during the procedural aspect of the
Council’s work at yesterday’s emergency meeting of the
Council. Ambassador Malik, a very able and experienced
diplomat, has also been a friend of Sierra Leone. He is one
of the representatives in this body whose views I respect
greatly. For the information of all, I wish to state clearly
that it was not my intention to be indifferent to my Soviet
colleague. I may add further that my country has for years
now had diplomatic relations with the USSR and we have
been on the best of terms.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/lGQ7)
1. Adoption

SEVENTH

of the agenda.

Letter dated 4 December 1971 from the Permanent
Representatives of Argentina, Belgium, Burundi,
Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Somalia, the United King
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1041 1);
Report of the Secretary-General (S/10410 and
Add.1);
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
along the cease-fire line in Kashmir (S/ 10412).

3. 1 would also add an apology for starting the meeting so
late. It would appear that we should have asked for an
adjournment of 24 hours instead of 12 hours in order to
hold consultations.
4. At the Council’s meeting yesterday I referred to a letter
from the represelftative of Tunisia [S/10413], in which he
supported the request made by nine delegations to convene
an urgent meeting of the Security Council. At the same
time I indicated that in a second letter [S/10414] the
representative of Tunisia had requested that he be authorized to participate without vote in the relevant discussion
of the Security Council. Taking into account both communications from the representative of Tunisia, I would
propose, with the consent of the Council, to extend such an
invitation to him, in accordance with the practice that has
been followed on previous occasions.

Adoption of the agenda
me agenda was adopted.
(0) Letter dated 4, December 1971 from the Permanent
Representatives
of AQentina, Belgium, Burundi, Italy,
Japan, Nicaragua, Somalia, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Coum5l (S/1041 1);
fb) Report of the Secretary-General (S/l0410 and Add.1);
(c) Report of the Secretary-General on the situation along
the cease-& line in Kashmir (S/10412)

At the invitation of the President, Mr, S. Sen (hidial and
Mr. A. Shahi (Pakistan) took places at the Council table.

5. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I should like to
tsk for clarification of exactly what this procedure means.
Was this the only request? Would this be the only
additional person to participate in the deliberations of the
Couocil? Are there any other pending requests still before
the &Council at this point? I ask this because we were
strongly supportive of our Italian colleague’s position
yesterday. We remain supportive; we feel that the matter is
SO urgent that the Council members, given the participation
by India and Pakistan, must address themselves to this first
step of trying to get some resolution that C&I solve this
problem and cause this bloodshed to cease. With all due
respect for our very cherished colleague from Tunisia, I
would like to know exactly what is pending in temls of
additional participants.

2. The
practice

6. Our own MCW reluctantly remains the way it was
yesterday: in support of the Italian representative’s position

1. The PRESIDENT:
At yesterday’s meeting the COUIIC~~
decided to invite the representatives of India and Pakistan
to participate in the discussion of the item on its agenda
without the right to vote. In accordance with that decision,
and with the consent of the Council, I propose to invite the
representatives of India. and Pakistan to take places at the
Council table.

PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the required
of the Council, I wish to make a very brief
1

that until we get a first-step resolution we must insist that
participation be confined to the members that are at the
table right now.
7. ’ Mr. VIlsCI (Italy): I am grateful to the representative of
the United States for having recalled the suggestion I made,
on which we were fully agreed around this table.
8. However, if I remember correctly, you, Mr. President,
made a statement at the end of our meeting yesterday that
you would give the floor to the representative of Tunisia at
the next meeting-which is today. I think we owe it to the
representative of Tunisia to let him spe& today, I think we
made an appeal to him yes&day; he showed full understanding and met our desires.
9. But before mentioning any other request on any side-1
think we should not embarrass anyone else-1 feel that in
the case of the representative of Tunisia we also have to
take into account the fact that he supported the request to
convene this meeting; so that is one more reason why I
believe we owe it to him to let him speak, although I would
think that the decision taken yesterday should be respected
with regard to other requests. Therefore, I think it would
be better not -to get involved with or speak about other
requests’ at this time; we might coinmence ,that later on in
order not to embarrass anybody.
10. Mr, MALIK

12. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): What I had
requested was clarification. I received it from the represep
tative of Italy. Certainly, I am in accord with what he said,
and would be prepared to proceed accordingly.
13. Mr. FARAH
reads:

(Somalia):

Article 31 of the Charter

“Any Member of the United Nations which is not a
member of the Security Council may participate, without
vote, in the discussion of any question brought before the
Security Council whenever the latter considers that the
interests of that Member are specially affected.”
14. I submit that the matter before this Council is one
which intimately affects all States Members of this Orgap
ization if we wish to uphold the principles of the United
Nations, which are very much at stake.
15. For that reason my delegation would support the
request of the representative of Tunisia to be aflowed to
give us the benefit of his views, and the request of any
other delegation which might also have submitted a similar
request.

(Union

of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I believe that to deprive delega.,
lions which are Members of the United Nations of the right
to participate in the discussion of questions which are on
the agenda would be unprecedented. Throughout the entire
existence of the Security Council, the practice whereby
every delegation of a State Member of the ‘United Nations
has had the right to participate in the discussion of any
question being considered by the Security Council and to
state the views of its Government has been strictly
observed. That is why I personally feel that there were
absolutely no grounds for depriving the delegation of
Tunisia of that right yesterday, despite my great respect for
the representative of Italy, and, a Sirtioiori, there are no
grounds for depriving it of that right today, as the
representative of the United States is implying.
(translated porn Russian):

11. In my opinion, there is no need to link the granting of
that right to the representative of Tunisia to the question of
whether there are other delegations wishing to speak at
Security Council meetings on ihe subject under consideration. Any representative and any State Member of the
United Nations has the right at any time to address a
request to the President of the Security Council and, after
the President has informed the Security Council of it, the
Security Council decides whether to invite the delegation in
question and permit it to participate in meetings without
the right to vote. I do not recall any cases where such
requests have been refused, although I have had occasion to
participate in many meetings of the Security Council. I
think, therefore, that we are wasting time in discussing this
question. In my opinion, the representative of Tunisia
should be invited and, if there are requests from other
delegations, ,those delegations, too, should be invited and
we should neither question this nor discuss it in order not
to waste them.

16. Mr. KUI/,AGA (Poland) (interpretation from French):
I shall be very brief. For the legal reasons that have just
been raised by our colleague from Somalia, and also far
reasons of practice and custom in the Security Council, as
the representative of the Soviet Union has just suggested,I
am in favour of extending an invitation to the representti
tive of Tunisia and any other representative who may wish
to participate in our debate,
17. The PRESIDENT: I should like to make a short
statement in reply to the representative of the United
States. Only ‘one application remains, and that comes from
the representative of a Member State. I do not know
whether members wish to use rule 37 and approve that
application. Since there have been no further comments I
take it that the Council approves that application, and I
shall make reference to him.
18. If there are no objections I shall now invite the
representative of Tunisia to take a place at the side of the
Council chamber on the understanding that I shall call on
him to take a seat at the Council table when it is his turn to
address the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. R. Driss (TuMa)
took the place reserved for him in the Council chamber,

19. The PRESIDENT: As I have already explained, 1have
received a letter from the representative of Saudi Arabia in
which he asks to be allowed to participate without the right
to vote in the discussion of the item under consideration.
20. If there are no objections I shall now invite the
representative of Saudi Arabia to take a place at the side of
the Council chamber on the understanding that 1 shall call
on him to take a seat at the Council table when it is his turn
.to address the Council.
21. Mr. VINCI (Italy): First of all I want to make itqaite
clear that my delegation does not in any way question the
2

right of any Member State not a member of the Council to
take part in our debates if it feels its interests are affected. I
did not know that the other request was made by
Mr. Baroody. I am sure that-and this has been shown-no
member objects to listening to the views the representative
of Saudi Arabia would like to submit to us. As a matter of
fact, WI? always follow his statements with great attention
and interest. I for one have always benefited fromhis great
knowledge and wisdom, which he shares so generously with
us, and therefore I should like to emphasize that we are
certainly happy to hear whatever he has to say to us.

East Pakistan, at yesterday’s meeting the Soviet representative advanced an argument based on population statistics.
This reminds one of the fact that in order to split China and
engineer the so-called independence of Taiwan, the representative of another super-Power put forward at a meeting
of the present session a similar argument, io the effect that
the Chinese province of Taiwan has a population of over 10
million. This is indeed a coincidence. This is a true duet.
30. The Soviet representative has proposed that the
representatives of the so-called Bangla Desh take part in the
meetings of the Council, that their opinions be heard and
their document be distributed. This is glaring interference
in the internal affairs of Pakistan as well as a trampling
upon the United Nations Charter, to which any country
that upholds justice cannot agree. We agree with the view
expressed by the representative of Argentina that, if the
United Nations were to do so, it would be creating an
extremely dangerous precedent.

22. May I make just one suggestion concerning the order

of Our business: if we could proceed with our normal work
and try to act as we have urged since yesterday-at great
speed, if possible, and at least at a better pace than
yesterday-and if in the course of our work we take no
action, or do take action, the floor could be given to the
representatives who are not members of this Council who
have asked to be allowed .to speak to us.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. J. Buroody [Saudi
Arabia) took the place reservedfor him in the Council
chamber.

23. Mr.

MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): Mr. President, I should like to

express my gratitude to you for having clarified the
position with regard to the fabrication published in today’s
edition. of 172s New York Times concerning you and
myself, But, in view of my experience over many years, I
am not surprised by such attacks by The New York Times,
and I therefore urge you not to pay any attention to it.
24. I think that comments like this in flze New York
i%rles, as in any other newspaper, will in no way affect our
good and friendly relations,

31. We should like to ask the representative of the Soviet
Union a question, In 1962 the Soviet Government engineered a counter-revolutionary rebellion in China’s Sinkiang
province, and carried out subversive and divisionist activities against China. Several tens of thousands of Chinese
civilians who were forcibly taken away by it still remain in
its hands. It has used some of them for anti-Chinese
scheming activities. Is it going to use Mr. Malik’s logic with
regard to the Pakistan refugees, as a pretext for launching
armed aggression against China? Is it also going to invite
those people to the United Nations to justify its subversion
and aggression? Wang Ming, a traitor to the Chinese people
and a renegade to the Communist Party of China, has all
along been reared by you as a treasure and as a tool for
subversion against China. Is it also going to invite him to
the United Nations?
32. At present outside your country there exist quite a
few people who oppose the Soviet Government and are
attempting to establish a so-called independence movement.
According to your principles, are you also going to agree to
invite them to the United Nations?

25. The second question I should like to raise is that of
inviting Bangla Desh. This question was discussed here
yesterday, and you, Mr. President, decided that we should
postpone consideration of it until the next meeting, that is,
until today’s meeting.

33. We hope to receive a reply frorn the Soviet representative .

26. I would invite you, Mr. President, in accordance with
your ruling, to take a decision on that question ‘too, before
we begin the substantive part of today’s meeting of the
Security Council,

34. The PRESIDFNT:
of India.

27. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (transzatedfrom Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is of the view that the question of
the invitation of the so-called representative of Bangla Desh
is a substantive and not a procedural question.

I now call upon the representative

35. Mr. SEN (India): I am glad to see that practically all
those who have spoken about the application of the
representative of Bangla Desh tu be heard by the Council
have treated this problem as a substantive problem.
Therefore, I should like to make a few comments, although,
following yesterday’s point of order by our friend and
colleague from Italy, I am not sure whether, under rules 37
and 38 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Counci,l,
delegations such as mine, which have been invited here by
courtesy, are really out of order in making comments on
points of order.

28. The representatives of the Soviet Union and India are
singing a duet openly trumpeting for the dismemberment of
Pakistan in a sinister attempt to impose upon the United
Nations the so-called Bangla Desh which they have created.
This act of subverting and dismembering a sovereign
country runs completely counter to the United Nations
Charter and is definitely not permjssible.

36. However, to begin with I shall simply reply to the
Chinese delegation’s standard accusations with standard
indifference. I shall simply say that we have no experience

29. In order to achieve the dismemberment of Pakistan
and to realize their scheme of the so-called independence of
3

of interfering in other people’s affairs so long as they do
not interfere in ours. Other countries have vast experience
in such interference and can always warm up to the subject.

the dismemberment
before the Council.

of Pakistan, That is the real issue

37. With respect to Eangla Desh, we are discussing a most
serious matter, and I think everyoue round the table is
agreed that the major party in the problem we are
discussing is Bangla Desh. The elected representatives of
Bangla Desh represent 75 million people, which is the
majority of the whole population of Pakistan.

43. The real issue is whether a so-called representative oi
Bangla Desh, which is not recognized by any State in le
world and which is a creature of the Government of India
created in order to bring about the dismemberment of
Pakistan, is going to be invited to speak before this Council
to tell us about the facts of the situation that we are
considering. That is the real issue.

38. Now let us turn to rule 39, which states:

44. Let this Coiincil act with the fullest sense of respok

sibility.
“The Security Council may invite members of the
Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers competent for the purpose, to supply it with information or
to give other assistance in examining matters within its
competence.”

45. Now let me quote rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council:

39, Let us start by analysing the sentence backwards. We
assume that the subject we are discussing is a matter within
the Council’s competence. The only question is: can the
representative of Bangla Desh supply us with information
or give us assistance in discussing this matter? If the
Council decides that such a representative will not be in a
position to supply information or give other assistance
relevant to examining the question before us, then of
course the Bangla Desh representative will have no grounds
for being dissatisfied if the Council rejects his request. If,
on the other hand, the Council is satisfied that he can
supply us with information and give us assislance in
examining matters within its competence, then I think that
under rule 39 the Council can easily invite him. Speaking
for myself, 1 have not the slightest doubt that he can,
should and must supply us with information and extend to
us other assistance which will help us in appreciating the
problem before us, a problem of great dimension and of
great gravity, and which will also help us to reach a
satisfactory conclusion.

Whom can the Security Council invite? It can invite
“members of the Secretariat” or it can invite “other
persons”-individuals-not
those claiming to represent a
Government which is not recognized and is not a Member
of the United Nations. How does rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure apply? Yet this proposal has been
pressed lipon the Security Council since yesterday. If the
Council accepts the proposal that has been put forward by
the representatives of the Soviet CJnion, India and Poland,
then it would be contravening not only the fundamental
provisions of the Charter but also rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

“The Security Council may invite members of thz
Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers conk
petent for the purpose, to supply it with information ar
to give other assistance in examining matters within its
competence.”

46. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated porn Russitan): Mr. President, during the state-

I call on the representative of

ment of the Chinese representative I could, of course, with
every justification have asked you to interrupt that statement, since he touched on questions which have no bearing
whatsoever on the item under discussion. But, considering
that he is new here and has much to learn, I did not do so.

41. Mr. SHAHI (Pakistan): Although on a strict interpretation, or any interpretation, of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council parties not members who
are invited to speak at the Council table cannot participate
in a discussion of the kind that has been raised by the
representative of the Soviet Union, I am compelled to
intervene, since the representative of lndia has been allowed
to make statements because he considered the problem to
be a substantive one.

47. His statement convinces us even more that the main
purpose of his participation in the work of the Security
Council has not been to co-operate in a business-like
manner in this main organ of the United Nations, which is
responsible for strengthening peace and international secu.
rity, but to invent and reiterate monstrous slanders against
the Soviet Union. That is a thankless task.

42. Yesterday I advauced a nmnber of arguments of the
most fundamental nature against the proposal put forward
by the representative of the Soviet Union. I maintain that
rules of procedure must be interpreted in accordance with
the letter and the spirit of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, and one of the furcmost
principles of the Charter is the territorial integrity of
Member States. The proposal before us is to accord
recognition to a group of persons who represent a secessionist element-a secessionist force organized, armed,
nurtured and propped up by India in order to bring about

49. The iuternational authority and prestige of the Soviet
Union are such that no slanders can succeed in shaking
them. We have won this authority wi,th our own blcod,
with the lives of millions upon millions of Soviet citizem
who fought for the freedom of the whole of mankind.
Tomorrow we are celebrating in our country an important
hoiiday, the thirtieth anniversary of the victory of the
Soviet people near Moscow on GDecember, and the Soviet
delegation would like to recall that date in connexion with
the question raised by the representative of China. That
event had great influence not only on the fate of the Soviet
people but also on the fate of all mankind.

40. The PRESIDENT:
Pakistan.

4

49. Tomorrow will be the thirtieth anniversary of the
beginning of the offensive of the Soviet troops near
Moscow and the beginning of the end for fascist Germany.
The battle for Moscow did not bring about a radical turn in
the course of the war; it only marked the beginning of such
a turn. However, it sharply changed the character of the
armed struggle throughout the rest of the war. The Moscow
victory contributed to the further unification of the forces
of the anti-fascist coalition, gave life to the resistance
movement in the countries occupied by Germany, dispelled
the myth of the invincibility of the German armed forces
and strengthened the confidence of the enslaved peoples of
Europe in the inevitability of liberation from the fascist
yoke; it was also a source of encouragement and a help to
those Chinese who were struggling against Japanese imperialism. The victory of the Soviet people near Moscow was
in large measure a guarantee that the allied forces would be
victorious in’ the Second World War, a victory which led to
the establishment of the United Nations. It is symbolic that
the decision to establish this universal international Organization for the maintenance of international peace and
security was taken in the territory of the Soviet State, a
State which made a decisive contribution to the defeat of
the fascist aggressors,and which has as the guiding principles
of its foreign policy the principles of the struggle for peace
and international security and peaceful coexistence among
States having different social and political systems and the
principle of extending all possible assistance to national
liberation movements.

terror and the sufferings and death of millions upon
millions of East Pakistanis. The Soviet delegation spoke of
this in detail in the statement it made yesterday.
53. Who can best inform the Security Council of what
actually happened in East Pakistan if not the representatives of those 10 million people who fled to a foreign
country and of all the 75 million East Pakistanis? To
deprive them of the right to speak here in accordance with
universally recognized practice and the rule of procedure
which has already been cited here-1 shall not repeat
it-amounts to taking the side of those who forced those
millions of people to leave their land, their homes and their
houses and to flee to another country.
54. Of course, it is the easiest thing to blame someone
else. In the words of a Russian proverb, that, as we have
already said, amounts to “shifting the blame from a sick
head to a healthy one”. Perhaps these methods will also be
used here by those who want to divert the Security
Council’s attention from the main cause of the conflict and
the deteriorating situation in the Indian subcontinent. But
it will not convince anyone and will only unmask the true
intentions of those who resort to such unconvincing and
contrived excuses.
55. Mr. KUI/AGA (Poland) (interpretation fbrn French):
In the brief remarks I am about to make, I should like to
keep to the question which, Mr. President, in accordance
with your ruling yesterday, we are to decide upon today,
that is, the invitation to Bangla Desh, without going outside
the scope of our agenda item. We took a stand yesterday
and we take a stand again today-in favour of an invitation
to the representatives of Bangla Desh. We do so on the basis
of the same premise, that it is impossible to solve the
present conflict without taking into account the reasons for
it. These reasons are known to us; we spoke about them
yesterday in our statement and we shall not dwell on them.

50. In the Moscow Declaration of 30 October 1943, the
Governments of the United States of America, the United
Kingdom, the Soviet Union and China declared:
“That they recognize the necessity of establishing at the
earliest practicable date a general international organization, based on the principle of the sovereign equality of
all peace-loving States, and open to membership by all
such States, large and small, for the maintenance of
international peace and security.”

56. That is why our delegation considers that not to hear
the representatives of the Bangla Desh-the elected representatives of that people-would be a mistake which might
affect the work of the Security Council in so grave a
question as that of the solution of the conflict on the
Indian subcontinent.

51. That is what the Soviet people fought for and that is
what 20 million Soviet people gave their lives for. And if
that had not been the case, we would have been the slaves
of German fascism and the Chinese would have been the
slaves of Japanese militarism. Yes, that is a historical fact
and it is shameful for the Chinese representative to slander
the first socialist State of workers and peasants in the
world-the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

57. If this proposal were to be rejected, the Security
Council would be depriving itself of the possibility of
hearing the opinion of a party that is very vitally concerned
in the solution of the conflict; it would be rejecting its right
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council to invite any “persons, whom it considers
competent for the purpose, to supply it with informa
tion . , .“. In the present circumstances this seems to be
particularly appropriate.

52. I believe that we can discuss the question of SovietChinese relations with the Chinese representative elsewhere.
It is not the subject of today’s meeting. However, the
statement of the Chinese representative had an obvious
political purpose, that of diverting attention from the main
cause, the real cause of the conflict in the Indian
subcontinent and from the monstrous and bloody reprisals
against the populatioh of East Pakistan. That is the main
cause of the conflict-violence,
terror, depriving millions
upon millions of people of their elementary rights-it is that
which forced them to flee to a foreign country in order to
save their lives. And the purpose of the statement of the
Chinese representative today is to divert attention from
that main and fundamental cause, to cover up the bloody

58. Those are the reasons why we support the proposal to
invite the representatives of the Bangla De&, a proposal
which is based on the principle according to which all
parties to a conflict must be heard as well as the practical
considerations which are directly related to the discharge of
the duties of the Council.
59. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (trunshztedfiom Chinese): I
believe that the suggestion made by the Soviet delegation is
5

not a procedural one but rather a matter of substance. It is
an attempt to establish the international status of the
so-called “Bangla Desh” before the conflict between India
and Pakistan is discussed here in the United Nations. It is an
attempt to make the United Nations Security Council an
accomplice in this kind of activity and the Chinese
delegation is firmly opposed to this.

66. NOW the point to be clarified is whether the motioaei
the representative of the Soviet Union is that we invite the
representative of a foreign Government, I need this hification to be able to vote, since it is very important; that ir
to say, I should like to know whether this is a Government
and whether it is one that any State Member of the Unit4
Nations has recognized. This is very important because it b
no longer a matter of a person-to which rule 39 of tht
rules of procedure refers-but rather the representative ofa
Government and, whatever the outcome of the vofinp
might be, I personally would not wish it to be interpreted
as either recognition or non-recognition of that Govera
ment .

60. Mr. Malik has painted his own face well, but the
cosmetics are not related to facts. The reality should be
judged by the people of the Soviet Union and the people of
the world,
61. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Chinese representative has
put on a magnificent show for those who delight in
dissension between China and the Soviet Union, He
deserves their praise.

67. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I did not today raise the paint of
order I had raised yesterday, since I assumed that when the
Ambassador of India took the floor he agreed that this is a
question of substance. I think that the main parties
concerned, the Ambassadors of India and Pakistan, wer*
perfectly entitled to speak on this question if they
considered that it was a substantive question.

62. But I should like to add one more thing and explain to
al1 whom it may concern that the problem of the crisis in
East Pakistan and the problem of almost 10 million East
Pakistan refugees has already been discussed and is being
discussed in United Nations bodies, and, if we were to hear
the representative of Bangla Desh concerning the origin,
cause and development of this terrible human tragedy and
the sufferings of millions upon millions of people, we
would be following the practice of those United Nations
bodies which are already dealing with the matter.

68. NOW the Ambassador of Argentina has raised another
point, which I think is very pertinent. For my part, I said
yesterday that you, Mr. President, in my view, acted very
correctly when you circulated the communication we are
speaking of in accordance with the appendix at the end of
the provisional rules of procedure. After rule 61 there isan
appendix, which says the following:

63. The PRESIDENT: At this juncture, may I state that I
had intended to refer to this problem myself in the
following words:

“A list of all communications from private individuals
and non-governmental bodies relating to matters of which
the Security Council is seized shall be circulated to d
representatives on the Security Council.”

“Members of the Council are aware that the representative of India, by a letter dated 4 December 1971, which
was circulated in document S/10415, had forwarded a
letter from Mr. Abu Sayeed Chowdhury of Bangla Desh,
requesting to be allowed to make a statement before the
Council. This has apparently now been followed by a
motion from the representative of the Soviet Union that
that application should be acted upon. However, there
appears to be an objection to the proposal. In the
circumstances, it is my intention to put the matter to the
vote for a decision by the Council, unless I hear any
further comemnts.”

69. This is what you did, Mr. President, and we approvld
your action. Now we have another letter, a communicatbn
from the representative of India. I think we are confronted
with a very complex situation. When you said yesterday,
Mr. President, that we would defer this question to a MU
stage, it was my understanding that we would start
consultations. I think it would be advisable to have
consultations on this question, which raises so many
aspects. The debate that has already taken place shows 110~
difficult, and perhaps even insoluble, it is-at this stage at
least.

64. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, yesterday afternoon I already
stated the point of view of my delegation on this question.
But since you are now gning to put to the vote the proposal
submitted by the representative of the Soviet Union, it is
very important for my delegation, for the purposes of
casting its vote, to know whom we are inviting.

70. Therefore I would suggest that, rather than going on
with a procedural debate of this kind, which will delay our
work further, we should follow the line of action that you
have taken, Mr. President; that is, to start consultations.
Then, when our minds are clear regarding what sort cf
question we are confronting and what sort of decision we
have to take, we can proceed to act.

65. Mr. President, you have referred to document S/10415
and to the letter contained therein. The last paragraph of
that letter reads:

71. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated f?om Russian): I shall answer the question asked
by the representative of Argentina by saying that the Soviet
delegation proposed that we invite the representative of
Bangla De& as a competent person on the item under
discussion by the Council. In connexion with this, a
reference was made to rule 39 of the rules of procedure. la
my opinion, the suggestion by the representative of It&’
that consultations should be held is reasonable and deserves

“As the representative of the people and Government
of Bangla Desh, I have already requested you to allow me
to make a statement before the Council on behalf of the
people and Government of Bangla Desh, as and when the
Council is convened to discuss this crisis. . . .”
6

b
1
1

attention. Since this proposal has been made, my delegation
will not insist on a vote.

propose that clauses ‘strongly condemning Indian armed
aggression against Pakistan and demanding the immediate
and unconditiona1 withdrawal of all Indian armed personnel
that have invaded Pakistan territory be added to the draft
resolution under consideration.

72. The PRESIDENT: It is now clear that the representatives of Italy and the USSR, the formal proposer, have
asked for further consideration by way of consultation on
the subject. Unless objection is raised to this suggestion I
propose to adjourn the question to a later date for further
consultations.

77. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Tunisia to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

It was so decided.

78. Mr. DRISS (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
First of all, and at last, I thank you, Mr. President and
members of the Security Council, for having authorized me
today to take part in the debate on the deterioration of the
situation between India and Pakistan. Therefore, in accordance with custom, while paying tribute to the work of your
predecessor, our colleague and friend Ambassador KuYaga
of Poland, I wish to address to you on behalf of the
Tunisian delegation our sincere congratulations in respect
of the important duties which you have been discharging
for some days now and to express our wishes for success in
these very difficult hours when more than one conflict is
threatening to engulf our planet and the Security Council
should fully fulfil the role assigned to it under the Charter.

73, The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
consider the substantive item on the agenda. The first
speaker on my list on the substantive question is the
representative of China.
74. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated porn Ckirzese):
The Chinese delegation has presented a draft resolution
(S/10421],
to the Security Council on the question for
consideration by the members of this Council. Now I
should like to make some explanation, briefly, with regard
to this draft resolution. An argument has been raised to the
effect that a request can first be made for a cease-fire by
both India and Pakistan, and the cessation of all military
actions, although the question of withdrawal of military
forces can be deferred to a later date. That is an argument
to which we definitely cannot agree, because the present
objective situation is that the Indian Government has
brazenly carried out subversion and aggression against
Pakistan and flagrantly sent troops to invade Pakistan
territory. In these circumstances, the key to the realization
of peace and security on the subcontinent is that the Indian
Government’s subversion and aggression must be immediately stopped. Indian troops must withdraw from Pakistan
territory immediately, unconditionally and completely.

79. Indeed, the deterioration of the situation between
India and Pakistan is not the only problem of concern to
the United Nations and on which the Security Council is
called upon to pass judgement, but it is by far the most
urgent and the most dangerous for peace at present.
80. Yesterday we believed that the limitation of the
debate to the members of the Security Council and to the
representatives of Pakistan and India, as proposed by our
friend Mr. Vinci of Itdy, would facilitate the adoption of a
quick decision on at least an immediate cease-fire. That did
not happen, and the Council was unable to exercise its
powers. Let us hope that it will be able to do so soon, by
making an urgent appeal to.the parties concerned for an
end to the fighting while we continue examination of the
question and proceed to a vote on the substantive resolutions in the course of the present meeting. This proposal
migh.t perhaps be taken up by a member of the Council, or
by yourself, Mr. President.

75. The demand for only a cease-fire in place by the two
sides, without a demand for withdrawal of Indian troops, is
in effect tantamount to conniving at and encouraging
aggression and to recognizing the Indian aggressor troops
remaining in Pakistan territory as legal. To do so would be
of no help whatsoever to the settlement of the arms
conflict between India and Pakistan or the relaxation of
tension in that area. On the contrary, it would only bring
extremely grave and dangerous results. Just as the representative of Somalia said yesterday, have not the resolutions
passed by the United Nations on the question of the Middle
East, which failed to demand the immediate withdrawal of
Israeli aggressor troops from Arab territory but only called
for a cease-fire in place, resulted in legalizing the fruits of
aggression and imposing them on the Arab countries and
people and in creating in the Middle East the danger of
aggression and war on a still larger scale?

81. ‘During the past few days a situation which was already
fraught with danger, and born of a latent conflict, has, for a
multitude of reasons, become a veritable war-like situation,
with everything war involves in terms of destruction,
victims and casualties-and more victims and casualties.
New unhappiness and further tragedy are thus being added
to the problems of millions of refugees-problems
which
were rife throughout the region and whose dimensions are
staggering. The turn of events has become increasingly more
alarming and nothing reassures us, neither what we read or
hear daily, nor the official statements of the Governments
of the countries concerned and their representatives, nor
the report of the Secretary-General, nor even the deliberations of the Security Council, which does not seem bent on
action.

76. The United Nations should in no way repeat time and
again such a grave error of principle. Should it do so, the
people throughout the world who uphold justice will have
every reason to accuse the Security Council of being an
accomplice in the scheme of India and her behind-thescenes boss, Soviet social imperialism, to invade and OCCUPY
Pakistan territory and to dismember the State of Pakistan.
We sincerely call upon the sponsor States to give serious
consideration
to such evil consequences. Therefore, we

82. President Bourguiba, the Tunisian Government and
the Tunisian people, like everyone in our region of the
world, are concerned, alarmed, overwhelmed. That is why,
7

on the instructions of President Bourguiba and the Tunisian
Government, and moved by the scale of the conflict with
its unforseeable consequences, I come before the Council to
plead the cause of peace. The acts of war must come to an
end immediately. The Security Council should give an
order-or should at least appeal-for an immediate ceasefire, so that peace, re-established on the basis of justice and
clarity in ‘accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
will at last permit a solution of the outstanding problems
and bring about a reconciliation. Tunisia pleads for peace
and against war, for justice and against injustice, every.
where that peace is threatened and justice is flouted.
83. On 2 December the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Tunisian Republic published a communique on the situation between India and Pakistan in which it is stated, in
particular :
“The Head of State has expressed his opinion that the
peace-loving .nations, and in particular those of the Middle
East, although largely preoccupied by their own specific
problems, are in favour of a peaceful settlement of the
problem of the situation in India and Pakistan, in respect
for unity and the territorial integrity of Pakistan,”
The communique adds:

tions. Seldom have the possible consequences been SO
grave.“’
We all know that the voluntary repatriation of refugeesis
the best solution-indeed the only solution. The sooner it
happens, the better it will be. A climate of confidence is
necessary for the flow of refugees to be stopped and for
voluntary repatriation to be brought about. That will be
possible only if all those concerned show a spirit of
co-operation and mutual understanding, which is so vital,
87. In the Third Committee a few days ago we debatedat
length the problem of refugees. Two draft resolutions were
adopted, but they have not yet been submitted for the
approval of the General Assembly in plenary meeting, in
spite of their urgency. Something does not seem to be
working properly in our system, when urgent questions are
neglected. We are on the moon; we are dreaming. We are
moon-struck, while our planet is aflame. The United
Nations has thus far avoided considering the political
consequences of the immense problem of the Pakistani
refugees in India, especially ln terms of the threat to peace;
and yet the Secretary-General has constantly drawn the
attention of the Members of the United Nations to this
aspect of the problem. Thus he has written in his report:
“In a disaster of such vast proportions, the international
community has a clear obligation to help the Govern.
ments and peoples concerned in every possible way. But,
as I have indicated, the basic problem can be solved only
if a political solution based on reconciliation and the
respect of humanitarian principles is achieved.“2

“The President has expressed the hope that Pakistan
will take the necessary measures to create a climate of
peace and concord in East Pakistan such as to hasten the
return of refugees to their own homes. President Bourguiba considers that the despatch of United Nations
observers to the region would constitute an appropriate
measure to silence the weapons and permit the beginning
of a constructive dialogue between the two parties.”

88. India and Pakistan are two sister countries with which
my country maintains the best relations. Their proximity
with each other necessitates close co-operation, and frequently involves them in regrettable confrontations, but all
in all those confrontations are temporary. The international
community must help them in overcoming their difficulties,
and not profit from those difficulties. When peace between
neighbours is involved, and’especially when the peace of the
world is involved, nothing must prevent the United Nations
from carrying out its duty. Tunisia, for its part, will
associate itself with all nations and peace-loving peoples in
working unstintingly for the triumph of that noble ideal.

84. Since then the situation has continued to deteriorate.
War is raging - The Security Council must act.
85. It is evident that the problem started zo arise as soon
as the refugees from East Pakistan crossed the border into
India in large masses. Secretary-General U Thant, to whom
I wish ‘to pay tribute, made an appeal for aid to the
refugees. The High Commissioner for Refugees, His Highness Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, Mr. Kittani, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Inter-Organizational Affairs and subsequently Mr. Paul-Marc Henry, Assistant to the SecretaryGeneral for Help to the Populations of East Pakistan, as
well ‘as their assistants, have all attempted to alleviate the
sufferings of millions of human beings, victims of the
special situation in the region. The work they have
aacomplished and continue to accomplish, in conditions
which are frequently difficult and perifous, is worthy of
every tribute.

89. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Saudi Arabia to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
90. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Thank you, Mr. President and members of the Council, inchrding my two good
friends Ambassador Vinci and Ambassador Bush, for being
gracious enough to allow me to address the Council on this
critical question. I happen to be an Asian and it stands to
reason that I should be concerned with war in Asia
somewhat more than my Italian and United States Cd
leagues-with all due regard to their deep interest in the
mother of continents, from which I happen to hail and
which is thousands of miles away from both Italy and the
United States.

86. At the end of the summer session of the Economic
and Social Council in Geneva, after a debate of five hours
without interruption or respite, I considered it to be my
duty, in my capacity as President of the Economic and
Social Council, to make a statement, which is contained in
the report of the Council, and I should like to quote two
sentences from that statement:

1 Of$cial Records of the Genera1 Assembly,
Supplement
No. 3, p, xiii.
ZIbid.,
SupplementNo.
IA para. 191.

“Seldom has the international community been confronted with a refugee problem of such gigantic propor8

l%Jenfy-sixth

Se~sioK

I
I

91. It may seem to some of you quite paradoxical that a
communist Ambassador, Yakov Malik, should defend the
right of monarchist Baroody to participate in your deliberations. It shows you that things have changed in the world.
Neither one of us is a bugbear to the other and I do hope
that harmony will prevail amongst all colleagues in the
future.

97. I advisedly used the word “fair” to qualify the word
“peace” because no absolute justice can prevail in war, nor
for that matter in the aftermath of war, as I myself
observed after the First World War and after the Second
World War. Furthermore, you gentlemen here do not
constitute a tribunal to pronounce yourselves with precision on what may be considered a just or unjust settlement.
More than ever I am convinced that we have not made any
significant progress in handling international conflicts since
the days of the League of Nations, and simply because
neither the Charter nor the Covenant of the League of
Nations has transcended the national interests of individual
States.

92. In regard to the wisdom which my friend Ambassador
Vinci said I proferred generously to the Council, I must tell
him that I am still a humble student who is still learning,
not so much from books nowadays as from the peculiar
workings of my colleagues’ minds and their skill in parrying
issues through the instrumentality of the rules of procedure.

98. From what most of you have observed last night and
today, who can challenge the fact that the Asian subcontinent is being made a chequerboard of power politics,
when the big Powers are still avid, as they have been in the
past, to play that game with a view to consolidating their
respective spheres of influence? Both the United States and
the Soviet Union, independently of each other, declared in
Washington and Moscow that the situation was fraught with
the great danger that it might involve the great Powers in
the Indian-Pakistani conflict. I am paraphrasing. The Soviet
Union went so far as to say-and I am also paraphrasingthat the stand it is taking on the question has to do with its
own self-defence.

93. My intervention today will involve some probing of
the policies that are being adopted by certain Powers-with
this proviso that if I am wrong in my assessmentof the
situation, I gladly stand to be corrected. But I have been in
the United Nations long enough to have learned a few
things and I hope that you will not consider me presumptuous
enough to claim that I am infallible. I invite anyone
to refute certain facts which I will present to you.
94. Having witnessed the proceedings of the Council last
night and this afternoon-with draft resolutions and tentative texts wafting in the air of the Council like autumn
leaves
whilst a full-scale war is being waged between two
sister States in the Asian subcontinent, perpetrating untold
sufferings on the innocent on both sides-I felt constrained
to address myself as objectively as humanly possible to this
human tragedy.

99. The representatives of the non-permanent members of
the Council have come out in their draft resolutions with
such preambular phraseology as: “Convinced that hostilities
along the India-Pakistan border constitute an immediate
threat to international peace and security”. This is from the
draft resolution in document S/10419. Another quotation
is: “Gravely concerned that hostilities have broken out
between India and Pakistan which constitute an immediate
threat to international peace and security” [S/l 04171.

95. Last night a United States draft resolution wasvetoed
by the representative of the Soviet Union because Ambassador M&k considered it one-sided and that it more or less
exclusively served the interests of Pakistan. I had a chance
when I came to the Council Chamber this afternoon to read
the draft resolution submitted by the representative of
China and, judging by what I have seen, I have no doubt
but that Ambassador Malik will turn it down on the
grounds that .it is against India. If the Soviet draft
resolution were pressed to the vote I am afraid that the veto
would be applied to it because one or two of the major
Powers may consider it unfair to Pakistan. Is that not the
situation before us? It becomes quite understandable why
the non-permanent Powers have seen fit to try to synthesize
the text of a draft resolution which they hope would be
acceptable not only to the warring parties but to the major
Powers, which have chosen sides and which, unfortunately,
are diametrically opposed to one another in regard to, how
this sad problem should be resolved.

100. The defunct United States draft resolution in docu.
ment S/10416, rendered defunct by the veto of Ambassador Malik, also refers in the second preambular paragraph
to the threat to international peace and security in the
following words: “Convinced that hostilities along the
India-Pakistan border constitute an immediate threat to
international peace and security”.
101, Curiously enough neither the Soviet nor the Chinese
draft resolutions refer to the India-Pakistan hostilities as
constituting a threat to international peace and security. It
is we small States-I do not know, the United States may
consider it, they have a great interest in that continent and
they may consider it-but we small States are frightened. I
tried to find such references in the Soviet draft resolution,
references to the threat to peace and international security,
and I could not find them. Nor could I find them in the
Chinese draft resolution. The Soviet draft resolution [S/
104181 refers to the letter of nine members of the Security
Council and calls for a political settlement in East Pakistan,
and then you know the rest of it. The Chinese draft
resolution has nothing at all to say, unless they have added
something-have you added something? Yes, I saw that:
“Noting in particular that India has launched large-scale
attacks on Pakistan, thus gravely undermining the peace in
the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent” [S/10421]. That is only in

96. I submit that no draft resolution would be entirely
satisfactory to all parties concerned. The alternative would
be a draft resolution with semantic expressions that could
be interpreted differently by one party or the other and
thereby would resolve nothing. Such draft resolutions
might be considered as covering some areas of agreement
between even the warring parties as well as the major
Powers, agreement on a set of principles without grappling
with the real issue at stake, namely, how to stop the
fighting and pave the way to a fair and just peace between
India and Pakistan.
’
9

the subcontinent, not international peace and security
involving the whole world in a third world war. If you
consider international peace and security as something
between two sides, this is bilateral peace and security. No, I
noted that; I am glad you gave it to me,
102. Gentlemen, I am afraid you are making a lot of
hullabaloo-is that an American term? -about resolutions.
In the English language which I speak it is “much ado”
about resolutions. It is not the resolutions that count but
the will to have them observed or whether they will be
implemented or enforced.
103, Three big Powers have involved themselves in the
India-Pakistan conflict, namely, the United States, the
Soviet Union and China. Let us see how obviously each of
those big Powers stands, without going into many details.
To put it simply, the Soviet Union apparently is siding with
India, China with Pakistan, and the United States seems to
have tipped the balance in its policy in favour of Pakistan.
Why? Ask them, I am not going to ask them.
104. Another point is quite obvious. China is a wholly
Asian country and has frontiers with India and Pakistan.
The Soviet Union has boundaries with China and also with
Pakistan. That is what I thought. I do not have the benefit
of the map which my colleague, Ambassador Bush, had,
Can you lend it to me? The trouble is that we cannot do
away with the great Powers because we have sometimes to
borrow their maps. I do not see the United States on the
map; it is several thousand miles from China, and also from
the Soviet Union, as well as from the Asian subcontinent
which has become the chequerboard of those three Powers.
105. In fairness to those three big Powers, they are not
primarily responsible for the unfortunate situation as it
obtains between India and Pakistan, and I shall not go into
the substance of the conflict. Suffice it to say that I have
every reason to believe that those three big Powers will not
make the same mistakes they have committed in Korea and
Viet-Nam. In other words, I am inclined to believe that
they will not send troops either to India or Pakistan,
although this does not mean that they will not send
“advisers” who on the whole are military men in civilian
clothes or woIves in sheep’s clothing. This is a figure of
speech: no offence, please.

107. Who bisected Korea? The Russians and the Amerim

ains.They drew a line through it called the thirty-eighth

parallel, which meant in fact a bisection of that unhappy
land. Theywere ethnologically the same people and th!sti
land wasbisected.
108. We are not talking about Korea, you may saY,hut it
has a bearing, and this I will show in the thesis which I am
going to lay before the members of the Council.
109. The Soviet Union supported North Korea with arms,
and the United States was joined by 15 other We&r
States in a war against North Korea-four years of warI,
because each of the big Powers froze its policy. Those orhrr
15 Powers, you know, were adjuncts. We were sounded OS!
about joining, and I was one who said: “We will never join
in a war waged by one brother against his own brother.”
110. Do you not draw any lesson from the Korean&al’?
Was it not’ enough that the French, with their famouj
political sagacity, saw that Indo-China was untenable snJ
left it?
111. Again, what did they do? The major Powers were
divided. Some were on the side of South Viet-Nam, and the
others were on the side of North Viet-Nam. And the wdr
has not yet ended.
112. Now they do, not have to divide a country; there are
‘two countries on the subcontinent, and, instead of doing

something radical, we witness here solidified policies ai
reflected in draft resolutions. Suppose there is what you
would call a compromise draft resolution: a cotnpronli~ in
words, not more and not less. And the war will continue on
the subcontinent.
113. Sir, I want to be frank, and I am sure you welcome
frankness because I can see frankness on your face. \vhat
should be done? More draft resolutions? I submit that
resolutions without the collective will to act will bring USto
nought. I believe that the differences between the big
Powers are strategic. China: nobody can contest that it bar
emerged during the last two decades as one of the big
Powers of the world, no matter how modestly they talk
about their being a developing Power; we are all developing.
It has organization; it has population-700 or 800 million.
It now has know-how; it woke up from the days of the
Manchus; it has become a model State. The Chinese llav*
their own ideology-that is their privilege-and they are a
Power to contend with. They happen to be neighbours of
the Soviet Union, another major Power that came out frcm
an agrarian society during the time of the Tsars to be One
of
the mightiest Powers on earth-of course, we never fc%et
the United States.

106. Have we not learned, during 25 years, how to deal
intelligently with a question which confronts us by benefiting from the mistakes of the recent past-for instance, in
the 21 years since the Korean war? I wassitting in this very
chamber during the discussion of the Korean question, and
none other than our colleague Mr. Malik walked out of the
chamber. And then what happened? There was no one to
veto a resolution which constituted what they called then
“the Little Assembly” of 46 States, of which the Soviet
Union and two other Soviet delegations, as well as, I
believe, two or three other socialist countries, were not
members. I, for one, made a statement that it would be
futile to discuss the question of Korea without the presence
of the Soviet Union. Finally, the LittIe Assembly-as you,
Mr. Stavropoulos, will remember-faded away, and there
was a war which lasted for four years. The Chinese sent
volunteers-they thought, of course, that Korea wasin their
area and that they should help another Asian country.

114. Now, of course, every country speaksfor itself; 1am
not delving into the motives of States. But W& shdd
China not be apprehensive that if it does not consolidate
itself in Asia, it might perhaps be subjected to seute
invasion or war? On the other hand, the Soviet Union,
because of the friendship that exists between Chins and
Pakistan, immediately signed a friendship pact-1 do set
know whether it contains any secret provisions, they tell us
that it does not-with India, lest there be a line barring it
10

I@*
[
1
E

from the hot waters

of the Arabian Sea and the Bay of

Bengal. These are strategic considerations, nothing new. It
reminds me of the era before the First World War when
Russia, France and England were allied against Germany. It
is a question of juggling for positions-I would say, strategic
positions.
115. Where does the United States come in? Well, the
United States is a world Power and it wants to make sure,
as it tells us, that that whole area does not fall into
Communist hands; and its delegation is sitting here near the
Communists
and is faced by the Communists. After
Khrushchev came on the scene the United States initiated
with him what was called a “policy of coexistence”,
Therefore, why this interest in Viet-Nam, and now in the
subcontinent?
For what? Trade? The Communists are
trading with the capitalists. The Soviet Union has received a
big deputation of American capitalists to do business with
them. Italy’s Fiat, I think, has a big project, and they are
net communists. They are labour-oriented. But they are a
great State with tradition. And then China is receiving
Mr. Nixon, the President of a capitalistic State. I think they
are doing business with another capitalist State, none other
than Japan-two
years ago to the extent of $600 million
per annum, and they might attain one billion dollars next
Year. Therefore, why are you big Powers taking sides? You
cannot afford to wage war on one another because of the
lethal weapons that you have in your arsenals that will do
away with Powers, big and small, and with peoples, and
may probably bring an end to humanity.
116. Well, it might appear that I am oversimplifying the
question. I am not oversimplifying the question, I challenge
the big Powers amongst us to tell us what will be derived if
this conflict trails on with so much suffering and tribulation.
117. The hour is late and I see that more draft resolutions
are being distributed, I mentioned that they were like
autumn leaves being wafted in the Council. I will say these
draft resolutions
will come to nought judging by my
experience in this very Council which has passed so many
resolutions that were not implemented. Then why have I
taken the floor-just
to challenge the big Powers and tell
them that they should do something? No. It is to make a
suggestion. Perhaps someone will take it. If you leave it, it
may have to come from Members who are not here if this
tragedy goes on without respite, as I am afraid it will.
118. I suggest that you, Sir, and the members of the
Council take into account the fact that India and Pakistan
are Asian countries, and that other Asian brothers should
handIe this question, not necessarily in rhe Council,
although it can be done, but through the instrumentality of
the United Nations. The United Nations would be the link
if a resolution is adopted by this Council, to call on Asian
Chiefs of State not to send an appeal, but to meet in a small
country.
In order not to exacerbate religious sensibitities, it
shouId be neither Hindu nor Muslim. It should immediately
call for a meeting of Asian Chiefs of State and try to pour
oil on troubled waters: not to appeal, not to adjudicate, but
to resort to Asian magnanimity to put an immediate end to
the war with a solution that will be acceptable. It will be an
Asian solution not a United Nations solution, but through

the instrumentality of ‘the United Nations-because if you
adopt such a resolution you will ask the Secretary-General
to try to have the Asian States, or at least 20 of them, meet
in a country like Ceylon, for example, which I believe is
Buddhist, or any such country, where they ,will put their
heads together and see to it that this sad conflict will come
to an end. The big Powers would be barred from such a
convocation, although if they wanted to, they could send
observers. Otherwise, I predict, you will be adopting
resolutions in this very Security Council, just as on Korea,
on Kashmir, on Palestine and on many other regions-I am
not speaking only of regions of Asia-you have adopted
resolutions’ that were not implemented, that were not
observed. It can be done through the instrumentality of the
United Nations-more
specifically the Secretary-General,
You can empower him to invite the Asian Chiefs of State to
meet in a neutral country as soon as possible, to put their
heads together and improvise a solution that will satisfy the
warring parties and also save the taxpayers of the big
Powers from the purchase of billions of dollars’ worth of
arms to be sent to those parties that are warring on the
chequerboard where big Power politics are being unfolded.
/,
Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
from Russian): The delegation of the Soviet
Union considers it necessary to make a few comments
directly relating to the item under consideration and, in
connexion, to state its views on and its assessment of the
draft resolutions which have been submitted.
120. During the examination of the item being considered
by the Council, the Soviet delegation has gone into
sufficient detail in showing and stressing the cause of the
armed conflict which has broken out in the Indian
subcontinent. It is quite obvious that the main cause is to
be found in the well-known actions of the Government of
Pakistan against the population of East Pakistan. This is
quite evident both from the report of the Secretary-General
[S/10410] and from the detailed facts which were adduced
in the statement of the Indian delegation. Even the Pakistan
representative himself, as has already been pointed out,
acknowledged in his statement the existence, continuation
and seriousness of the political crisis in East Pakistan,
which, as is now clear to all, has become international in
character and has given rise to international consequences.
The consideration of this question in the Council has
shown, however, that the ‘representatives of certain countries are attempting to side-step the main issue, to shut their
eyes to reality and to distract the Security Council and
consequently the United Nations from the real causes of
the conflict and of the events which are taking place in the
Indian subcontinent. And yet it is quite obvious that the
Council’s attention should be focused on the situation
which has developed in East Pakistan as a result of the
actions of the Pakistan authorities and which is the real
cause of the conflict. I cannot agree with my friend,, the
Ambassador of Saudi Arabia, that anyone else is responsible
for what happened and what is happening in East Pakistan.
Unfortunately,
in the statements of some representatives,
including the statement of the representative of one State
which is a neighbour of India’s, an attempt was made to
distort the true picture of the situation, to pass over in
silence the real cause of the conflict and to make it look as
if India was “inciting” the struggle of the people of East

Pakistan against the Pakistan authorities. This version of the
story is contrived and completely groundless; its Purpose is,
first, to justify the policy of violence and terror carried out
in East Pakistan and, secondly, to shift the blame. Actually,
as a result of the consideration of this question in the
Security Council, it is becoming quite obvious that the
heart of the matter is precisely the fact that the repressive
actions of the Pakistan authorities against the inhabitants of
East Pakistan have led to the death of many thousands of
peaceful people and have caused nearly 10 million Persons
to flee to neighbouring India to savetheir lives.
121, Several speakershere have tried to convince us that it
would be “unprecedented” for.the Security Council to deal
wit11this main and real causeof the conflict. Attempts have
also been made to take cover behind the clause regarding
so-called “non-intervention in the domestic affairs of other
States”. And yet it does not take much work or effort to
understand quite clearly that this very phenomenon-the
flight of almost 10 million people from their own camtrY
to another country in order to savetheir lives-is in itself an
unprecedented event, and, what is more, this unprecedented event has had serious international consequences;it
has resulted in the deterioration of the situation in the
Indian subcontinent which has now been recognized in an
official document signed by the representatives of nine
members of the Security Council and in reports of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
122. The course of the discussion in the Security Council
has also shown and confirmed that the armed resistance of
the people of East Pakistan to the punitive actions of the
Pakistan armed forces has not been brought about by any
Indian intrigues but is the natural reaction of people who
are subjected to cruel measures, violence and terror. The
course of the discussion and the second report submitted to
the Security Council by the Secretary-General (5’/10412
and Add.1 and 2/ has confirmed in a factual and welldocumented manner the incontestable fact that the military
operations were undertaken and initiated by Pakistan and
not by India. Those military operations were undertaken
because the Government of Pakistan, unable to cope with
the resistance of the 75 million inhabitants of East
Pakistan, instead of eliminating the real causes of the
ConfliCt,
took military action against India, including the
bombing of Indian cities, attacks on Indian posts, shelling,
and the violation of India’s territorial integrity. The
Purpose of those actions wasto divert attention from the
real cause of the deterioration of the situation in the Indian
subcontinent and to cover up the Pakistan Government’s
inability to cope with the serious internal political crisis in
East Pakistan.
123. The development of that crisis has shown that the
Pakistan authorities have in fact reached an impasse in their
Policies with regard to East Pakistan. Having found themselvesin such a position, they are now trying to find a way
out by attacking India. By initiating military operations,
they are obviously counting on transforming the problem
of East Pakistan from an internal one to an international
one and solving it through the intervention of the major
Powers and the United Nations. As can be seen from
Mr. Baroody’s statement, that is how he has understood
this action by Pakistan. To judge from the nature of the

debate on this question in the Security Council, and in View
of the well-known fact that the United States WAS particu.
larly insistent that a meeting of the Council should be
convened urgently and has submitted to the Security
Council a draft resolution which is clearly pro-Pakistan, it is
becoming quite obvious that Pakistan is placing its hopes in
assistance from the United States.
124. On the other hand, it is also obvious that the United
States is being led by Pakistan and is ignoring the real cause
of the conflict in the Indian subcontinent, trying its Utmost
to support Pakistan’s assertion that it is India which is
responsible for the conflict in that region.
125. China is following the same course, to judge from the
statements of the Chinese representative and the content of
the draft resolution he has submitted.
126. The position and approach of the Government of the
United States are being sharply criticized even by the
American press. The leading article in one of today’s
newspapers says quite openly that the United States
Administration is ignoring the fundamental threat to India
which has been created by the Government of Pakistan a~a
result of the terrorist repressions in East Pakistan. In statiog
this opinion, the same newspaper concludes that the United
States has openly taken a position of false impartiaIity,
which has led to an intensification of the conflict between
India and Pakistan.
127. Furthermore, the newspaper stresses that the funda.
mental threat to India resulting from the cruel repressions
by the Pakistan authorities in East Pakistan is thereby being
disregarded.
128. In their statements, representatives have spoken of a
cease-fire between India and Pakistan, However, marry of
them do not link the question of a call for the cessation of
hostilities with a call to the Government of Pakistan to
eliminate the main cause of the conflict. Yet the course of
the discussion in the Council has shown that the main,
fundamental and essential point is precisely that the
question of the hostilities and the conflict in the Indian
subcontinent should be linked with a call to the Govern.
merit of Pakistan immediately and unconditionally
to
recognize the will of the people of East Pakistan as
expressed in the elections of December 1970, which have
already been described here in detail yesterday and at
today’s meeting. Both these questions ahodd be organically
linked. What does this mean? It means that only the people
of East Pakistan, through their elected representatives, can
decide their future fate. No one should deny the rights of
the representatives elected by this people,
129. Through their elected representatives the people of
East Pakistan are also free to decide on the renewal of
negotiations with the Pakistan Government. And yet, under
the proposals which were submitted to the Security Council
yesterday and, it has become apparent from the course of
consultations today, as is now being suggested by the
representatives of the Western and some other countries, as
before, the question of the hostilities should not be linked
to the question of the need for a political settlement of the
situation in East Pakistan; this problem is also not dealt

with in the Chinese draft resolution, The first question is
stressed, while the second main question-the main causeof
the conflict-is completely ignored. And yet, it is precisely
this question, which, as has repeatedly been noted and
stressed, is the main and decisive cause of the outbreak of
the conflict in the Indian subcontinent.
130. Attempts have been made to give events in East
Pakistan a certain religious colouration. However, according
to the information available, approximately 60 million of
the 75 million people living in East Pakistan are Muslims
and up to 2 million of the 10 million refugeesare Muslims.
The violence and terror carried out by the military
authorities in East Pakistan have therefore had not a
religious but a political basis, with all the attendant results.
131. An attempt has also been made in statements and
draft resolutions to adopt the same attitude towards both
India and Pakistan. What is more, one delegation has
followed the course of putting all the blame on India alone.
That can in no way be justified. Such an approach is devoid
of any foundation and it is therefore quite impossible to
agree with it. It is impossible to adopt the same attitude
towards both India and Pakistan, since the latter, unable to
cope with the internal crisis in East Pakistan, has undertaken a diversionary manoeuvre in attacking India, bombing
a number of its cities and other inhabited areas, attacking
Indian posts and shelling Indian territory. Pakistan troops
invaded Indian territory. This is how Pakistan acted, since it
was unable to achieve a peaceful settlement of the internal
crisis in East Pakistan and crush the resistance of the
population of East Pakistan.
132. This is the heart of the matter and the real cause of
the conflict. And no one, including the Security Council,
has any right to overlook it.
133. The position of the Soviet Union with regard to the
serious deterioration of the situation in the Indian subcontinent is set out in the TASS statement of 5 December
1971, which was issued today as Security Council docu
ment S/10422. The members of the Security Council and
Missions to the United Nations will be able to acquaint
themselves with that document.
134. As to the draft resolutions, the delegation of the
Soviet Union will insist on the adoption of the draft
resolution it has submitted. That is the one which reflects
the main, fundamental and real cause of the conflict in the
Indian subcontinent. The two other draft resolutions do
not take account of the main cause of the conflict but
side-step it and the USSR delegation. cannot ‘therefore
consider them acceptable and will vote against them.
135. The PRESIDENT:
Pakistan.

I call on the representative of

136. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): In making my present remarks, I am concerned only with clarifying certain issues
which were regrettably confused or distorted in the
statements of the representatives of the Soviet Union and
India.
137. Yesterday the representative of the Soviet Union,
Ambassador Malik, read from document S/10412, which

contains a report by the Secretary-General on the situation
along the cease-fire line in Kashmir. It must be pointed out
that that report relates to the State of Jammu and Kashmir,
which is disputed territory. It must also be pointed out that
this report could not have been filed except for the
provisions of resolutions of the United Nations Commission
for India and Pakistan of 13 August 1948 and 5 January
1949, adopted under the auspices of the Security Council.
138. The Soviet representative will recall that the IndiaPakistan question has been on the agenda of the Security
Council for the last 23 years and has engaged the Council’s
attention at more than 100 meetings. He will also recall
that it was his delegation which vetoed three proposals in
the Security Council which would have facilitated a
settlement of the Jammu and Kashmir dispute. Let me
quote paragraph 2 of that same document in rebuttal of the
charge he made against Pakistan concerning the alleged
violation of the cease-fire line in Jammu and Kashmir:
“(c) The Indian military authorities had admitted that,
since 20 October 1971, they had strengthened their
forces in Jammu and Kashmir by a considerable number,
thus exceeding the authorized level of troops in Jammu
and Kashmir under the Karachi Agreement, and that they
would continue to do so as considered necessary for the
security of Indian territory.
‘(d) The Chief Military Observer found that Pakistan
had also introduced additional forces on its side of the
cease-fire line.. . .” but “without . . . exceeding the permissible level .”
It may be noted that the dates when India violated the
Karachi agreement,3 20 October, and when Pakistan moved
additional forces, but within the permissible limit,
29 November, are 40 days apart. It was only after 40 days
of violation of the Karachi agreement that Pakistan moved
to restore the balance, and even then it took care to remain
within the magnitude of forces permitted under that
agreement.
139. As regards the particular so-called violations cited by
the representative of the Soviet Union-about the alleged
crossing of the cease-fire line-let me inform the Council
that such violations are being committed by India almost
every day; UNMOGIP has been sending these reports of
violations and they can be made available by the Office of
the Secretary-General. So to single out one small alleged
incident of a border crossing as denoting Pakistan’s intention of ‘attacking India is, I regret to say, not evidence of a
sense of proportion.
140. The representative of the Soviet Unioh ranged far
and wide in his many interventions on the internal affairs of
Pakistan, and he also spoke about certain aspects of
Pakistan’s external relations. In speaking of the problems of
the refugees he stated that India wasjustified in massing its
forces on Pakistan borders because, to quote Ambassador
Malik, what self-respecting State which cares for its security
3 For the text of the agreement, see Official Records of the
Security Council, Fourth Year, Special Supplement No. 7, annex 26.

/’
’

is not going to displace part of its armed forces to the
territory where there was this rush of 10 million refugees?
If that was justified, we should like to ask was it also
justified for India to ‘have established bases for armed
guerrillas, to have equipped, trained and unleashed them to
carry out acts of sabotage and destruction in East Pakistan? IS that also justified because there are 10 million
refugees in India? And was it also justified when finally
Indian armed forces attacked Pakistan on 21 November on
a loge scale at many points of the border-which has been
admitted by the representative of India?

and security which can be certified by the United Nations if
the international community is genuinely interested in
seeking a humanitarian solution to this problem and not
exploiting it as a weapon to bring about the dismemberment of the territorial integrity of a Member State. I could
say much about displacement of populations elsewhere,
about mass transfers of human beings, about the denial of
the right to return to their homes even after a generation,
but I do not think that much purpose would be served by
entering into such exchanges and therefore I say no more
on this subject.

141. We regret that the Soviet representative did not take
into account these other aspects of the situation. But in one
respect I welcome his statement. Since April of this year we
have heard repeated charges from India of genocide-that
Pakistan armed forces had killed hundreds of thousands of
men, women and children in East Pakistan, that they have
carried out all kinds of untold atrocities.

146. We have also heard a great deal about the need for a
political settlement in Pakistan. Of course, we know that
this is vital to the survival, not only of East Pal&tan but
also of West Pakistan, but we have been told about the
human rights of citizens, about national liberation movements and about democracy. We know that many States
Members of the United Nations are not homogeneous
States. In fact, many of them claim to be pluralistic
societies or multi-national States, but the question arises,
when Pakistan is told that it should not suppress autonomy,
that it should respect the aspirations of the people of East
Pakistan-we
ask to what extent the right to autonomy
demands respect? Many representatives of States who teIl
us this know that in their own countries there is no
autonomy; they are unitary States even though ostensibly
they are federal in form. Even as federations, they arc
highly centralized States and leave only local powers for the
constituent units of a federation.

142. We are glad to note the sobriety and responsibility in
the statement of the representative of the Soviet Union and
in his Government’s statements whenever they have spoken
about the situation; they have referred to thousands killed
in the disturbances-although
they have talked of 10
million refugees.
143. I should like to inform the Council that I have no
desire to enter into an exchange with the representative of
India in regard to this tragic situation. Impartial observers
such as the correspondents of the London Guardian and
even some correspondents of i%e New York Times did
report on the massacres carried out by the anti-State and
secessionist elements in East Pakistan before 25 March. And
if the representative of India has chosen to disregard the
other side of the picture we can only say that his
submissions here in the Security Council cannot be considered balanced or fair. I would be glad to draw his
attention to the reports that have appeared in the world
press, in the most responsible and respected organs of
public opinion, in this regard.

147. We in Pakistan would have been able to settle this
problem if the demand had not escalated to a break-up of
Pakistan from a federation into a confederation. We would
hope that those who are objective and who truly try to
understand the problems of pluralistic societies where there
is a diversity of peoples, where society is dichotomous,
would try to be helpful and to understand and find a
solution to this dilemma of reconciliation, of the need for
preserving the territorial integrity and national unity of a
State with the demand for autonomy which is undoubtedly
genuine. But, instead, we have been pilloried by propaganda
and by those who, for reasons of alliance, or of politics,
wish to take sides and demand that Pakistan should
concede the ultimatums that are put forward by elected
representatives of the people, not for autonomy but for
dismemberment.

144. The representative of the Soviet Union drew a very
graphic picture when he said that 10 million refugees
constitute a larger population than that of some 88 Member
States of the United Nations. Undoubtedly, this is an
enormous figure. Without entering into a controversy as to
the actual number of refugees that have left, let me also
point out that in the Third Committee debates on the
question of humanitarian assistance to Pakistani refugees
the representative of Uganda stated that his country had
given asylum to 188,000 refugees from neighbouring
African countries. And at the same time the representative
of Uganda maintained that his Government had taken strict
precautions to see that none of those refugees were armed
and trained and sent to carry out depredations against the
neighbours of Uganda.

148. We in Pakistan are formulating a political settlement,
but regrettably it is not a political settlement that would be
to the liking of India which seeks the dismemberment of
Pakistan. About this there can be no doubt considering the
statement of the Prime Minister of India and the statements
of responsible leaders in the Indian Government which
Ambassador Malik has totally chosen to disregard. He
thinks that Pakistan is the guilty party and that it should be
punished for its crimes by being made to submit to its
disintegration by force, However, I should like to state that
we have a will to survival and we will resist all attempts
from any quarter to destroy our territorial integrity.

145. In ter’hs of percentage of the population of India,
the refugees, as was pointed out by the representative of
Greece in the Economic and Social Council debate at its
fifty-first session, constitute 2 per cent of the population of
India. But we agree that it is a very large number, which we
are most anxious to take back under conditions of safety

149. One of the reasons why India has chosen this time ta
launch an aggression against us is to disrupt the time-table
laid down by President Yahya Khan to induct a represen.
14

tative government in Pakistan for which the date had been
fixed between the 20th and 27th of this month. History is
full of dangerous pitfalls emanating from the desire of big
and powerful States which tried to impose a political
settlement on relatively small and weak neighbours. Munich
is a classical example. We know that India considers the
existence of Pakistan a threat to its security, but now that
the Soviet Union has articulated a new security doctrine for
South-East Asia, perhaps all of us should seriously think of
what it may portend.

151. It needs to be stressed again and again that the
Council is concerned not with an ordinary situation or
dispute but with a situation of war, Can there be any
possibility of a return of the refugees unless and until
international peace is secured? Let me make it very clear
beyond any shadow of doubt that no proposal for a
settlement of the conflict will have any effect if it does not
assure the cessation of Indian infiltration and indirect
aggression to the same degree and with the same force as it
calls for the cessation of hostilities.

150. The representative of the Soviet Union spoke about
the Tashkent spirit but that spirit prevailed much before
the signing of the Indo-Soviet Treaty, of what is euphemistically called a treaty of friendship and co-operation. In
content and effect it is nothing less than a military alliance.
Events have conclusively proved it to be so. Actions speak
‘louder than words and guns even louder. What are these
actions? Immediately after this Treaty was signed a series
of feverish military consultations started in Moscow and
New Delhi under article IX of the Treaty, which pledges the
parties to consultations with a view to taking what in
diplomatic language has been described as effective measures to remove any threat to peace. We have sufficient
experience of military pacts to know that similar clauses
exist in those instruments and world opinion and the
parties themselves construe such language to be sufficient
to constitute
a military pact. Supplies of sophisticated
armaments such as MIG-23s, tanks and other military
equipment were despatched post-haste to Calcutta and
other Indian ports.

155. In asking for such a decision by the Security Council
we are not asking for any partisan support or sympathy
from any member of the Council. And I should like to tell
my good friend Mr. Jamil Baroody to take good note of
what I have to say. We are not asking for partisan support
from members of the Security Council: we are invoking the
law of the United Nations. We issue solemn declarations of
principle-the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of Their Independence and Sovereignty, the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security, the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations-but
when the time comes to apply those principles we tend to
put them aside. Is it not fundamental to the maintenance of
the norms of international relations that no State should
foment civil strife on the territory of another; that no State
should aid and abet subversion and sabotage in another?
Does it not follow logically that it should be condemned
for such acts? The word “condemns” is used in the
Declaration on non-intervention in the internal affairs of
States. If the Security Council does not wish to condemn,
should it not at least ask India to desist from armed
intervention in Pakistan’s affairs?

151. Having thus upset the balance of power in the
subcontinent, the Indo-Soviet Treaty emboldened the
lndians to opt for a military invasion of Pakistan under the
pretext of self-defence. I said in the First Committee in
October f1806th meeting/ and in the plenary meeting last
month [1996th meeting] that this Treaty must be judged
by its results, whether it will act in restraint of war or will
precipitate war. We now have the answer; we have it in
India’s aggression and the Soviet veto last night of the
proposal for a cease-fire and withdrawal.

156, It was because the draft resolution which was voted
upon last night was deficient in this respect-and I must be
frank-that we had serious misgivings about its effectiveness. It did not condemn aggression. It is not, I repeat,
enough to ask the parties to ceasehostilities. Hostilities are
but the second stage of the process which began with
Indian subversion, Indian armed interference and Indian
infiltration
into Pakistan. Unless interference and infiltration are stopped, peace will not be restored.

152. A double pretension surrounds the Indo-Soviet
Treaty. One party makes it possible for the other to launch
subversion and aggression against a third country and yet it
invokes the Tashkent spirit. The other party closely binds
itself to a military alliance and yet claims to be non-aligned.
Who is so naive as not to see through these pretensions? If
any further evidence were necessary, it has been provided
by the Soviet statement circulated by the TASS news
agency this morning [S/10422]. The statement in effect
says that Pakistan was following a dangerous course in
defending itself and resisting a military occupation and
implied that Pakistan action even posed a threat to the
Soviet Union’s security interests. I submit, how can we
believe any more in the existence of the Tashkent spirit?

157. The United States draft resolution, as I said before,
failed to condemn India for its aggression, as India should
have been condemned. It did not explicitly call upon India
to desist from its attempts to bring about the disintegration
of Pakistan, as the Security Council should demand. None
the less, we were willing to co-operate with the Security
Council on the basis of that draft resolution, because it
carried the support of as many as 11 members of the
Council. That is Pakistan’s attitude.
158. -Let the Council members compare that attitude with
India’s. There is no question of a cease-fire, says India. The
representative of India warned the Security C&ncil yesterday that India would persist in the course of its aggression
against Pakistan. Whether or not this meeting of the
Council will be able to take a positive decision, that
message from India should be ringing in the ears of
i2
members of the Council.

153. The representative of the Soviet Union, in his
statement a few moments ago, referred to what he called an
attack by Pakistan on 3 December. He did not refer at all to
the large-scale attacks on East Pakistan from all sides, which
commenced on 21 November and, in the words of the
Defence Minister of India, left Pakistan no other alternative
but to break up or choose to go to war.
15

.-

159. Turning now to certain remarks of the representative
of India, I would draw attention to his statement that:
“ . . . we went into Pakistan territory after 21 Novem.
her. We did; 1 do not deny it.” [1606th meet@
para. 162.1

And yet the United States draft resolution did not take into
account the evidence submitted by my delegation about the
facts of Indian aggressionand the admission by India. What
further proof wasneeded?
160. The representative of India gave as the explanation
for the invasion of Pakistan territory that the Pakistan
Army had “started shelling our civilian villages”. “What was
the remedy left to us? ” he asked. And he said the remedy
wasto invade Pakistan.
161. You will recall, Mr. President, that Pakistan, accepted
a proposal that the armed forces of India and Pakistan
should pull back from the frontiers to their peace-time
stations, That proposal was rejected by India. Then
Pakistan accepted a proposal that they should pull back to
agreed safe distances from the frontier, if not to peace-time
stations. That proposal wasrejected by India. Did India not
have this option, so that shelling from the Pakistan side,
which he has charged, could have been prevented and
stopped? India had the option of peace, but chose war.
162. Finally, I heard a representative say earlier in this
meeting that the problem of Bangla Desh had been
discussedin the United Nations. Let me state categorically
that this so-called problem has not been discussed in the
United Nations-or if any such discussion ever took place
the delegation of Pakistan had no knowledge of it and
could never have agreed to participate in it.

one of the recognized parties to the dispute. In fact, that
is the appropriate way to win international IWOgnifiOn
for Bangla Desh. It should be made cleai that the
cease-fire cannot be signed in the Bangla D&I Sector
unless the Bangla Desh commander is recognized as an
independent sector commander for the purposes of
cease-fire, and the Bangla Desh government is recognized
as a party to the dispute as a whole.”
165, The representative of India dismissed this quotation
as the utterings of theoreticians and academicians, but the
pattern of action that is being unfolded before your very
eyes in this debate confirms every word and letter of this
statement. This is the pattern that is being followed,
beginning with the sponsorship by the representative of
India of a request for giving a particular individual a
hearing-and if you examine the request of that individual
for a hearing, you see that he claims to speak in the name
of the people and Government of Bangla Desh.
166. We would like to ask our distinguished colleagues
who are formulating draft resolutions: are you formulating
those draft resolutions to camouflage designs to promote
secessionist forces and their designs against Pakistan? Will
your calls for cessation of hostilities and withdrawal of
forces allow for loopholes to achieve the designs that have
been so clearly stated in this analysis by the Indian Institute
of Defence Studies?
167. I should like to advise the sponsors of all draft
resolutions that my delegation will look carefully into such
formulations so that ambiguities may not be taken advantage of in order to promote ends in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations.
168. The PRESIDENT:
India.

163. Let me recall that only two problems pertaining to
Pakistan have so far been discussed in the United Nations,
One is the humanitarian problem of the refugees, and that
was discussed in the Economic and Social Council and in
the Third Committee of the General Assembly. The other is
the situation between India and Pakistan, which is being
discussed by the Security Council at this very moment,
Neither of those problems can be considered to be the
problem of Bangla Desh.

I call on the representative of

169. Mr. SEN (India): I do not know how these things are
arranged but I was under the impression that there would
be another speaker between the representative of Pakistan
and myself. However, it makes no difference because I
think I can easily reply to the various points he made
yesterday-as indeed I promised I wouId do-and to some
of the points he made today.

164 In addition to the reasons that have been SO
eloquently adduced by the representative of Argentina
against the proposal that was discussed earlier in this
meeting, let me again remind the Security Council of the
fact that in this Seemingly innocuous proposal lurks a
sinister ,design: to promote the disintegration of Pakistan.
Yesterday 1 quoted from a paper of the Indian Institute for
Defince Studies and Analysis, about how India should
proceed to deal politically in the United Nations with the
East Pakistan situation. I should like to quote that passage
again:
“There is no doubt that the Security Council would
meet to call upon both nations to end the fight, Whether
the fight should be ended immediately or continued for a
period Of time is a matter for India to cons’ider. At this
stage it should be India’s endeavour to get Bangla Desh as

170. Let us first look at the military affairs to which he
referred at the beginning of his statement yesterday. As I
said, he represents a military regime and therefore he has all
the military details handy, However, we are not without
some army and it is not altogether impossible for us to get
some information. I shall just give you the list of incidents
on the Bengal front on 7 November:
(a) The Pakistani Army started firing towards the Indian
villages of Rahimpur and Gourangala under Kalamchoura
police station in Tripura. Ten artillery shells and 14 bombs
landed inside Indian territory.
fbl The Pakistani Army opened LMG and MMG fire
towards the Indian village of Gourangala in Tripura.
(Cl The Pakistani Army opened fire towards the Indian
village of Mandabag in Tripura. Several 3-inch mortar

16

bombs and a number of artillery shells landed inside Indian

made it clear to my colleagues and to the representative of
Pakistan himself, when he was on speaking terms with me,
that we will not tolerate intrusion, aggression in our
territory by the Pakistan Army and if they continue to do
it they must take the consequences. And that is a statement
I wish to make again in this Council, that we shall have
nothing to do with aggression from Pakistan any longer. We
have suffered four times and we are not prepared to suffer
any more.

territory.

(d) The Pakistani Army subjected the Indian village of
Kasbain Tripura to intermittent firing. Several shells landed
inside Indian territory.
(e) The Pakistani Army opened fire towards the Indian
village of Simna in Tripura. Several artillery shells landed
inside Indian territory.

172. But let us turn to the other aspects. He makes a long
song and dance-forgive my vulgar, rather casual, expression
which The New York Times does not like-that we are
trading, arming and doing all kinds of things to subvert,
pervert, invert, convert and revolutionize East Pakistan. Let
me repeat what I read out in the General Assembly on
13 October 1971. I said-it is always a bit of a bore to
quote from one’s own speeches, but sometimes it saves
time:

(fl Several artillery shells landed inside Indian territory
when the Pakistani Army opened fire towards the Indian
border outpost of Sidhai in Tripura.
(g) Several LMG, MMG and 2-inch mortar shells landed
inside Indian territory when the Pakistani Army opened fire
towards the Indian village of Amlighat near Sabroom police
station.

“Pakistan accuses India of creating tension on the
border and of supporting the freedom fighters inside East
Bengal. I would in this context read out what the
Ambassador of Pakistan in Washington had to say on
1.5 August 1971”~not IS April, not 15 May, but 15 August-“on a programme of the television network of the
American Broadcasting Company (ABC). Incidentally,
the Ambassador of Pakistan in Washington is the brother
of the representative of Pakistan here”-he no longer is
because he has been transferred-he said: “ ‘There were at
least about 160,000 armed personnel who defected on
account of Awami League propaganda. The army was
asked on the 25th of March to go and deal with these
160,000 armed people.’ Who are those people? In the
same interview the Pakistan Ambassador answered:

(h) The Pakistani Army opened fire towards the Indian
village of Malua under Belonia police station in Tripura.
Several artillery shells landed inside Indian territory.
(i) The Pakistani Army opened fire towards the Indian
village of Belonia in Tripura.
(i) Pakistani troops opened unprovoked fire towards the
Indian village of Chandannagar under Kamalpur police
station in Tripura. Several artillery shells landed inside
Indian territory.
(k) The Pakistani Army opened fire from Dhalai area
towards Indian territory in Tripura. Several artillery sheUs
landed inside Indian territory.

“ ‘There are not only East Bengal Rifles; there were
East Pakistan Rifles; there was a border military force;
there were armed police .’

(1) The Pakistani Army subjected the Indian village of
Rangauti under KaiIashahar police station in Tripura to
heavy and intermittent Bring,

“From where did they get their arms? The Ambassador
said :

(m) Several shells of 34nch mortar fired by Pakistani
Army landed inside Indian village of Puran Raj Bari in
Tripura.

“ ‘These weapons came from looting of armouries and
government stores and from the armouries of reserve
police and so on, weapons that had been collected by
force, by militant student bands who were going and
knocking at the doors of the houses and asking people to
deliver their guns and whatever sporting rifles-guns and
rifles-they had. These were not collected from the East
Pakistan Rifles. We wish we had taken the trouble to
disarm them before.’ ” [I 965 th plenary meeting,
para. 215.1

171. That is the record of one day, I am quite sure the
Council would not like me to recite this litany of military
aggression from Pakistan day after day. But if the Council is
interested, I am fully prepared to do so. It does shock the
credibility of anyone listening to the representative of
Pakistan fdr him to say that villages were not fired upon,
that we were not compelled to take action in retaliation,
that the only option open to us was to kill civilians or to
silence the guns, to refer to all the offers to withdraw to a
peace-time station, to any agreed limit, to anything they
suggested. But anyone who has read the proposals will be
interested to find that all these offers were related to one
fundamental point-that we must ceasehelping what they
call the “guerrillas” and, the President of Pakistan must be
satisfied that we have been good boys. That wasone of the
conditions attached to most of these so-called proposals+
And yet the question still remains unanswered: if the
intention was not to provoke hostilities with India, why did
the Pakistan Army move forward to these positions? That
question still remains unanswered and I have repeatedly

That is the beginning of the story. That is how they got
their arms. That is how the guerrillas started fighting for
their liberty.
173, In the same context, one of the difficulties of
answering the representative of Pakistan is that he roams so
wide and large over the same theme, that India is guilty for
arming the guerrillas; India is guilty over the elections; India
is guilty for the Mukti Bahini; India is guilty for the Awami
League, for their programme, It is extraordinarily creditable
for us that such allusions should be made, but let me point
17

out three things. Mr. Bhutto, who is no friend of India as I
mentioned to you yesterday, has written a big book and
not a word has been said about Indian influence on
elections or subsequent actions, or the exploitation of
refugees, on which the representative of Pakistan is always
waxing eloquent. We give shelter to refugees. We give
shelter to all refugees-east, north, south, west, who flee
from terror and from oppression. We have no apologies to
make for our humanitarian action. If they flee from terror
we give them shelter. If other Governments do not like it, it
is too bad. I do not have to go into the businessof Tibetan
refugees; it has been mentioned again and again, and if the
representative of China has any fears that we shall launch
aggression against China because of the Tibetan refugees, I
can assure him that fear is completely unfounded and
indeed his chargesare both base and baseless.
174, So no press reports wrote about it. No Pakistani
wrote about it. Pakistanis are gloating about the successful
election. We are indeed very happy they had a successful
election in Pakistan. We hoped that, for a change, our
relations would improve. Our country wasgoing to have an
election and our Government was returned to power with
an overwhelming majority. We were looking forward to an
economic breakthrough, with friendly relations with
Pakistan. Was that the sign for plotting the dismemberment
of Pakistan? These chargesare flung, day in and day out,
without the slightest evidence and without the slightest
proof and I must protest most vigorously at this kind of
nonsense being tolerated.
175. Let us see another charge. Just before President
Ayub Khan retired, he had brought up another charge
called the Agartala conspiracy case. Now let us see what
Mr. Bhutto-who, as I said, is no friend of India-had to say
about the Agartala conspiracy case:

house and sat in the portico behind the President”s
salon.”
177. I do not have to comment on this. If the Presidential
palaces are bugged in this way so that two leaders like
Mr. Bhutto and Mr. Rahman do not feel safe to converse,
on political matters no doubt, then I have no further
comments.
178. Much has been said about atrocities. The Pakistan
delegation, I suppose like many of us, read some of the
popular journals, but popular journals are not the type of
documents we should quote in the Security Council. Here is
a journal called Foreign Affairs-an American quarterly
review of October 1971, price $2.50 a copy-and since I am
in America where many of the qualities are to be judged by
the price tag, I suppose it is a good journal. Here is a very
good article; at least, I think it is good: “Pakistan Divided”
by Sydney Schanberg:
“In short the fanatic fury of a holy war seems to have
been the overriding reason why the Pakistani Government
loosed the army on the Bengali population. This is not
hard to understand when we recall that Pakistan is a State
based on religion where democratic traditions are almost
nonexistent and where the popular will has been often
frustrated. When the army troops began their rampage
that first night, they seemed to be enjoying themselves.
As Punjabi patrols emerged from alleys after killing
unarmed Bengalis, they came out with their hands
upraised, shouting . . , ‘Victory for God’ and , . . ‘Long
live Pakistan’.”
That was the spirit where the Muslims killed Muslims in the
name of religion. Then, a little further on, Mr. Schanberg
says:

“If Ayub Khan had at this stage heeded my advice, a
reasonable compromiJe could have been reached, recognizing the basic merits of the case. If Ayub Khan had
done in 1966 what he sought to do at the round table
conference in 1969, the problem of Pakistan would not
have come to such a pass. Unfortunately, Ayub Khan
chose what he called ‘the language of weapons’ and not
the weapon of language. He arrested Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman. The Agartala conspiracy case”-which made
headlines, I was the High Commissioner in Pakistan and
no one would tell me what the case was about,
however-“which followed was handled in a disastrously
clumsy manner and boomeranged so seriously that we
still are reeling from its consequences. Only Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman benefited from this case. If all of the
most important political issuesare handled in this clumsy
way, we must reap the consequenceswhether it is in the
military field or in the political field. This has been the
story again and again.”

“At this writing, foreign diplomats estimate that the
army has killed at least 200,000 Bengalis. Despite claims
that normalcy prevails in the province, the military has
not been able as yet to restore law and order or establish
even a semblance of governmental administration.“4
179. This particular conclusion has been reinforced again
and again to such an extent that I think it is a waste of
breath and time to go on repeating the same story.
180. Much has been said about autonomy and indeperr.
dence. I am slightly tired of saying the same thing in
different forums of the United Nations. There was no
demand for independence at the time the elections were
held, or when the negotiations were undertaken. The
demand for independence only started when the military
crack-down took place, and if there is any doubt in this
respect, let those representatives of countries who have
well-stocked archives come along and say this is not SO.I
doubt that they will.

176. Since we are on the subject of Mr. Bhutto, I might
touch on a humorous subject. Mr. Bhutto had gone to see
President Yahya Khan in his presidential palace in Dacca.
After the meeting wasover Mr, Bhutto ran into Mr. Mujibur
Rahman in the presidential drawing-room, and this is what
Mr. Bhutto had to say:

181. To go back to another aspect, Washington’s call with
the others for a Security Council meeting yesterday
represented the welcome, though tragically tardy, recognition of those dangers and of the essential role of the United

“At this point, thinking that the room might be bugged,
we walked out to the verandah towards the back of the

4 Foreign Affairs, vol. 50, No. 1, pp. 126,127

18

and 129.

. For months the

P
i
I
:
1
!

concern of the representative of Pakistan. We do nt. want
to extend international recognition by listening to a bangla
Desh representative in the Security Council. If we did want
to give recognition, we, as the Government of India, could
have done so a long time ago. We shall do it when we think
the normal criteria for recognition have been established,
when we think that they deserve it, not because of the
wish, but because of their ability to govern the country. It
has nothing to do with Security Council attendance.
Security Council attendance is governed by rule 39 of the
rules of procedure. If there is any doubt about it, I wonder
how many people have considered the number of representatives of various countries and areas who have come
before us and given their views. The only question about
listening to Mr. Justice Chowdhury-who,
incidentally, was
the Pakistan representative on the Human Rights Commission until he was removed very recently-reminds
me of
another remark because the Pakistan Ambassador is always
saying that the Indians are at the back of all these evils, but
how many ambassadors have defected? How many soldiers
have defected? How many Ministers have defected? I have
received letters from people who are leaving the Service
today and those letters would bring tears to the eyes of
even very hard-hearted people. Are these the people who
are to be influenced by Indian propaganda, Indian machinations’? If that is the nature of the Pakistan Foreign Service,
then I do not have to make any further comments. At any
rate, many people have appeared before the Security
Council; even today we have pending requests from some
delegation-I
think it is the Soviet delegation-for
two
representatives of the black population of Rhodesia to be
heard. I wonder if the representative of Pakistan will object
to such an appearance. I have also before me a complete
record of all those who have appeared before the Security
Council, and I find the names of people from the Palestine
movement and of various other people who have appeared
before the Security Council, including the Mayor of
Jerusalem at one stage. So I do not think we need be
frightened by this question of recognition through the
Security Council. We are not going to recognize anyone
through the Security Council. All those people who have
appeared have not been recognized, and I am quite sure
that Mr, Ian Smith will not recognize the existence of the
black community or of their rights merely because their
spokesmen come and speak here. I am quite sure that the
President of Pakistan will not recognize Mr. Justice
Chowdhury as the spokesman of Bangla Desh. If we are to
proceed in this matter in an intelligent way, in a realistic
way, we cannot do so without listening to the party most
interested in it.

by-passed and served to paralyse the world Organization.
The Nixon Administration adopted a public posture of
mock even-handedness which had the effect of exacerbating
the Indo-Pakistan
conflict, It ignored the fundamental
threat to India posed by Yahya Khan’s harsh repression in
East Pakistan.
182. The United States Government is still sidestepping
the central issue and is responding with flagrant injustice in
attempting to pin the major responsibility for the present
conflict on India. If Security Council intervention is to have
any chance of restoring peace between India and Pakistan,
the United States and the United Nations must recognize
and deal with the basic problem in East Pakistan,
183. If that particular statement had been made by an
Indian spokesman, our aid would have been cut, we would
have been put on the mat and given a lecture as if we were
some kind of native children from a missionary school. But
this was not made by a spokesman of the Indian Govemment. This was made by the respectable New York Times.
184. Yesterday the representative of the United States
said: “In an effort to end the bloodshed, to save lives, to
reduce the untold suffering, we are introducing a draft
resolution
which . . .” and so’ on and so forth [1606th
meeting, para. 200].
185. Now this bloodshed, this concern for the saving of
lives, this concern for the reduction of untold suffering,
wouId it not have been better expressed a few months
earlier? Would it have been too much to ask the United
States Government to make a public declaration expressing
concern at all the humiliations, all the tragedies, all the
suffering and all the brutalities that people were enduring?
However, this is how politics rubs; let it be.
1%. That also brings us to the Chinese draft resolution.
As 1 said, I hope that I shall continue to treat all Chinese
utterances with a degree of indifference because they only
read out statements which have been made in Peking for
the last six months. There is nothing new in them. But it is
extraordinary
that a country which is supposed to represent
all revolutionary
forces should be taking this attitude. I can
only explain it by assuming that they think time is on their
side and that there will be plenty of opportunities to
change the direction of the sails according to the wind.
187. Now I come to the draft resolutions before US. As 1
explained,
it is not for India to agree or disagree to
cease-fire resolutions; it is for the Bangla Desh Government
because they are fighting for their liberty and for their lives.
If they agree, we shall see what can be done. But we cannot
be involved in a dishonest agreement to cease fire, knowing
fully well that we shall not be able to keep it because, as I
said repeatedly yesterday, we have no desire to oppress
people who are already sufficiently oppressed, in spite of
the great invocation of the religion of Allah by the rulers of
Pakistan.

189. Lastly, I thank the Council for a very patient hearing.
I have tried, in spite of sudden outbursts of anger, because I
do feel angry when nonsensical charges are made in the
Council and so much time is taken up. It is now a quarter
past nine; we sat up until 1.30 this morning, and much time
has been taken up by unnecessary polemics, propaganda,
controversies-and
Bengdl is burning.
190. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I wish very
briefly to exercise my right of reply.

188. I have only one more point to make before I finish,
and it relates to our request. that Bangla Desh representatives should be heard. I do not quite understand the

19 1. First, I think that we must all be tolerant because of
the tensions and pressures on both the representative of
19

Pakistan and the representative of India. But I must express
surprise in hearing an Ambassador quoting an editorial
which includes a direct attack on the President of the
United States, a President who has tried for a long, long
time, through massive aid, through private contacts with
the Heads of Governments in that area, to keep the
continent at peace. Thus it wasmost surprising to find this
kind of use of an editorial unfavourable to our Government
presented by a representative to the United Nations.
192. To accuse the United States of a degree of indifference possibly could be excused because of the untold
tensions in the area, and I am inclined to lean over
backwards in this regard, but I do not see that our record of
massive aid for refugeeson both sides of the border, direct
appeals to the Chiefs of State of both areas-nothing in it
for us-entitle any representative to level, in these critical
times, this kind of allegation against our Government.
193. Several Powers have made private appeals to the
Chiefs of State to avoid hostilities; the Soviet Union did;
the United States Government did; I believe the United
Kingdom did, and perhaps others. And now there is a total
war, complete with many thousands of troops on the soil of
another country. And we have a crisis; we have a full-scale
war.
194. If a man has his arm almost severed in an accident,
emergency action is taken; a tourniquet is put on immediately; the bleeding is stopped; one does not tell him, with
his arm almost severed, to start doing exercises; one does
not give him a long-term answer; one acts to stop the
bleeding. And here there is a crisis in the subcontinent, a
war, a massive invasion in the East. The latest figures were
some 120,000 troops. There are smaller incursions in the
West just as condemnable perhaps, but much smaller, and
we must put on a tourniquet, and that tourniquet must be
for a cease-fire and it must be for a withdrawal. Innocent
third parties are being harmed. We have only to look at the
report of the Secretary-General that was put before us
today about one of the aircraft contributed to the United
Nations by a Member State being strafed although it was
clearly marked as a United Nations aircraft. Third party
ships apparently were attacked today.
195. The United States Government tried to help with the
refugee problem and I do not believe that any country in
the United Nations, or any country in the world, has done
more. Perhaps we do not view this as anything except our
obligation, but we did try. We gave a large amount of
assistance to both India and Pakistan, and we yield to no
nation in our concern for human suffering. In true quiet
diplomacy we urged restraint on Pakistan and we urged
restraint on India. We encouraged prompt attention to the
situation in East Pakistan by the Pakistan Government, and
we fully supported the man whom I wish could have been
in his place with us today-the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. But now India has invaded East Pakistan
with thousands; 120,000 odd troops have crossed that
border. And this Council at this moment should not be
sitting here handing down some moralistic judgement. We
must simply say there is a lot of blood being lost, a lot of
agony, a lot of misery, a lot of death; and this body must
act now to stop the war. This has been a full-scale invasion

in East Pakistan and it must stop. If people say we are
favouring one side over another, they are wrong. But if they
say that we insist that these invading forces go back to their
own borders, they are correct. And where there are
Pakistan forces on India’s soil, ,they must as well go back.
Of course they must go back. This is a crisis. It must be
treated as a crisis. This is not the time to solve once and for
all, in one neat package, this whole complex question, It
cannot be done at this sitting. What can be done is to put
on that tourniquet, to stop shooting, to withdraw troops.
There has been a massive invasion of East Pakistan, and
there is too little time to solve the underlying problems.
But there is enough time for this Council now to end this
war.
196. Our Government will support resolutions that are
offered that will effect a cease-fire and effect a withdrawal.
197. Let me end where I began. The attack by the Indian
representative on the policy of the United States Government would under different conditions receive a much
different reaction from me. Here I understand the tensions,
and I simply hope that we can lay aside these kinds of
allegations and get on about our business of trying to have
this Security Council act to bring about a cease-fire, bring
about a withdrawal, and then continue to address ourselves
to the agony that exists in the subcontinent. So I am
inclined to excuse what I consider to be a most unfortunate
comment about the President of the United States.
198. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretatiu!r
from Spanish): The sponsors of the draft resolution
contained in document S/10423 have conferred on me the
privilege of introducing it to the Council for consideration.
I say that they have conferred the privilege on me and that
I feel honoured by it because any of the distinguished
representatives who have signed it would have been better
qualified to introduce this text, and would have done so
with greater eloquence than I will be able to muster.
199. You will doubtless recall that at the meeting yesterday or-to be more accurate-at the very end of the meeting
early this morning, the representative of Somalia asked US
to meet early in the afternoon so that the morning hours
could be devoted to intense consultation with other
delegations. Since 10.30 this morning, all the delegations
who sponsored this draft resolution have been working
incessantly and consulting all the other delegations on the
Security~ Council and those of India and Pakistan to
endeavour to arrive at a formula which might enable the
Council to move forward and break the deadlock of our
efforts. But more than that, to find a formula that would
make an immediate cessation of hostilities possible and the
restoration of peace in the area.
200. All the representatives of the eight countries who
sponsored the draft resolution have had one primary
concern: to find a solution that would be satisfactory to
the two parties to the conflict. And this was our main
concern because we all have excellent bonds of friendship
with both the Governments of India and Pakistan.
201. The draft resolution which we submit to the Security
qouncil is intended to follow a parallel course. On the one

20

hand, we direct our efforts to that which seems obviously
most urgent and immediate, that is, to call for an
immediate cease-fire and withdrawal of armed forces of
India and Pakistan to their respective frontiers. On the
other hand, our effort is intended to create the conditions
necessary for the refugees to return immediately to their
homes, thus putting an end to the suffering which has
afflicted them because of the events of the last month.
Furthermore, the draft resolution recognizes the need to
deal adequately, at a later stage and within the framework
of the United Nations Charter, with the questions which led
to the hostilities, because we are convinced that tonight we
will not solve a complex problem, and because we are
convinced that what is most urgent and important is to
restore peace in the region; and finally, because we are
convinced that calmly, later on, we will be able to examine
all the other problems which led to the outbreak of
hostilities.
202: At the meetings we have had since this morning, we
have been able to arrive at a joint text between the two
draft resolutions which had previously been before the
Security Council and which, as a result of this merger, are
therefore eliminated. Since we were among the co-sponsors
of the draft resolutions contained in documents S/10417
and S/1041 9 we were very quickly able to overcome some
of the differences which divided us, and which were not
important.
But unfortunately we have not been equally
successful in the other consultations we have had. The
Points of view of the parties, which are known to all the
members of the Council, are strongly held. Both parties
adhere to them and it is difficult in a time of crisis to
persuade them to yield so as to arrive at a compromise
formula. But even so, the eight sponsors who are nonPermanent members of this body felt it to be their
responsibility to submit a draft resolution which, aswe see
it, offers a possibility of arriving at an immediate and
positive result, such as the cease-fire, the withdrawal of
forces, and the restoration of peace in the region.
203. We know that the draft resolution is not perfect-far
from it. We know too that it may not addressitself to other
crucial aspects which should be taken into account. But
having had almost 12 hours of consultations we reached the
conclusion that those other aspects could not be solved at
this time. If any other delegation which may be critical of
our draft resolution were to have any constructive ideas,
the eight sponsors would be the first to welcome them,
because we are not prompted by a spirit of competition. We
do, however, appeal to all the members of the Council to
bear in mind that it is very easy to criticize but that an
adequate and acceptable plan of action is something else
again and not so easy to formulate.

205. The PRESIDENT:
India.

I now call on the representative of

206. Mr. SEN (India): I simply wish to correct a few facts.
207. First, I am not suffering from any tension, anxiety,
boredom, fatigue or sleeplessness. I hope I am quite alert
and completely cool, otherwise I should not be here to
represent the Government of India.
208. Second, it is quite true that the United States
Govel’nment has been extremely generous with its money in
looking after the refugees. I have made many public
acknowledgements of it and, if necessary, I shall repeat
once again for the records of the Security Council that the
United States Government has been extremely generous
with money in looking after the refugees. But the claim
that they have contributed most in financial terms is simply
not correct. India has contributed more, I do not claim any
credit for it; I do not think it is entirely a matter of money.
But I again say for the sake of fact that we have spent
more.
209. Third, my regret was not because the money has not
been forthcoming but that no official condemnation of
what was going on in East Pakistan has been forthcoming.
If it is true-and I do not yet have the facts, the United
States delegation has much more information than I
have-that 120,000 Indian soldiers are in East Pakistan, I
have explained the background in which they are there. But
I have not heard any regrets about 80,000 Pakistan soldiers
who, in the words of Mr. Schanberg, were described as
having gone on a rampage against the civilian population.
That wasalso a time to apply the tourniquet.
210. Lastly, with great deference I would say that I said
nothing about the President of the United States. I believe
that I am too seasoned an official to reflect on any
President-any Head of State-in the Security Council. I
read a quotation which said: “The Nixon’Administration”.
Now that is the style of the American language. They do
not describe their Government as the Government of the
United States but as the “Nixon Administration”,
“Taft
Administration”
or “Eisenhower Administration”,
SO if
any excuse is to be given, it is to be given by the American
language, not by the Indian Ambassador.
211. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
The Soviet delegation has
listened carefully to the statement of the representative of
Pakistan, Ambassador Shahi. We appreciate the situation in
which he finds himself at present. He needs arguments but
really nothing that he has said concerning the statement of
the Soviet delegation can be acknowledged as serious and
convincing arguments. We understand that he needs these
arguments in order to side-step the main problem, the main
and real cause of the conflict in the Indian subcontinent.
Yesterday he himself recognized this main and real cause in
his statement when he said that a serious internal political
crisis had developed in East Pakistan. He denied that
Pakistan had attacked India. That, however, has been
shown by documentary material. And today the Indian
representative has once again provided documentary and
official information. The representative of Pakistan sug(translated

204. We, the representatives of these eight countries, trust
that this first step-and I emphasize that this is simply the
first step-will be acceptable to all the members of the
Council and that we shall be able to leave tonight when the
meeting is adjourned with at least the satisfaction of having
contributed-in
that region and in this conflict involving
two Powers with which most of the members of this
Council maintain excellent relations-to finding an honourable way towards immediate peace and the possibility for
lasting peace in the region.
21

from

Russian):

gested that the Soviet Union was trying to punish Pakistan.
But that cannot be taken seriously.
212. All the activities of the Soviet Government, all the
actions it has taken in connexion with the deterioration of
the situation in the Indian subcontinent have been directed
exclusively towards preserving peace in that region. This,
too, is mentioned in the TASS statement which Ambassador Shahi quoted [S/10422]. I shall quote a few excerpts
from it,
“Guided by concern for the maintenance of peace, the
Soviet Government repeatedly expressed to President
Yahya Khan of Pakistan and to the Government of
Pakistan its concern over the situation that had developed
in the Indian subcontinent in connexion with the events
in East Pakistan.”
It goes on to say:
“In approaching the Government of Pakistan with these
considerations, the Soviet Government acted in accordance with the principle of humanitarianism, wishing the
Pakistan people well in solving, in a democratic way, the
complex problems facing the country.”
And finally, the third point in that statement:

215. The Council has before it at this moment three draft
resolutions. In the order of their submission they are: draft
resolution S/10418 submitted by the Soviet Union, draft
resolution S/10421 submitted by China, and draft resolution S/10423 submitted by Argentina, Belgium, Burundi,
Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone and Somalia. I
understand that draft resolution S/10423 supersedes the
two draft resolutions presented yesterday by the same
States in documents S/10417 and S/10419. Those two
draft resolutionsare therefore no longerbefore the Council.
216. When the Council is ready to vote on the draft
resolutions before it, I shall put them to the vote in
accordance with rule 32 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
217. As there are no further speakersinscribedon my list
to speakat this stage,I take it that the Councilis prepared
to vote on the draft resolutionsbefore it. I shallnow put to
the vote draft resolution S/10418 submitted by the Soviet
Union.
A vote wastaken by showof hands.
In favour: Poland,Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics.
Against: China.

‘fin the face of the military threat now hanging over the
Indian subcontinent, to which not a single peace-loving
country can remain indifferent, the Soviet Union calls for
a speedy end to the bloodshed and for a political
settlement in East Pakistan on the basis of respect for the
lawful rights and interests of its people.”
That is the humanitarian position of principle of the Soviet
Union and the Soviet Government, a position which is
supported by the Soviet people. And, therefore, there are
absolutely no grounds whatsoever for blaming or reproaching the Soviet Union for punishing Pakistan in some way.
213. I shall not dwell on the comments of the Pakistan
representative concerning the Soviet-Indian Treaty. I have
already had occasion to answer similar remarks in detail in
another United Nations body. I am prepared to discuss the
substance and purpose of this Treaty in great detail with
Ambassador Shahi. I am astonished by remarks suggesting
that there were some sort of special secret consultations in
Moscow concerning this Treaty. This does not accord with
the facts. I shall merely refer to the joint Soviet-Indian
statement which was published in connexion with the visit
to India of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the USSR,
A. A. Gromyko, on 12 August 1971. This stated:
“All the provisions of the Soviet-Indian Treaty serve the
purpose of strengthening peace in Asia and universal
peace and ensuring international security. The Treaty is
not directed against anybody at all but is intended to be a
factor in the development of friendship and goodneighbourliness in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.”

Abstaining: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, France, Italy,
Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Statesof America.
The result of the vote was 2 in favour, I qgainst,with
12 abstentions.
The draft resolution was not adopted, having failed fo
obtain the affirmative vote of nine members.
218. Mr. VAN USSEL (Belgium) (interpretation front
French): My delegationwas not able to support the draft
resolution submitted by the Soviet Union, Weconsider,in
fact, that by dissociatingthe political problem from that
created by the open armed confict between India and
Pakistan, the Council would not be doing its duty in this
tragic hour. We must urgently adopt a draft resolution
calling for an immediate cease-fireand inviting the two
Governmentsconcernedto withdraw their armedforcesto
their own side of the Indo-Pakistanfrontier and, finally,
appealing to the Government of Pakistan to create the
necessarypolitical conditions which would make possible
the repatriation in conditions of security of the refugees
who have had to leavetheir homes.
219. Given the gravity of the situation, my deIegationis
evenpreparedto agreeto a merecessationof hostilities.
220. My delegationcould not vote in favour of any draft
resolution which does not contain these three essentid
elements.Indeed, while at the beginningof the conflict the
acts of violence and hostility were limited to the frontier
zone between India and East Pakistan,today there is an
open war between two sovereigncountries, a war which,
unfortunately, extends to both the easternandthe western

214. The PRESIDENT: I wish to recapitulate at this
juncture the situation in respect of the draft resolutions
which are before the Council.
22

part of Pakistan, as is borne out in the successive reports of
the Secretary-General,

has ooenlv slandered the representative
representing only West Pakistan.

221. In other words, it is no longer a matter of frontier
incursions of refugees, of Indian or Pakistani battalions, but
of the land and air forces of both countries.

228. The Soviet representative has also done his utmost to
defend the Indian aggressive acts subverting the Pakistan
Government and disrupting the national unity of Pakistan,
In the draft resolution he put forward yesterday the Soviet
representative went to the length of attacking Pakistan for
causing the deterioration of the situation and he asserted
that only after the so-called political solution of the
question of East Pakistan could the acts of hostility cease.
In other words, so long as the Pakistan Government refuses
to agree to the “independence” of East Pakistan, the Indian
Government has the right to continue its subversion and
aggression against Pakistan. This echoes the open clamour
of the Indian leaders that the Indian troops and armed
personnel must not be withdrawn from East Pakistan, and
they demand that Pakistan troops withdraw from their own
territory, East Pakistan, and that a so-called Bangla Desh be
established.

222. MY delegation also attaches great importance to the
appeal for the withdrawal of all military units occupying
part of another country. On several occasions my country
has clearly opposed territorial occupation through the use
or threat of force. At a time when the General Assembly is
debating the question of the Middle East it is not without
point to insist upon the withdrawal of armed forces.
2’23. Allow me once again to recall our grave responsibility. This Council must act, and act fast. With the
support of world public opinion duty bids us take without
delay measures that will put an end to hostilities between
India and Pakistan, both by an urgent appeal for a cease-fire
and for the withdrawal of armed forces and by a no less
urgent appeal for an equitable political solution in accordance with the interests and aspirations of the populations
concerned that will make it possible to normalize living
conditions in the area of conflict and thus make possible
the return of the refugees to their homes.
/

224. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated from Chinese):
I should like to explain the vote we have just cast. The
Chinese delegation voted against the Soviet draft because it
would constitute direct interference in the internal affairs
of a Member State. The present armed aggression by the
Indian Government against Pakistan is being carried out
with the connivance, support and shielding of the Soviet
Union. Countless facts have proved this. Over a long period
the Soviet Government has energetically supported India’s
expansion and has provided the Indian expansionists with
large quantities of arms and other war material, It has
encouraged India in its sinister activities to subvert and
dismember Pakistan, and has at the same time openly
exerted all kinds of pressure on the Pakistan Government.
225. Last August the Soviet Union and India concluded a
so-called treaty of peace, friendship: and co-operation which
is in fact a treaty of military alliance. With the encouragement of that treaty, the Indian Government has become
even more embroiled in carrying out expansion and
aggression. Not long ago the Indian Prime Minister visited
Moscow and held talks with the Soviet leaders. It is by no
means accidental that since then the Indian Government
has flagrantly sent troops to invade Pakistan.
226. The Soviet representative’s performance at yesterday’s meeting has made it even clearer that the Soviet
Government is the supporter, encourager and protector of
the Indian aggression against Pakistan. Reversing right and
wrong, confounding black and white, the Soviet representative
claims that India, which carries out armed
aggression, is the victim and blames Pakistan, which is
subjected to aggression, fdr the current armed conflict.
227. The Indian representative has undisguisedly declared
that the Indian Government regards the dismemberment of
Pakistan and the disruption of its unity as state policy, and
d dp”&j 1 pg \

A

1

of Pakistan as

229. That is a naked revelation of the role played by
Soviet social imperialism in India’s armed aggression against
Pakistan. To put it bluntly, in supporting India in its
provoking of an armed conflict with Pakistan, the purpose
of the Soviet Government is to take advantage of India’s
inevitable dependenceon the Soviet Union in the war and
to control the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent and the Indian
Ocean and expand its spheresof influence so asto compete
with another super-Powerfor world hegemony.
230, This is exactly the same tactic it has used in the
Middle East question. The Soviet social imperialists are
carrying out aggression,control, subversionand expansion
everywhere. Everyone will recall the Soviet military aggression and armed occupation of Czechoslovakia in 1968.
Everyone will equally recall that the Soviet Government
plotted to subvert the legal Government of an African
country this year, grossly interfering in the internal affairs
of that country. There are too many similar instancesto
enumeratethem.
231. The present acts of the Soviet Government in the
Indo-Pakistan subcontinent are precisely the extension and
continuation of that policyp
matter how hard_,’
232. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof the
Soviet Union on a point of order.
233. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I shouldlike to draw attention
to the fact that the Chineserepresentative is diverting the
Security Council’s attention both from the main problem
under consideration and from the voting, by spreadinghis
customary slandersagainst the Soviet Union. I would ask
you, Mr. President, to draw his attention to the fact that
this is unworthy of the work of the Security Council.
234. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
China to resumehis statement, but I would ask him to
adhere strictly to the rules of procedure of the Security
Council.
235. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated from Chinese):
No matter how hard the Soviet representative may try to

justify himself, he cannot write off the facts. All these facts
which I have mentioned just now are closely related to the
Soviet draft resolution. You cannot deny facts. The present
Soviet Government is out-and-out social imperialism. No
matter how much Mr. Malik dislikes it, the label is on and
cannot be taken off, By betraying the fundamental interests
of the Indian people and serving the ambitious designs of
the Soviet Government to control the subcontinent and the
Indian Ocean, the Indian Government will inevitably eat
the bitter fruits of its own making. Soviet social imperialism
which supports and connives at Indian aggression and
expansion will come to no good end either.
236. Because of the above-mentioned reasons, the Chinese
delegation voted against the Soviet draft resolution.
237. The PRESIDENT: I now put to the vote draft
resolution S/10421 submitted by China.
238. I call on the representative of China.
239. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated from Chinese):
I wish to state that the Chinese delegation is now carrying
out consultations with other delegations with regard to this
draft resolution. Therefore, we do not ask you,
Mr. President, to put it to a vote now.
240. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now vote on
draft resolution S/10423 submitted by Argentina, Belgium,
Burundi, Italy, Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone and Somalia.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favouv: Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, Italy,
Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, United States of America.
Against: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Abstaining: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The result of the vote was I1 in favour, 2agairzst, with
2 abstentions,
The draft resolurion wasnot adopted,one of the negative
votesbeingthat of a permanentmemberof the Council.

241. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET (France) (interpretation
Porn French): Sadly, we have witnessed the rejection,
which wascompletely predictable, of draft resolutions both
yesterday and today. Leaving aside the first draft resolution
voted on this evening, which obviously could not have won
the approval of a sufficient number of members of the
Council, we should like to indicate the reasons for our
abstention on the draft resolution just voted upon. We did
not wish to vote against becausewe did not wish to oppose
a text which had the approval of a large number of
members of the Council and which could provide the basis
for the beginning of a solution, but we thought we could
not pronounce ourselves in favour of it because it was
obvious that it was destined to fail from the time that it
met with major objections from a party concerned, and,
rightly or wrongly, it might also seem to be one-sided.

242. We also abstained because we wished to indicate that
we remain open to any attempt at a constructive resolution,
which the Council has the duty to achieve, For, we share
the feelings expressed by a large number of members of the
Council-and even of delegations not members of the
Council; I am thinking of the statement made by Ambassador Driss-that it is deplorable that the Council shotrId
prove to be incapable of taking a decision on a question
which endangers peace and security. It is regrettable that
the Council should remain silent in action whereas it is so
prolific in words, just as it is deplorable that for six months
it did not deem it appropriate to take action, when all the
world knew that the fate and lives of millions of human
beings were in jeopardy. I am grateful to my neighbour,
Ambassador Vinci, for having recalled yesterday the efforts
which he as President of the Security Council and which 1
before him had endeavoured to make in this regard at the
request of the Secretary-General because it wasnecessaryas it is still necessary-to do everything possible to put an
end to bloodshed, all bloodshed. The draft resolutions, as
Ambassador Baroody said, have fallen like dead leaves, and
for the time being we are in a deadlock. Yet they are proof
of one thing-that it is not by demanding everything with a
maximum resolution that we can obtain the agreement of
the Council. Nevertheless they do show, for important steps
have been taken, that there has been the beginning of an
agreement; they gave proved that there is a basis for
agreement.
243. The Ambassador of Tunisia reminded us of this.
There is, nevertheless, a common feeling here that we must
end hostilities, all hostilities and at the same time-because
we cannot forget one of the phases of the problem-we
must encourage a political solution which wifi make
possible the free and voluntary return of all refugees. Now
this basis has been provided for us in the latest draft
resolution, In this connexion we regret that the text of
Belgium, Italy and Japan was not presented in its original
form. We consider that it would have been better, but even
now we consider that, in the light of the explanations given
to us, in the light of the appeals which have been made, and
bearing in mind what has been stated even by delegations
which seem to be so far removed from one another, we can
still reach an agreement on the essential bases, and-and we
are not claiming any originality-we believe we could take
as a basis for our discussions and consultations the draft
resolution which has been introduced, with possible amendments. In this connexion we are prepared to make our owfl
suggestions, and we believe that we should be abIe to arrive
at a text that would be worthy of the responsibility of the
Security Council.
244. However, an effort of persuasion doubtless still
remains to be made with some delegations in attempting to
save time, we sometimes lose it. What must be avoided is
the ruling out of anything, or categorical instructions. 1
believe it is too late tonight, because some delegations are,1
take it, bound by instructions which prevent them from
showing the necessary understanding and flexibility; but
that is no reason to prevent us from persevering.
245. Therefore, on the basis of the result, which is arr
unfortunate and deplorable one, 1 should like to make a
twofold suggestion: first, that the Council should remain

24

seized of the agenda as it now stands and, secondly, that we
should adjourn and, under the guidance of the President,
continue our consultations, which must be concluded
quickly because of the urgency of the matter, and that we
should resume this debate as early as possible in order to
reach agreement,

2.52, Those are the serious reasons which led to the
negative vote of my delegation on the United States draft
resolution.
253. Taking as a point of departure the position of
principle I have explained, we regret that we were not able
to vote in favour of the draft resolution contained in
document S/10423, mainly because it objectively places
India and Pakistan on a footing of equality, which we do
not consider to be appropriate and which we cannot accept.

246. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): As I explained
ia my statement last night, my delegation believes that no
voting in the Council on this issue can be effective unless
the draft resolution commands such support that a clear
message can go out From the Council. Vetoed resolutions
get us nowhere. However, so long as any hope remains,
however slight, of our achieving a unanimous resolution, Or
at least one which no delegation would find it necessary to
vote against, I believe we should pursue it. It may be that
we shall not succeed, but 1 do not think that hope is yet
dead.

254. For the same reasons of principle we voted in favour
of the draft resolution of the Soviet Union. We did SO in the
conviction that that draft resolution which went to the root
of the evil, in order radically to eradicate the effects, would
if adopted have made it possible to create the conditions
necessary to ensure a political settlement, which, as I said
yesterday, is the course that will lead to an end to
hostilities between Pakistan and India, the normalization of
the situation in East Pakistan and the return of the refugees
to their homes, which we have hoped for and continue to
hope for.

247. For that reason my delegation abstained in the vote
on the eight-Power draft resolution contained in document
S/10423, and for that reason, too, my delegation supports
the proposal just made by the representative of France, that
we should have further consultations.

255. Mr. VINCI (Italy): My delegation, like other delegations-and
not only the sponsors of the eight-Power
resolution-deeply
regret that that resolution was not
adopted, As the representative of Argentina, Mr. Ortiz de
Rozas, so eloquently stated, an effort had been made by
eight non-permanent members to have a very balanced text,
which we succeeded in putting together having had consultations between ourselves and with the main parties
concerned. Now we have reached a deadlock. We have
failed to meet our responsibilities so fat. It is deplorable, as
my neighbour the representative of France has SO clearly
emphasized, that we have not been able to take any action,
while the war continues, people are dying, and misery is
increasing. We shall not lay the blame either here or there.
We will not place it on anyone for the moment.

248. Mr.
KUT/AGA
(Poland) (interpretation
fianl
French): When I spoke yesterday my delegation presented
the position of Poland in regard to the origin of the events
which we have been considering, as well as the consequent
threat to peace. We expressed the opinion that the Council
should have urgently taken decisions which would have
made it possible to end the conflict and restore a normal
situation in the region.
249. As we said yesterday, we are convinced that those
purposes cannot be achieved without taking into account
the roots of the evil, without drawing practical conclusions
from the deterioration of the situation in East Pakistan. We
believe that that situation is doubtless due to the fact that
the Government of Pakistan decided to resort to military
measures instead of political ones in order to meet the
difficulties
which are known to us all. It is obvious that
such nlilitary measures could not lead to a normalization of
the situation, On the contrary-and -**/entshave sufficiently
proved it--the effect was seriously to aggravate the situation
in Pakistan itself, to lead to military activities, and to the
tragedy in East Bengal, in the form of attacks against India.

256. Perhaps there could be one explanation for our
failure: we have tried to tackle so many problems at the
same time-problems
of great magnitude which cannot be
dealt with in the space of a few hours, It is not only that
those problems are complex, but that they involve so many
conficting interests, not only of the main parties concerned
but also of outside Powers.
257. We feel that we cannot adjourn without making a
last, perhaps more modest, attempt to do something by
taking up, for instance, the most urgent and main duty
which is incumbent upon us, trying to rise to the occasion,
trying to live up to our responsibility, in short, stop the
fighting and stop the bloodshed.

250. That is why the delegation of Poland early this
morning voted against the draft resolution submitted by the
United States delegation. We are convinced that at the
present stage launching appeals and exhoatations which
overlook the sources and profound causes of the deterioration of the situation will not facilitate the solution of the
conflict, Such action on our part might, on the contrary,
create the impression that the Security Council, by remaining silent as to the true causes of the conflict, accepts
and approves events in East Bengal, and particularly the
military action launched in that region.

258. In the Council many voices were raised in favour of
such an action. Many eloquent voices were raised also from
some Member States which are not members of this
Council. Today we heard the Ambassadors of Tunisia and
Saudi Arabia, two distinguished and highly esteemed
colleagues who urged us to take action, And they were
certainly expressing the views and expectations not only of
the general membership, but I would say of world-wide
opinion.

251. The adoption of such a resolution by t,he SecuritY
Council could not have prevented the later aggravation of
the military
situation, or the expansion of the conflict
between India and Pakistan.
25

259. Our impotence could be condemned by public
opinion and, what is worse, might lead to the negative
consequences we have suffered and which we are still
suffering for another case. I think that the serious miscalculations which were made in June 1967 are in the minds of
many members, Because of the failure to take action at
once we are still suffering from the negative consequences
of what happened in those first days of June. Eurthermore-and to this I should like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council-if we fail to take another step not
only will we be criticized and attacked, but I think, and I
believe it is a good guess, that there will be a move to take
this question, which is a serious problem, to the General
Assembly and thus by-pass the Security Council, which is
paralysed, and you might have a General Assembly adopting one of the draft resolutions which yesterday and
today, in spite of the overwhelming majority, were not
carried.
260. Ambassador Driss has by his eloquent, moving
statement inspired me to draft a very short resolution
which takes up a very modest and urgent task which, as I
said before, is to try to stop the fighting and the bloodshed.
I know perfectly well that this draft will appear unsatisfactory to many delegations. However, may I point out at
once that the draft resolution which we, together with
other delegations, have in mind, does not prejudge any of
the many issues which were raised during our debate, nor
any of the measures we shall and must take in the future. I
shall read this draft which is co-sponsored by Belgium,
Japan, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Tunisia and Italy. As I said,
it is a very short draft:
LTbe Security Council,
“Gravely concerned that hostilities have broken out
between India and Pakistan which constitute an immediate threat to international peace and security,
“1. Calls upon the Governments concerned forthwith,
as a first step, for an immediate cease-fire;
“2. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Council promptly and currently informed of the implementation of this resolution;
“3. Decides to continue to discuss the further measures to be taken in order to restore peace in the area.”
[S/l 0425.1
261. We have given this draft resolution to the Secretariat.
I believe it will be available very soon and circulated. As
will be noted, the last paragraph keeps us seized of this
problem. In our mind it means we will go on meeting every
day until we can take up other measures. And here I should
like to thank Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet for his very
favourable and positive comments on the original draft of
Belgium, Japan and Italy. I thank him also for having
advocated a further effort in order to go on with
consultations and see if the original three-Power draft
resolution could be amended and improved, if possible.
262. If there are no other speakers in explanation of vote
I would propose that we recess for a few minutes in ordei

that the text we are submitting can be printed &
circulated and submitted for the consideration oi F?X
Council.
263. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I should H&
to defer our right to speak at this moment if I COUM ~;n;;l
we see if this draft resolution is going to be voted on r&
evening and speak after the vote, if that is agreeable to
Chair.
264. Mr. HUANG I-Iua (China) (z’ranslated fyon1 Ukr&w,
I should like to explain the vote that the Chinese delepai+z
has just cast. The Chinese delegation voted for r%
eight-Power draft resolution but we must State that ti?3
draft does not face reality squarely and condemn :ZX
aggressors. That is, of course, unsatisfactory.
265. Secondly, this draft resolution refers to the carii,~%
political settlement. The Chinese delegation is of the a;;ie*
that these words cannot be interpreted as meaning 2;
violation of the United Nations Charter or interference E
the internal affairs of any sovereign State.
266. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republi%
(translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation bclie~es
that the comments made by the French represental&?
concerning the continuation of consultations arc reason&b
and appropriate at this time and that it would be ndviwb%
for all delegations and the Security Council as a whoIc EC
agree with those comments and proposals.
267. As I understand its actions, the Chinese delegar&:
has also withdrawn
its draft for the same reasons. c9a.
plaining that it intends to pursue consultations on its L’U:
draft. There is therefore na reason for not taking 11~5):
circumstances into account and hastily resubmitting pi;**
posals which cannot be adopted. Why? The answer is &er?
simple: because, as has already been repeatedly stated aa?
explained in great detail, it is not possible to separate t&t
two aspects of the problem, to divorce one from the other
and overlook the need for a political settlement. Here UC
disagree in principle with previous speakers.
268, The Pakistan representative himself has recognir&
the existence of a serious political crisis in East Pakist;lLF!
And until that crisis is settled by peaceful political nmrzs.
Only
Utopians can hope for tranquillity in the In&P:
subcontinent. And anyone who side-steps this proble??:,
obviously prefers to see instability, terror, violence an?
chaos continue, in accordance with the principle “the war%
it is, the better it is”. It would therefore be far better if 0%
Security Council continued consultations on this important
problem which it is now considering.
269. We would therefore ask the Italian delegation Xe
reconsider its position, not to insist on its proposal and 1%~
agree to the Council continuing its consultations.
270. Since I have the floor, I should also like to rep!!,
briefly to the latest maliciously slanderous statement
against the Soviet Union and its peace-loving policies by the
Chinese representative, More and more we are drawing the
conclusion that he has come to the United Nations and Ihe
Security Council not as a serious representative of a serious

State to discuss serious matters, but to amuse the imperialists, aggressors and militarists who delight in dissension
between the Soviet Union and China. Well, if he has
assumed this role of one who amuses the imperialists, let
him continue his mischievous work, This role is fully in
accord with the beliefs of the Chinese social traitors.
271. Why did he feel the need to make this statement and
to give such an obvious display of pathological hatred
towards the Soviet Union? In order to disguise the beliefs
of the Chinese, to disguisethe real reasonsfor China’svote
against the Soviet draft resolution and to prevent the
Security Council adopting practical measuresafter such
detailed consideration and after establishingthe existence
of a serious political crisis in East Pakistan. Chinadoesnot
want tp see a just and effective decision taken by the
Council, and this is in accordancewith its beliefs:the more
agitation, disorder, violence and terror, the better. That is
the whole Chinesebelief and policy.
272. The statement was alsonecessaryin order to disguise
the now obvious fact that the Chinese delegation is
defending injustice, violence, terror and thosewho caused
the sufferings of the almost 10 million peoplewho have
been forced to leave their homes, their land, their houses
and flee to another country. It wasalso necessaryin order
to prevent the Security Council making a humanitarian
appeal to Pakistan to take measuresto settle the political
crisis, whose existence has been officially recognizedby all
of us.
273. TO these ends the Chinese representativehas not
scrupled to use any means.He has ascribedto me words
which I have not said: “West Pakistan”. That term doesnot
exist in my vocabulary. He has distorted my quotations.
This is a new meansof carrying on debatesin the Security
Council: to distort quotations and then disputethem. If the
Chinese representative comesto the Security Councilwith
new methods of this type, he will not get very far with
them. He mentioned the events in Czechoslovakiain 1968.
That is shameful for China and the Chineserepresentatives.
If the socialist countries, including the Soviet IJnion, had
not extended fraternal assistanceto the CommunistParty
and people of Czechoslovakia, Czechoslovakiawould have
been engulfed by imperialismand reaction. That is precisely
wlzat China wasaiming at, in pursuit of its own beliefs:the
worse it is for socialism, for the revolutionary forces
throughout the world and for friendship amongthe socialist
countries, the better it is. And if the socialistcountrieshad
not taken the necessarymeasures,socialist Czechoslovakia
would not have survived.

considersit appropriateto speakin accordancewith the
principle which we formulated yesterday. We realize that
when the smallcountriesspeak,evenwhen they put their
fmger on the truth, they arenot alwayslistenedto with the
maximumof attention. Lessthan 24 hours agoI saidthat
my delegation,for its part, wasscepticalabout unanimity
amongthe membersof the Councilon any draft resolution
whatever. Unfortunately, my forecasthasbeenconfirmed
severaltimes.
276. We presumethat the role which hasbeenplayed by
the non-permanentmembersof the Council-the majority
of which are smsllStates-may well beplayed downbefore
world public opinion, in the newspapers.
It is not inconceivablethat tomorrow the headlinesin the paperswill be
concentratedon the few clashesthat have taken place in
this chamber,insteadof placingthe emphasis
on the highly
laudablerole played by the non-permanentmembers.We
believe that the Security Council,at all costs,must be the
instrumentof international peaceand security. We therefore wishto continueour efforts in the faceof the tragedy
that is unfoldingin the regionconcerned.In Africa we have
not yet experiencedmodernwarfare,nevertheless
we would
have thought that the majority among us who have
first-handknowledgeof the pain and ravagesof war would
be in a positionto help us out of the presentimpasse.
Of
course,the Security Councilis located far from India and
Pakistan,and so it succumbsto a sort of abstraction;in
other words, it has an abstractidea of the material and
human devastationwhich is taking place in those two
countries.
277. That is why, in accordancewith our unswerving
attachment to the ideasthat we expressedyesterday, we
believe that in order to understandbetter the situation
which exists there, it is necessaryto indulge in what
experimentalpsychology calls introspection. If we could
transport ourselvesto the countriesconcernedandwitness
what is taking place, seeingthe fate of the refugeesand
observethe war that is now goingon in India andPakistan,
if we could seethe womenandchildrenwaiting for shellsto
fall upon them, what would our reactionbe? Must politics
and diplomacy disregardhuman feeling and compassion?
Wewant to withdraw to anivory tower wherewe no longer
think of the terrible sufferingwhich is a daily occurrencein
the countriesthat we are discussing?Representinga small
country which is a fervent championof peace,I think that
the Security Councilmust now rise above the difficulties
which it hasencounteredfor theselast two days,in order
to preventthe situationfrom deterioratingfurther.
278, It is true that conversations
havebeentakingplacein
recent months, but now it is really time to take concrete
action to find a solution and to seeto it that the Security
Councilisrespectedin its powersandits rights.

274. That is what the Chinesebeliefs have led to and are
leading to. And today we hail both the CommunistParty
and the people of Czechoslovakia,who have in their recent
elections proclaimed their genuineproletarian and popular
279. We havejust beenpresentedwith a draft resolution.1
will, having voted for the candidatesput forward by the
think that, sinceseveralhave proposedit, it might be well
Party and having thereby condemnedboth the attemptsof
to hold consultationsto seewhether a more acceptable
imperialism and reaction to lead Czechoslovakiaawayfrom
the socialist path and the policiesand beliefsof the Chinese solution-onewhich is greatly desired-mightbe found.
social traitors. On that point, perhapsI might stop.
280. I should like to conclude by repeatingan urgent
appealthat any delay shouldbe avoidedsothat we can save
275.
Mr.
TERENCE (Burundi) (i?GerpretariOn from
French):
At this stage in our debate my delegation what remainsto be savedon both sides,and bearingin
21

.-

mind the fundamental points raised-particularly
by the
non-permanent members, which have no direct interests
involved but have endeavoured to find a solution-to help
us out of the impasse, in which we have been stuck for two
days.
281. I should like to conclude by saying that, in order
better to understand the situation, we should try to
personalize the problem and to place ourselves in the
position of those who are directly affected. For example,
let us try to imagine the panic of those who are directly
affected, when they realize that they might be burned to
death at any moment.

286. You said with regard to the situation in the Middle
East that in 1967, within the United Nations, you put
forward the proposal for a cease-fire and the withdrawal of
troops. Why then do you refuse to apply the same principle
to the situation on the Indian subcontinent? That fully
reveals that you harbour expansionist ambitions with regard
to the Indian subcontinent. You are resorting to delaying
tactics to enable India within a very short time to change
the military situation in Pakistan.
287. Certain responsible persons in India have stated that
they regard military activities in Pakistan as a short-term
affair.

282. Those are the reasons that have led me to speak more
on the human level and setting aside political and diplomatic considerations which at times divert us from the true
path towards a proper solution.

288. At the very beginning of the meeting you made a
proposal for the participation of representatives of the
so-called Bangla Desh, using this to obstruct the progress of
our meeting. And then you introduced this sinister draft
resolution. In all you tried every means to engage in
collusion with the Indian expansionists in order to achieve
the dismemberment of the State of Pakistan and to attain
your ambition, the control of the Indian subcontinent.
Otherwise you would not have vetoed a draft resolution
containing provisions for a cease-fire and the withdrawal of
troops.

283. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) [translated from Chinese):
It seems that my statement hit Mr. Malik’s sore point.
Therefore, he made a most unreasonable and slanderous
reply. However, the foreign policy of the great revolutionary Government of China cannot be distorted by a small
Mr. Malik. Mr. Malik mentioned the great October Revolution. He mentioned the Second World War. The Chinese
Government and people have only respect with regard to
the great October Revolution and with regard to the great
Soviet people for their sacrifice and for the contributions
they have made during the Second World War.

289. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I understand from the statement
made by Ambassador Malik that the deIegation of the
Soviet Union is not yet ready to vote on the last draft
resolution, that WC have just circulated [S/10425/. Perhaps
other delegations’ are in the same position. Therefore, an
behalf of the sponsors and of my own delegation, I would
say that we shall not insist on a recess and that we are ready
to go into consultations.

284. But the blood shed by the martyrs of the great
October Revolution and the blood shed by the Soviet
fighters during the Second World War cannot cleanse the
crimes committed by the Soviet traitors. The brilliant
contribution made by the Soviet people in history cannot
add any colour to the faces of these traitors. On the
contrary, if we compare the past foreign policy of the
revolutionary Government of the Soviet Union with the
social imperialist foreign policy of today, things become
very clear.

290. May I just add a few comments, even if I should
repeat myself? The purpose of the sponsors of this very
short draft resolution was to make a very last attempt at
this very late hour to see if we could not at least take one
modest first step after 24 hours of discussion, an effort to
stop the fighting, the shooting and the bloodshed, at least
part of it. That was our main purpose, and I think the
sponsors of this draft resolution can feel that they have
done their duty up to the very last minute and that tlley
can have a clear conscience.

285. Mr. Malik mentioned the Czechoslovak event. He
deems it regrettable that China was not able to participate
in this great and glorious act of social imperialism. He is
only dreaming. The Chinese Government and people and
the Chinese Communist Party have long denounced vigorously the Soviet act of aggression against the people of
Czechoslovakia. What you did was not rendering assistance
to a socialist country. In the darkness of the night, like
gangsters, you dispatched your planes, air force and
paratroopers to control its capital city. You brought by
force the leaders of Czechoslovakia to Moscow and then
forced them to sign your most humiliating conditions, This
has fully revealed your social imperialist “hand of friendship”. The Soviet representative may well look over his
statement made today. You have extended your security
boundary to the Indian subcontinent now. You are saying
that the Indian subcontinent is directly related to your
security interests. This kind of reasoning is exactly the same
as the security boundary and the security interests of Israel.
It is precisely because of the policy of social imperialism
pursued by the Soviet Government that the Chinese
delegation cannot but vote against your draft resolution
and expose the true nature of your draft resolution.

291. Another comment I should like to make is that,as 1
said in introducing this draft resolution, we certainly did
not mean to stop our deliberations after this first step but
on the contrary meant to keep this problem under close
consideration and to go on and on meeting until we could
take further measures, including what Ambassador Malik
has called a political solution. To prove this point I think 1
need only refer to draft resolution S/10423, submitted by
eight delegations, including my own, in which there is a
preambular paragraph reading as follows:
“Convinced that an early political solution would be
necessary for the restoration of conditions of normalcy in
the area of conflict and for the return of the refugees to
their homes,“.
So we certainly had that point in mind, but we thou&t,
and we still think, that an early decision-if we Carl still calI
28

it “early”
after 48 hours of discussion-was
order to fulfil our responsibility.

necessary in

292. In any case, I repeat that we are ready to go along
with the consultations suggested by the Ambassador of
France and supported by other delegations.
293. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): This Council
has now been in extended session for two full days. We met
because we were faced with a clear and present threat to
the peace of the world. During our debate no member of
the Council has even attempted to deny that this threat to
international peace is an urgent fact with which we must
dKl1.
294. A few minutes ago I recited our views on the
hostilities which continue unabated, The duty of this
Council is manifest. If it is to fulfil the responsibilities
irnposed on it by the Charter, it must act to stop the
fighting and preserve the territorial integrity of Member
States. Peace must be restored before we can expect
progress towards the creation of a climate conducive to the
settlement of the issues that lie behind the fighting.

some time to reflect on the events of the past few days and
that all of us consider carefully what more we might
usefulIy do to rescue the Council from apparent impotence
and failure. It may be that we shall find no basis for
constructive action and that we shall have to consider what
other possibilities are open to us. All of us would benefit
from a brief period of time for reflection before we make
this decision. My delegation believes that we should meet
again as soon as possible tomorrow. I suggest, Mr. President,
that we leave it to you, in consultation with members, to
fix the time when we should meet again. Whatever we
decide, however, one thing is clear: we cannot leave the
matter where it is. As I have said, the world is watching,
and all that we have done so far is to demonstrate that one
member is able to frustrate the will of a very large majority.
But I strongly hope that we shall yet find the collective
wisdom to act constructively in the discharge of our
responsibilities under the Charter. It is in that spirit that we
strongly support the suggestions made by the representatives of France and of Italy.
299. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I have asked to speak in order to
make a brief reply. Everyone who has listened to today’s
statement by the Chinese representative has been able to
see clearly and with his own eyes the low level to which the
social treachery of the Chinese has sunk.

295. It is clear that the dominant sentiment in this
Council is that it must decisively address itself to first
things first. By large majorities-l 1 members in one
instance and then again 11 in another instance this
evening-this Council has sought to achieve agreement that
a cease-fire must be brought about in the Indian subcontinent and that the troops of the parties involved must be
withdrawn to within their own borders.

300. With his malicious and pathological slander against
the Soviet Union, the Chinese representative is playing the
role of an imperialist jester in the main organ of the United
Nations. He is amusing the imperialists with his malicious
slander against the Soviet Union. Now there is nothing
more for the imperialists to do in this area. They have a
reliable spokesman.

296. This Council can do no less ifit is not to abdicate its
responsibilities in the eyes of the world. We cannot accept
the view that we must bow to the will of those who oppose
the course of action which such a large majority knows to
be the right course. If the lowest common denominator
resolution
which can escape a Soviet veto makes no
contribution
to the urgent problem of peace in South Asia,
then we cannot accept it.

301. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakers inscribed on my list. I would therefore suggest to the Council
that we adjourn this meeting. This would permit members
of the Council to hold extensive consultations in order to
find a solution for the grave and serious problems with
which we are confronted.

297. The only responsible action which the Council can
take is to call for both a cease-fire and the withdrawal of
armed forces. To act otherwise is to admit that the Council
is impotent to act on the very issue of war and peace. My
colleague from the Soviet Union has often made known his
country’s views that the Charter imposes on the Security
Council the responsibility to act on security issues, on
matters which involve a threat to the peace. Has the
Council ever faced a more obvious test of its responsibilities?

302. It is my understanding that the draft resolution
submitted by China, contained in document S/10421, is
still before the Council. A six-Power draft resolution,
contained in document S/10425, is also before the Council.
In view of this situation, I would suggest that this item be
included in the agenda of the meeting scheduled for
tomorrow afternoon at 3.30 o’clock which is to take up the
question of Southern Rhodesia and the admission of a new
member.

298. Before we admit that this Council, the world’s
principal organ for the maintenance of peace and security,
has failed in its duty, I want to join in the suggestion that
has been made here by other representatives that we take

303. As I hear no objection, we shall proceed accordingly.
The meetingrose at II.15 p.m.

29

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
dGpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.
ICAIC

TIOJIYVHTb

XK~~AIINJI

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OI’I’AHM3AI[MH

DE

OBTaEARHEHHhIX

LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&in
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
Unidas, Seccirjn de Vcntas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 1.50 (or equivalent

NACIONES

HAIIJM

UNIDAS

on venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero o dirijase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

82210~June

19744,050
