United Nations

S/PV.5872

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5872nd meeting
Tuesday, 22 April 2008, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kumalo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Belle
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Shcherbak
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2008/196)
Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2008/249)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-31307 (E)

*0831307*

S/PV.5872

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2008/196)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2008/249)
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Rodolphe Adada,
Joint
African
Union/United
Nations
Special
Representative for Darfur.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Adada to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Holmes to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them two
reports of the Secretary-General on the deployment of
the African Union United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, contained in documents S/2008/196 and
S/2008/249.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Rodolphe Adada, Joint African

2

Union/United Nations Special Representative for
Darfur, and Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rodolphe Adada, Joint
African Union/United Nations Special Representative
for Darfur.
Mr. Adada: I have my own statement for the
Security Council, but I would present, with your
permission, a very short update on the political process
that the two Special Envoys, Jan Eliasson and Salim
Ahmed Salim, have asked me to present to the Council.
(spoke in French)
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
providing me with this opportunity to brief the
Council. The 90-day report of the Secretary-General
offers comprehensive information on the reporting
period in question. Today, I will focus on the current
security, humanitarian and political situation in Darfur.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) was deployed in
accordance with resolution 1769 (2007), with a
mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. The central expectation placed upon us by the
people of Darfur and the international community,
through the solemn decision of the Security Council, is
to provide protection for the civilians of Darfur. The
people of Darfur have suffered terribly from war
during the past five years, and the world has demanded
unequivocally that this suffering be brought to an end.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) is the primary instrument chosen by
the Council for that task.
As I speak today, I must report frankly that there
is a long way to go before we can say that we have met
those expectations and fulfilled the promise made by
the Council. Our forces are serving under exceptionally
difficult conditions, facing daily dangers and
hardships. I am obliged to report that the obstacles they
need to surmount and the risks that they run have not
diminished over the past three months.
In spite of all our efforts, it remains the case that
three months into UNAMID’s operations, the force
strength has not increased much from the strength of
the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) as it was
at the end of December 2007. The force is at less than
40 per cent of its mandated level of 19,555 and it is

08-31307

S/PV.5872

very unlikely to achieve full operating capability
before 2009.
The key challenges are therefore to ensure that
the former AMIS units and incoming units from troopcontributing countries are self-sustaining. Otherwise,
measures must be put in place to assist them on the
ground. The majority of the former AMIS bases that
are being retained by UNAMID require expanding and
refurbishing. Furthermore, the deteriorating conditions
of roads in Darfur and the approaching rainy season
will make the main supply routes impassable in many
areas. All these challenges will require exceptional
logistics and engineering operations which will dictate
the rate of deployment of new and expanded units.
In light of all these complications, the mission is
finalizing a list of vital emergency measures needed to
reposition the deployment back on track. The
achievement of the mission’s new deployment goals
and the application of these measures will once again
depend heavily on the timely and unhindered
cooperation of all the stakeholders.
Having said that, I am happy to inform the
Council that a number of deployments by troopcontributing countries are scheduled over the next three
months, including the main body of the Chinese
engineering company, the Egyptian infantry battalion,
the Egyptian signals, engineering and transport
companies, the Bangladeshi multi-role logistics
company and the Nigerian level-II hospital. The
Ethiopian advance party has arrived in El Fasher, and
their deployment is expected to be completed in June.
All these deployments are dependent upon the arrival
of the contingent-owned equipment in Darfur.
During the next three months we expect the four
Nigerian battalions and the South African battalion to
rotate. The combination of the planned deployments
and the rotation will put UNAMID under considerable
pressure. Owing to the very long line of
communication from Port Sudan into Darfur, the
difficult road conditions and the lack of capacity
among local contractors, the risk of delays remains
high.
The Force Commander’s priority is to have the
10 existing infantry battalions brought up to the United
Nations contingent-owned equipment and selfsustaining standards. This is a considerable challenge
since, although troop-contributing countries can
generate the troops, many of them are unable to meet

08-31307

United Nations requirements. I should like to express
the mission’s appreciation to the donors for their
initiative to increase the operational capability of
troop-contributors.
Since the transfer of authority, UNAMID is still
lacking five critical operational capabilities: attack
helicopters, surveillance aircraft, medium-lift support
helicopters, military engineers and logistical support.
An offer to meet part of the attack and medium-lift
helicopter requirement has been made by Ethiopia, and
an initial reconnaissance has been carried out by that
country.
I am happy to confirm that UNAMID police and
civilian components are gradually increasing their
impact on the ground in Darfur. Patrols are being
conducted for substantially longer periods over greater
areas of Darfur and now take place on a daily basis.
More protection is being provided to vulnerable groups
during firewood collection, enhancing security around
the camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
providing better protection, especially for the women
in the IDP camps.
In addition, police advisers have held several
public forums with the leadership of the IDP camps to
explain the UNAMID police mandate and duties, the
concept of community policing and violence against
women. The introduction of the community policing
concept has culminated in the registration and training
of 287 IDP volunteers, 30 of whom are women.
The mission remains concerned with the security
situation on the ground and the lack of systematic or
sustained protection for vulnerable civilians in Darfur.
In this context, the recent Government attacks on
villages in the northern corridor of West Darfur left at
least 100 civilians dead and caused tens of thousands to
flee their homes. The attacks by the Sudanese Armed
Forces were in response to an earlier attack by the
Justice and Equality Movement at the beginning of the
year. These acts constitute grave violations of
international humanitarian law and need to be strongly
condemned. All the parties involved in the conflict
must respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and implement their obligations
under all relevant Security Council resolutions and
existing ceasefire agreements.
While security is primary concern of the mission,
and the one that has the most direct impact on the lives
of civilians in Darfur, UNAMID continues to push for

3

S/PV.5872

a comprehensive political solution to the conflict. The
mission is fully committed to supporting the work of
the Special Envoys and will continue to encourage all
stakeholders to reach a negotiated solution.
Despite all these relentless efforts, I am afraid
that the prospects for the peace process in Darfur
remain very slim. The senior staff of UNAMID
continues to meet with the representatives of the
signatories and non-signatories to the Darfur Peace
Agreement (DPA). Unfortunately, it is commonly
understood today in Darfur that peace is not at all
attractive,
either
economically
or
politically.
Signatories of the DPA have not only lost most of their
political credibility and popular backing from the grass
roots in Darfur; they also have expressed their deep
frustration and disappointment about the lack of
financial, political and logistical support they receive
from the international community and the Government
of the Sudan. Non-signatories are, however, still being
armed and enjoy the logistical and financial support
which allows them to sustain the political backing in
Darfur. All local and international actors need to exert
serious efforts to reverse this dangerous trend.
Furthermore, the conflicts in Darfur and Chad are
now closely linked. In the current state of affairs, it is
difficult to consider a solution to one conflict without
taking the other into account. UNAMID will remain in
close contact with the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
with those African and international leaders who are
engaged in seeking a solution to the problems between
the Sudan and Chad.
Among the priorities of the mission, as the body
mandated by resolution 1769 (2007) to contribute to
the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement, are
reviving the Joint Commission and restructuring the
Ceasefire Commission so that it can have a meaningful
mechanism for monitoring and verifying violations of
the ceasefire agreement. In the absence of a widely
supported peace agreement, the Ceasefire Commission
is a crucial tool for the implementation of the mission’s
mandate.
The challenges facing UNAMID are formidable
in every respect. There are such high hopes in the
mission that the warm reception that Darfurians have
given it could very quickly degenerate into deep
frustration. It is disturbing to note that, although Darfur
is at the top of the international agenda, this attention

4

has not thus far been translated into action to provide
UNAMID with the means to accomplish its mission.
In resolution 1769 (2007), the Council gave the
mission an extraordinary mandate, corresponding to
the international community’s level of concern at the
unacceptable human suffering in Darfur. Carrying out
that mandate on the ground requires tools that are equal
to the task. It would be a tragedy if the high hopes for
that mandate — particularly the responsibility to
protect millions of innocent civilians who continue to
live in fear — were to be dashed.
The Council has consistently stated that it
considers Darfur to be among the most important crises
today, and Council members have committed
themselves to ensuring that a force capable of
addressing the complexities of the conflict is deployed
in an effective and timely manner. Therefore, I appeal
to the Council to redouble its efforts to assist the
mission in overcoming the logistical and political
obstacles that it currently faces.
I would like to conclude by expressing my
gratitude for the good cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in bringing about the
progress made thus far by UNAMID. And, on behalf of
all my colleagues, I thank the Council for having given
me this opportunity to speak about the work of
UNAMID.
(spoke in English)
With the Council’s permission, I shall now read
out the following brief statement by the Special
Envoys, which provides an update on the political
process.
“As members of the Council are aware, it
will be very difficult for UNAMID to implement
its mandate and protect the civilians of Darfur if
there is no peace to keep. According to Special
Envoys Eliasson and Salim, prospects for
comprehensive substantive talks in the near
future are dim. Their emphasis is now on
reducing the level of violence and preparing a
cessation of hostilities.
“The five movement groupings have made
little progress in unifying their positions and
agreeing on a negotiation team. The Government
of National Unity lacks a coherent Darfur
strategy. The security situation has deteriorated
dramatically. Relations between Chad and Sudan

08-31307

S/PV.5872

have been strained, and humanitarian access has
been threatened.
“In view of the dire security situation, the
Special Envoys have re-emphasized the primacy
of a political solution and have refocused the
work of the mediation on establishing a dialogue
between the parties on security-related matters.
On 17 and 18 March in Geneva, they held
consultations with regional and international
partners to discuss the way forward. There was
agreement among all participants that improving
the security situation in Darfur, as well as
normalizing the relationship between Sudan and
Chad, was essential in order to make progress on
the political track.
“Since the Geneva meeting, the Joint
Mediation Support Team has shuttled between the
movements and the Government to determine the
conditions under which the parties could engage
in a dialogue on security issues, including the
framework for a cessation of hostilities. To
highlight the urgency of the matter, the Special
Envoys were in Khartoum, Juba and Darfur over
the past two weeks, exploring with the parties the
possibility of convening such consultations. The
Government of Sudan has set up a technical team
to work with the mediation. The Envoys have
stressed the importance of involving both Minni
Minawi and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement in these discussions.
“In meetings with the representatives of the
United Resistance Front, Abdul Wahid and Khalil
Ibrahim, the movements agreed with the Envoys
that improving the security situation is the first
priority. Concrete steps are now being taken to
move forward as soon as possible on establishing
a dialogue between the parties under African
Union and United Nations auspices. The Joint
Mediation Support Team is also continuing its
work to find common ground among Sudanese
civil society, political parties, traditional leaders
and the internally displaced population on the
various issues related to peace in Darfur,
including the census and the elections.”
The President: I thank Mr. Adada for his own
statement and also for reading out the statement by the
facilitators of the political process.

08-31307

I now give the floor to Mr. John Holmes, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to provide the Council with an update on
the humanitarian situation to complement what
members just heard from the Joint Special
Representative.
The Council first discussed Darfur four years ago
this month. Sadly, many of the observations that my
predecessor made at that time remain only too relevant
today: growing numbers of displaced, continuing
hostilities and violence against civilians, increasing
humanitarian needs and limited access to beneficiaries.
The difference is that almost six times as many people
are now affected. Jan Egeland spoke in April 2004 of
approximately 750,000 people in danger. Of Darfur’s
estimated 6 million people, some 4.27 million have
now been seriously affected by the conflict;
2.45 million are internally displaced, while an
additional 260,000 have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries.
One year ago, I briefed the Council myself for the
first time, following my first visit to Darfur as
Emergency Relief Coordinator. I am sad to say that the
humanitarian situation is as grim today as it was then,
if not more so. In 2008 so far, a further 100,000
civilians have been forced to flee, many of them not for
the first time. Nearly 60,000 were displaced in West
Darfur alone. The Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) rebel movement was responsible for initiating
the latest round of violence there by attacking
Government
installations,
including
reportedly
launching attacks from within civilian areas, with the
civilian population bearing the brunt of the
consequences. But military units of the Government of
Sudan once again used disproportionate force and
failed to differentiate between military and civilian
targets
in
their
response,
including
aerial
bombardments. Last month’s report by the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights highlighted
targeted attacks on civilians during that campaign, in
particular through the use of Janjaweed militias to
terrorize the population before the arrival of regular
forces.
Elsewhere in Darfur, too, hostilities between the
parties, intra-rebel and tribal clashes, aerial
bombardments and the resurgence of Janjaweed

5

S/PV.5872

militias have resulted in death, displacement and
widespread violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law. Cross-border attacks and
support for each other’s rebel groups by Chad and the
Sudan have further destabilized security in both
countries, despite efforts to reduce tensions following
the Dakar Agreement.
Darfur today is therefore still characterized by
insecurity, lawlessness and impunity. The effects on
civilians are not difficult to imagine. Widespread
human rights abuses continue to be reported in many
areas. A particularly worrying feature is evidence of
high levels of sexual violence and exploitation in the
northern corridor of West Darfur over the past two
months — for example, judged by the dramatically
increased number of women and girls seeking
treatment for the effects of those brutal acts and
statistics for sexually transmitted infections treated at
local health clinics.
In my previous trips to Darfur, I met women who
had the courage to tell me some of their stories, while
the authorities have continued to deny that any such
thing could exist in their country. Sexual violence in
Darfur is not a figment of our collective imaginations. I
call upon the Government, which has the primary
responsibility for the protection of its citizens, to take
concrete steps to address this scourge, and on the
armed groups to help stamp it out.
The humanitarian community itself is also subject
to constant violence. Since the start of the year we
have seen 106 vehicles hijacked — 46 United Nations
and non-governmental organization vehicles and
60 trucks contracted to the World Food Programme
(WFP). One WFP-contracted driver has been killed and
26 drivers are still missing. The rate of hijackings is
more than 350 per cent higher than even the already
alarming statistics of 2007.
So far in 2008, 42 humanitarian premises have
been assaulted, and six aid workers killed. Rebel
groups and individuals associated with them appear to
be primarily responsible for the attacks on convoys and
hijackings, whether their motives are military or
criminal. All that is seriously jeopardizing efforts to
deliver aid, and in particular to preposition relief
supplies ahead of the rainy season. It also comes at a
time when several key humanitarian indicators are
getting worse, including those on malnutrition, which

6

is now in excess of emergency threshold levels in many
areas of Darfur.
That may sound a sadly familiar story, if no less
unacceptable for that. But we need also to be aware of
the cumulative effects of continued violence, stress and
upheaval in Darfur. Those in the camps feel helpless
and voiceless. The fear of never being able to return to
their areas of origin and the pressure by Government
authorities to return when conditions are clearly not
right lead to increasing tension, polarization,
politicization and even militarization.
But the conflict and the continuing degradation of
traditional social structures after five years of fighting
and flight have serious consequences not just for the
stability of camps for internally displaced persons
(IDPs), but more fundamentally for the long-term
stability of Darfur itself. How many will be able, or
indeed even willing, to return to their previous lives
when peace finally arrives? Normality cannot simply
be suspended for five years or more and then resume as
if nothing had happened. That problem is aggravated
every month that passes without peace.
Meanwhile even relatively untouched rural
communities are increasingly vulnerable and require
our assistance in growing numbers. In some areas, for
example, the price of staple commodities such as millet
has doubled since this time last year. That partly
reflects the global phenomenon of rising food prices
and partly unfavourable weather, but it is also a result
of general dislocation and neglect as so many fields go
untilled and infestations of disease and pests go
unchecked. Unfortunately, we cannot always access
those rural communities. It is inevitable that some of
their inhabitants too will end by migrating to IDP
camps — many of which are currently well beyond
capacity — in search of assistance. We are already
seeing this in Al Salaam camp in south Darfur, where
approximately 1,000 newly arrived families remain
unregistered, with 17 deaths among that group during
the month of March alone.
There is a risk that developments will take an
even more serious turn. The World Food Programme
announced last week that it would be forced to reduce
its food distributions next month. Regular attacks on its
convoys, in particular on the roads from Kordofan to
El Fasher in north Darfur and Ed Daein in south
Darfur, mean that they have simply not been able to
preposition food stocks as necessary and cannot now

08-31307

S/PV.5872

catch up without a radical transformation of the
position. That means that the amount of food provided
to the conflict-affected men, women and children in
Darfur will be halved in a matter of days. That heartbreaking decision could not come at a worse time, as
the agency continues to struggle in any case to deliver
to its existing beneficiaries as the rainy season
approaches.

Janjaweed militias and put an end to impunity for those
who commit crimes — including banditry, the killings
of civilians and rape — by actively seeking out those
responsible and prosecuting them. As an increasingly
prosperous country, the Sudan should provide more
assistance to its population, rather than continuing to
allow the international community to shoulder virtually
all the financial responsibility.

During that period malaria, water-borne diseases,
respiratory infections and other illnesses normally
cause mortality to increase in Darfur. The effects on
those further weakened by poor nutrition are likely to
be much worse. Global acute malnutrition in children
under the age of five, for example, which is already in
excess of emergency thresholds in many areas of
Darfur, could double. It is therefore vital that the
Government of the Sudan does much more to protect
those convoys and that the armed groups stop such
attacks by anyone associated with them, as well as
halting all attempts to extract so-called taxes at
checkpoints along the roads.

Rebel movements are responsible for many of the
threats facing civilians and the relief operation. They
too can do much more. They should stop endangering
the lives of civilians by the kind of attacks that are
bound to provoke a response in civilian areas, with
predominantly civilian casualties. All groups should
stop attacking humanitarian vehicle convoys and
premises, control all those within their ranks and
punish those responsible. The movements should
ensure safe humanitarian access and assistance and
show respect for basic humanitarian principles. They
should ensure the civilian character of IDP camps and
villages.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur is also looking at how it can help.
Meanwhile, I appeal to the donor community to
redouble its efforts to ensure that key under-funded
sectors such as health, nutrition and water and
sanitation receive the rapid support they need.

In spite of those challenges, 14,700 international,
national and local relief workers continue, wherever
and whenever possible, to provide life-saving
assistance. I spoke a year ago of the fragility of the
operation. That has increased as time has gone by. But
the agencies, organizations and individuals involved
have refused to be intimidated. I salute their
determination and that of donors.

I am pleased to say that the moratorium on
restrictions and the joint communiqué on the
facilitation of humanitarian assistance in Darfur, which
were extended at the end of January, have helped to
alleviate bureaucratic obstacles. I am grateful to the
Government of the Sudan for improved cooperation in
that area, but the humanitarian operation still faces
other obstacles. Those agreements do not, for example,
ensure physical access to IDPs and other vulnerable
groups. Humanitarian workers are too often blocked by
military intelligence, national security elements or
civilian police, seemingly at random. Those denials of
access serve no discernible purpose aside from
frustrating relief efforts and increasing suffering.
The Government of the Sudan can therefore do
much more to help on the humanitarian side. In areas
under its control, the Government should improve
security for civilians and the international community,
in accordance with international law, and ensure more
freedom of movement for relief organizations. The
Government should disband once and for all the

08-31307

However, even if the humanitarian presence at
times can act as a deterrent to violence against civilians
and our efforts sustain the lives of millions,
humanitarians still cannot provide what is
fundamentally lacking.
I am saddened and angry as Emergency Relief
Coordinator that, after five years of that suffering and
four years since the Council became actively engaged,
we have still not been able to find a lasting solution to
the suffering of those millions of men, women and
children. A study in 2006 suggested that 200,000 had
lost their lives from the combined effects of the
conflict. That figure must be much higher now, perhaps
half as much again, yet we continue to see the
goalposts receding, to the point where peace in Darfur
seems further away today than ever. Further progress in
the deployment of UNAMID, equipped to protect
civilians and improve security, will help, but only an
end to all violence and concrete steps towards a

7

S/PV.5872

political settlement will make the fundamental
difference needed, as the rebel movements themselves
above all need to recognize. Otherwise, the reality is
that the people of Darfur face a continued steady
deterioration of their conditions of life and their
chances of lasting recovery.
I said at this time last year that I hoped from the
bottom of my heart that I would not be back here one
year later to repeat the same messages, but the reality
is that I have come here today to give the Council even
worse news. In the absence of any real progress

8

towards a solution, whatever the efforts of the
international community and the Council, profound
human suffering will continue to grow in Darfur.
The President: I thank Mr. Holmes for his
briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

08-31307
