S/2010/42

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 January 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 15 January 2010 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to my letter dated 29 December 2009 (S/2009/694),
by which I transmitted a joint letter dated 19 December 2009 from President Laurent
Gbagbo of Côte d’Ivoire and President Blaise Compaoré of Burkina Faso proposing
the deployment, for a period of three months, of a battalion of 500 personnel from
Burkina Faso to Côte d’Ivoire, as part of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI), in order to reinforce security arrangements for the Ivorian
presidential election.
In my letter, I indicated that I would revert to the Security Council with
specific recommendations after conducting the necessary assessment of the offer.
Given the urgency of the matter in light of the timelines of the election and the
upcoming UNOCI mandate renewal consultations of the Council, UNOCI
dispatched a team to Burkina Faso to conduct a rapid preliminary assessment of the
capabilities of the proposed unit and the feasibility of its timely deployment. The
Burkinabé military officials who received the team confirmed their readiness to
deploy to UNOCI a properly trained battalion of 500 personnel, which includes
aviation capability in the form of one military helicopter and crew. However, the
assessment team was not able to inspect the unit earmarked for deployment to Côte
d’Ivoire since it was yet to be constituted. The Secretariat will conduct the usual
predeployment verification to ensure that the battalion is adequately equipped, once
the Government of Burkina Faso confirms the dates of the planned visit.
In my report to the Security Council of 29 September 2009 (S/2009/495), I had
indicated my intention to request the authorization of the Council for the temporary
redeployment of one infantry company and two helicopters from the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to Côte d’Ivoire to reinforce UNOCI during the
elections, within the framework of the inter-mission cooperation arrangements
provided for in Council resolution 1609 (2005). However, UNMIL has confirmed
that this option is no longer feasible, as the election date of Côte d’Ivoire has shifted
and the deployment of the earmarked infantry company would now conflict with the
Mission’s drawdown schedule. In addition, the concerned troop-contributing country
that had been approached to provide the helicopters is not in a position to approve
their transfer from UNMIL to UNOCI.
In the meantime, it has also become clear that the Ivorian national army and
the Forces nouvelles will not be able to deploy the full complement of the agreed
8,000 personnel as mixed brigades to provide security for the elections along with

10-21905 (E) 260110

*1021905*

S/2010/42

UNOCI. They would be able to provide only 2,000 personnel. There is therefore an
unforeseen security gap that UNOCI has to cover.
In light of the above, I recommend that the Security Council approve the
proposal by President Laurent Gbagbo and President Blaise Compaoré to deploy a
battalion from Burkina Faso, including one helicopter with crew, for a period of
three months beginning one month before the presidential election. The Secretariat
estimates that the cost of this deployment, including the helicopter and crew, would
amount to some US$ 5 million. This option has the advantage that it would provide
the capability that UNMIL is no longer able to provide and would make up for the
shortfalls on the part of the national arrangements for securing the elections.
However, it would require the consent of the Security Council to temporarily
increase the authorized troop ceiling of UNOCI from 7,450 to 7,950 personnel. The
mission’s current troop strength stands at 7,391.
I would be most grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

10-21905
