S/2017/830

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 October 2017
English
Original: French

Letter dated 2 October 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
The present letter is being addressed to you in connection with the Quito
Agreement announced by the Government of Colombia and the National Liberation
Army (ELN) on 4 September 2017. In that agreement, the two parties declared that
they intended to observe a temporary bilateral ceasefire and that they planned to
establish a mechanism involving the Government, ELN, the United Nations and the
Catholic Church, with the aim of preventing and reporting any ceasefire violations.
The parties continued their talks in Quito to determine the agreement’s details and
follow-up arrangements, by means including the development of protocols. The
ceasefire entered into force on 1 October 2017, and is due to remain in force until
the second week of January 2018.
As the Council is aware, I publicly welcomed the announcement of the
ceasefire, and authorized my Special Representative for Colombia and Head of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault, to conduct consultations
with all the parties concerned in order to determine how the United Nations could
support this process.
On 29 September 2017, in a joint communiqué, the parties requested that the
Security Council authorize the United Nations Verification Mission established by
resolution 2366 (2017) to fulfil the tasks entrusted to the United Nations in the
context of the monitoring and verification mechanism comprised of representatives
of the Armed Forces of Colombia, ELN, the United Nations and the Catho lic
Church. The parties indicated that the mechanism would verify compliance with the
ceasefire, prevent incidents through close coordination between the parties, ensure
timely reaction to incidents and undertake independent verification of allegations of
non-compliance. It would have a presence at national, regional and local levels.
They agreed that the United Nations, as the international component of the
mechanism, would coordinate the mechanism’s work, resolve any disagreements
between the parties and make recommendations accordingly. It would also be
responsible for reporting the results of the verification to the mechanism and to the
public. The joint communiqué was formally transmitted to the United Nations on
29 September 2017 by means of a letter addressed by the Permanent Representative
of Colombia to the United Nations to the President of the Security Council and to
me.
After giving due consideration to this request, and having taken account of the
information that has emerged from the consultations with the parties held by my
Special Representative, I wish to convey to the Council my positive assessment of
the viability and desirability of the role proposed for the United Nations. You will

17-17334 (E)

031017

*1717334*

031017

S/2017/830

find below an explanation of the ways in which the Mission could fulfil the tasks
anticipated and of the conditions needed for it to be able to do so.
First, although the ceasefire is nationwide, the parties agreed that the
mechanism would focus solely on areas of particular relevance for the
implementation of the ceasefire, namely twenty locations matching the Catholic
dioceses, and a further thirteen locations. While the United Nations Verification
Mission is already deployed in some of these locations, its presence will be required
in a number of new locations. At each of these locations, the Mission could deploy a
small team comprising one civilian staff member and two international observers. At
locations where no United Nations offices exist, staff would work from available
hotel or other facilities to make it possible to minimize costs.
Second, the involvement of the United Nations in the monitoring and
verification of the ceasefire would rely on the staffing and logistical resources of the
Verification Mission without affecting the fulfilment of the task s already entrusted
to the Mission under resolution 2366 (2017). In particular, civilian staffing needs
would be met from within the Verification Mission’s existing strength, although
temporary deployment of a limited number of staff might be necessary. Fulfilling
the task of liaising with the Colombian Armed Forces and ELN to avoid conflicting
movements and prevent armed clashes would require 70 additional international
observers. It should be remembered that repatriation of the majority of the observers
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia, which completed its mandate on
25 September, is ongoing. While Council approval and the consent of observer
contributing countries is pending, these additional ob servers, who have experience
with the former tripartite ceasefire monitoring mechanism, could be retained,
thereby ensuring immediate operational readiness.
Third, the Verification Mission is in the process of taking over the assets and
resources of the recently concluded Mission in Colombia, and is therefore in a
position to meet the short-term logistical needs deriving from the additional tasks.
Such logistical support would include vehicles, radios, computers, offices and
access to an in-country United Nations air transport capability. Moreover, staff and
observers carrying out the additional tasks would be able to rely on the field
coordination, operational, security and analytical capabilities that the Verification
Mission already has in place, both in Bogota and in the regions. Under these
circumstances, the Verification Mission could initiate operations immediately, while
leaving open the possibility of requesting additional support should the situation so
require.
The circumstances under which the request from the Government of Colombia
and ELN is being made are very different from those under which the Security
Council considered the request of the Government of Colombia and the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia-People’s Army (FARC-EP) in January
2016. Never before has a ceasefire been agreed between the Government of
Colombia and ELN. The temporary nature of this ceasefire shows that the process
between the Government and ELN stands at a different stage than was the case with
the peace process between the Government and FARC-EP a year and a half ago. It
represents an opportunity for the international community to instil further
momentum into the positive dynamics that have been emerging in the past few
months. A further strengthening of the ceasefire now, and establishing conditions
conducive to its extension next year, would enhance the positive environment for
the ongoing negotiations in Quito. Such efforts could also alleviate the humanitarian
situation for the communities most affected by the conflict. In this respect, they
represent an important complement to what the Verification Mission is seeking to
achieve through its verification of commitments to the security and protection of
communities in conflict-affected areas.
2/3

17-17334

S/2017/830

I therefore recommend that the Council respond positively to the joint request
of the Government of Colombia and ELN by authorizing the Verification Mission in
Colombia to undertake the tasks outlined above and reflected in the communiqué of
29 September 2017, and by increasing its strength by 70 international observers for
the duration of this function. I shall be reporting to the Council on the verification
of the ceasefire in the context of the reporting cycle that it has already established
for the Verification Mission. In the event that the parties later request a continuation
of these tasks beyond the currently envisioned timeframe, the Council’s
authorization will be sought.
(Signed) António Guterres

17-17334

3/3
