S/PV.7958

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7958th meeting

Friday, 2 June 2017, 4.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-15741 (E)
*1715741*

S/PV.7958

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Republic of
Korea to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/472, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2356 (2017).
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): The
Security Council is sending a clear message to North
Korea today — stop firing ballistic missiles or face the
consequences. The members of the Council — including
three of North Korea’s closest neighbours — agree that
North Korea’s missiles are a threat to international
peace and security and that the international community
must respond to the threat. It is long past time for North
Korea to see the writing on the wall. The international
community is coming together to take action, and the
pressure will not cease until North Korea complies
fully with the Council’s resolutions.
2/11

02/06/2017

North Korea’s provocative and illegal missile
launches are a direct threat to the security of numerous
countries, including my own. Missiles have already
fallen perilously close to South Korea, Japan and,
most recently, Russia. Each North Korean rocket
has the potential to hit an airplane or ship, which
threatens civilian lives. Each test ratchets up tensions
in the region.
But despite all the risks and the sanctions that the
Council has imposed so far, North Korea still chooses
to keep escalating. The reason that North Korea keeps
launching these missiles is obvious. It openly says
that it wants the ability to deliver its weapons of mass
destruction over long distances to United States, South
Korean, and Japanese cities. That is why the regime’s
ballistic missile tests are increasing. With each launch,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea gains
valuable technical data to make even more progress,
but, bit by bit, it wants to extend its reach. The Security
Council has rightfully and repeatedly condemned
the launches and required the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to suspend all activities related to
its ballistic-missile programme. Foreign Ministers
gathered here one month ago (see S/PV.7932) to demand
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea stop.
Resolution 2356 (2017) shows that those were not
just words.
The United States will work tirelessly to make
sure that the international community never gets used
to violations by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea or looks the other way. And the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea must understand that the
international community will never accept the regime’s
development and testing of nuclear weapons. Until the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea reconsiders, all
States Members of the United Nations must do their
part to increase pressure. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is a global threat that requires a
global response. There is still a lot of room to improve
the implementation of the Security Council’s sanctions
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That is
why the United States renews its call on responsible
States to sever diplomatic ties and cease illegal trade
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Countries must also do more to break up the smuggling
rings of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
cut off the sources of funding that it uses to pay for the
development of weapons of mass destruction and the
means to deliver them.
17-15741

02/06/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The United States will continue to seek a peaceful,
diplomatic resolution to the situation. We want a
negotiated solution, but the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea must fulfil its basic obligations by
first stopping all ballistic missile launches and nuclear
weapons testing and taking concrete steps towards
getting rid of its nuclear-weapons programme. Our
goal is not regime change. The United States has no
wish to threaten the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea or destabilize the Asia-Pacific
region. And we have never closed the door to dialogue
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. But
as we have said before, all options for responding to
future provocations must remain on the table. Beyond
diplomatic and financial consequences, the United
States remains prepared to counteract the aggression
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea through
other means, if necessary.
The United States is fully committed to defending
itself and its allies against aggression by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Once again, it is up to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to decide
whether to stay on this dangerous path. As the Security
Council showed today, future missile launches and
nuclear tests are absolutely unacceptable. We hope that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea sees that
response and chooses a more constructive path towards
stability, security and peace.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Relevant
Security Council resolutions include explicit provisions
against any launches by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea using ballistic missile technology.
China is opposed to the launches conducted by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Resolution
2356 (2017), adopted by the Council today, has
demonstrated the united position of the international
community against the development of nuclear and
missile programmes by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. At the same time, the resolution
reiterates the importance of maintaining peace and
stability on the Korean peninsula and in North-East
Asia at large, expresses a commitment to a peaceful,
diplomatic and political solution to the situation and
stresses the importance of reducing tension on the
peninsula by the parties concerned.
China calls on all parties to fully and comprehensively
implement Security Council resolutions related to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and strive for a
peaceful settlement of the nuclear issue on the peninsula

S/PV.7958

via redoubled efforts to promote non-proliferation,
peace and dialogue. The current situation on the
peninsula is complex and sensitive. At the same time,
there is a critical window of opportunity for a return
to the right track of seeking a settlement to the nuclear
issue on the peninsula through dialogue and negotiation.
It is incumbent upon all parties concerned to exercise
restraint and do more to help ease the tension and build
mutual trust, rather than to the contrary.
As a close neighbour of the Korean peninsula,
China has always insisted on denuclearizing the
peninsula, maintaining peace and stability on the
peninsula and seeking a solution through dialogue and
negotiations. China has always been firmly opposed
to chaos and conflict on the peninsula. Based on
developments on the peninsula, China has proposed
the dual-track approach of promoting parallel progress
in denuclearization efforts and the establishment of
a peace mechanism on the peninsula. China has also
put forward the suspension-for-suspension proposal,
which would allow for the suspension of nuclear missile
activities by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the suspension of massive military exercises by
the United States and the Republic of Korea. Those
proposals are pragmatic and feasible. We hope they will
be seriously considered and will receive a constructive
response by the parties concerned.
For its part, China is open to helpful proposals
by all parties. We hope that all parties concerned will
work with China to keep pushing for dialogue and
negotiations in order to seek a solution to the problems
on the Korean peninsula within the framework of the
Six-Party Talks and continue to work actively and
constructively towards to goal of early denuclearization
and lasting peace and security on the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2356 (2017). We would like to
express our appreciation to the United States for taking
the lead. Our appreciation also goes to all the other
members of the Security Council for their support.
For three consecutive weeks, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has launched ballistic
missiles in blatant violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions. That is totally unacceptable. Japan
strongly condemns the most recent launch as well as
previous launches, which were conducted eight times
this year alone. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has obstinately continued its nuclear build-up,

17-157413/11

S/PV.7958

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

while completely ignoring the will of the international
community. Those continued provocations trample
upon international efforts towards a peaceful resolution
of nuclear and missile issues and constitute a direct
challenge and threat to the security of Japan, the region
and beyond.
The international community must not let the
defiance of Security Council resolutions go unanswered.
Today’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2356 (2017)
sends a very strong signal that ballistic-missile launches
have consequences. On countless occasions, we have
made it clear that we are always ready to resume
dialogue if the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
were to show sincere commitment and make concrete
steps towards denuclearization. The current pattern of
frequent and alarmingly provocative ballistic-missile
launches indicate that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is nowhere near resuming a meaningful
dialogue. That leaves us no choice but to continue to
increase pressure on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. It is time for all States Members of the United
Nations to demonstrate a renewed commitment to
rigorously and thoroughly implementing the existing
Security Council resolutions, including the one we
just adopted today, so that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea understands that it must change its
current policy.
In addition, resolution 2356 (2017) is not the end of
our efforts. We must continue to exert pressure on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea until it shows
sincere commitment and concrete steps towards the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Japan will
continue to work very closely with Council members
and all other Member States to reach a comprehensive
resolution to the problems related to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2356 (2017). The Security
Council has today sent another message of unity and
determination against the repeated provocation of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law
and a serious threat to regional and international peace
and security. We thank the United States and China for
moving the resolution forward in a constructive spirit
of active collaboration with all the relevant parties and
actors, which remains crucial to the overall efforts to
bring peace and stability to the Korean peninsula.
4/11

02/06/2017

Italy reaffirms its strong condemnation of North
Korea’s recent missile- and nuclear-related activities.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must end
its blatant disregard for its international obligations and
take immediate steps to abandom its defiant and selfisolating policies. It can do that by first committing to
completely ceasing its missile and nuclear programmes
in a verifiable and irreversible manner.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), we continue to work
tirelessly with other members in order to ensure the
full implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including the resolution that the Council has
just adopted, by the entire membership. A rigorous and
effective sanctions regime is essential in order to make
the leadership of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea calculate the price of its defiance of the Council
and of the international community as a whole.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Italy believes that sanctions must remain a tool used
to further a wider strategy aimed at achieving lasting
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula. Sanctions
regimes are not an end in themselves. We must avoid
negative consequences for the civilian population and
a humanitarian situation in the country. The ultimate
objective is to produce a change of behaviour by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which might
frame a parth towards the achievement of a peaceful
and comprehensive solution for the Korean peninsula
and the region as a whole.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia supported today’s adoption of the new
resolution 2356 (2017), concerning sanctions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The resolution
we have just adopted demands that Pyongyang stop its
inappropriate behaviour and submit to the legitimate
demands of the international community. Missile
launches, especially those carried out without warning,
are unacceptable. They are not only a threat to transport
security in the region, but also to the lives of people.
At the same time, we would like to draw attention
to some controversial points of the resolution that we
have just adopted. Of course, Pyongyang is violating
the sanctions imposed on it. However, it does not supply
components of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
to non-State actors. There is no direct connection
between the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and the actions of the authorities in Pyongyang. The
17-15741

02/06/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

practice of mentioning it in the context of sanctions
must be stopped. It is counterproductive, especially for
resolution 1540 (2004) itself.
Russia has repeatedly stated that resolution 1540
(2004) primarily serves as a platform for cooperation
among States in order to prevent materials for weapons
of mass destruction from falling into the hands of
non-State actors. Without cooperation, it is impossible
to achieve that goal at the global level. Attempts to drag
the resolution into enforcement mechanisms will not
work, especially in national jurisdictions. Supporters
of maintaining the reference to resolution 1540 (2004)
should understand that by doing so they undermine
the inherent spirit of cooperation and interaction.
In addition, countries that are already wary of this
non-proliferation document are given an additional
argument in favour of non-compliance.
We also have serious doubts about the mention
in the text of some other WMD programmes. The
presence of that passage requires convincing evidence.
The Security Council has no right to make mistakes
and must operate with real facts, not with assumptions.
We remember how the United States initiated a war
against Iraq under the false pretext of the presence
of WMDs in Baghdad. At the moment, there is no
evidence that Pyongyang is developing chemical- or
biological-weapons programmes. If any colleagues
have relevant, convincing evidence about Pyongyang’s
guilt on the matter, then we stand ready to look at it.
The facts that we have at our disposal say the following.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is a member of the Biological and Toxin Weapons
Convention and no claims against it have been made
under the Convention. We also know that Pyongyang,
while not a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
nevertheless actively encouraged Malaysia to involve
the expertise of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in the investigation of the murder of
Kim Jong-nam, the final results of which have not yet
been made public.
We would like to hear explanations from the
United States regarding the broadening of American
sanctions, announced on 1 June, against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. It concerned three Russian
companies and one Russian citizen. The step is
perplexing and deeply disappointing.
We have repeatedly said that the mechanism of
unilateral restriction is illegal from the point of view

S/PV.7958

of international law. Practice shows the ineffectiveness
of such measures and the destructiveness of the
approach. The sledgeshammer of sanctions gets used
as a universal method for solving world problems,
instead of diplomatic tools. That fully applies to
the recent decision of Washington, which does not
contribute to the settlement of the situation around the
Korean peninsula.
It is necessary to note that, after the change of
Administration in the United States, sanctions by
inertia remain a constant in American policy. That
includes attempts to apply those sanctions to Russian
organizations and citizens. Instead of starting to sort
through the backlog that has accumulated in bilateral
relations, Washington is doing the direct opposite,
taking unfriendly steps that only complicate the
normalization of our dialogue and cooperation in
international affairs.
Pyongyang’s reckless endeavours should not give
rise to an increase in military activity in the region and,
even more so, the implementation of plans to use force.
Confrontational logic is fraught with catastrophic
consequences for both the Korean peninsula and the
region as a whole. To us, it is absolutely clear that the
choice should be made in favour of maximizing the use
of diplomatic tools.
In that context, Chinese proposals on the twopronged freeze to North Korea’s nuclear missile
programmes and the United States-South Korean
exercises, while advancing the solutions to the
problems that the peninsula is facing, deserve serious
attention. We are ready to promote international efforts
and in particular those of the United Nations aimed
at a diplomatic detente on the Korean peninsula. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s intention to raise the
profile of the United Nations in resolving the tension
around the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In
order to find a formula for normalizing the situation,
we ought not forget that sanctions against North Korea
should not lead to a strangulation of its 25 million
ordinary citizens, the vast majority of whom need urgent
assistance. In that regard, we are convinced that, when
it comes to humanitarian efforts, the United Nations
must fulfill its duty. Dehumanizing the decisions and
actions regarding the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and other situations of crisis is unacceptable,
regardless of how difficult those situations are.

17-157415/11

S/PV.7958

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The reason for the tension on the peninsula is not
just Pyongyang’s nuclear missile programme. It also has
to do with increased military activity by some regional
and especially extra-regional States in North-East Asia.
Another destabilizing factor is the recent
deployment of components of the United States
THAAD missile defence system on the territory of
the Republic of Korea. We have repeatedly stated that
such a move undermines the existing military balance
in the region. It puts the security of neighbouring
countries in a precarious position. Once again, we call
on both the United States and the Republic of Korea
to reconsider the expediency of such a step and think
about its long-term consequences. We encourage others
in the region to not be tempted to get involved in such
destabilizing efforts.
It is now more important than ever to find a
political solution. Some of our partners say that they
are ready to renew contacts with Pyongyang, but under
certain conditions. If we speak to one another in the
language of ultimatums we will never move forward.
The situation on the Korean peninsula and other acute
contemporary crises require that we start working
together as quickly as possible. Russia stands ready to
start that kind of work.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2356 (2017) today. Through the resolution and
our unity, we have sent a clear message to the regime of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — faced with
a sustained pattern of reckless, belligerent behaviour
from Pyongyang, we, the Security Council, will act.
Repeated missile launches threaten our allies and
partners in the Republic of Korea, Japan and the wider
region. With each and every launch and missile test, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea demonstrates a
total disregard for international security. They put their
destructive ambitions above the welfare of their own
people. This pattern simply cannot continue.
Multiple missiles have been fired this year alone.
The regime’s actions and rhetoric shows clear intent
to pursue its illegal weapons programme. We need to
show that there are consequences and that the whole
international community stands in support of the
Council in tackling this threat.
So, for the third time in 18 months, the Council
has had no choice but to take decisive action. Through
this resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter of
6/11

02/06/2017

the United Nations, we will restrict the ability of
key individuals and entities from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to assist or finance illegal
weapons programmes — building on the analysis and
recommendations from the United Nations Panel of
Experts. We will blunt their ability to generate the
revenue needed to prop up the regime’s illegal nuclearand ballistic-missile programmes.
Our signal is clear: we will not tolerate nor be
distracted by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s wide range of cover activities that prop up
their illegal programmes. The resolutions adopted by
the Council impose wide-ranging sanctions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and they have
bite. Through them, tangible pressure is being brought
to bear on a regime that has acted with impunity for far
too long. Let me be clear, it is the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that has a clear choice to make on
the way forward: either continue its destabilizing,
dangerous actions or change its behaviour and begin to
build a future for its people.
Together, we, the international community, must be
steadfast when enforcing these new sanctions, as well
as all previous measures adopted by the Council. All
Member States must do their part to fully implement the
sanctions. We have a collective commitment to address
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s behaviour.
We must show our collective resolve to bring an end to
those destabilizing, illegal actions.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine voted in
favour of resolution 2356 (2017), which designates
additional North Korean individuals and entities for
inclusion into the relevant control lists, in response to
the recent provocative ballistic-missile launches by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We welcome
the efforts of the delegations involved in drafting
the text.
At the same time, in the context of its almost
weekly missile launches and rapid progress in the North
Korean missile programme, Pyongyang continues
its aggressive rhetoric and steadily evolving tricks to
evade existing prohibitions and restrictions. We must
admit that the current sanctions regime needs to be
strengthened. We are all aware that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continues to acquire
technologies, materials, equipment and financial
resources for the further development of its nuclear and
missile programmes. Every single launch or test makes
17-15741

02/06/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

it increasingly difficult for the Security Council and the
international community at large to put an end to that
sinister process.
We share the need to address the North Korean
nuclear threat collectively and decisively. We must
not allow Pyongyang to continue destabilizing the
situation and discrediting the role of the Council in the
light of global non-proliferation efforts. Only robust
steps taken by the Council can stop the systematic and
flagrant violations of international law and move us
closer to the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
We call upon the Council’s members to stay united in
further tackling the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea issue to ensure the full compliance of Pyongyang
with the Council’s decisions and demands. Only a
consolidated and firm stance will bear fruit and bring
about positive change in the current tense situation in
the region.
I had hoped to conclude my statement on that
optimistic note. Unfortunately, the statement of the
Russian delegation a few minutes ago added some
doubts that now make it difficult to do so.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We welcome the
adoption of resolution 2356 (2017), on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The position of Kazakhstan
remains stable and consistent. We condemn, in the
strongest terms, any launches of ballistic missiles, as
they are in flagrant violation of all the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Such actions undermine our
common international efforts to strengthen regional
and, ultimately, international peace and security.
The denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula is a
key element in preserving broader security across Asia.
Possession of nuclear arms by the North Korean regime
will create a precedent that will undoubtedly lead to an
escalation of the regional arms race and may lead others
to further proliferation so as to balance the nuclear
threat of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to refrain from actions that have an impact on
the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation process
and pose a threat to both regional and global security.
My country’s non-nuclear status is the most convincing
example that such an approach is the only promising
one. We call on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to opt for the same. We are convinced that there is
no alternative to collective commitment to international
obligations under Security Council resolutions.

S/PV.7958

We would recall that Kazakhstan’s principled
position is a firm condemnation of the use of weapons
of mass destruction by any party and the promotion of
conflict resolution through dialgogue. We call upon the
interested parties and all Member States to take balanced
and responsible actions that do not lead to irreversible
consequences. We also call on all the parties concerned
to refrain from any action that could increase the risk of
a military escalation and further tensions in the region.
My country strongly believes that, at this critical stage,
the Security Council — the single body entrusted to
maintain international peace and security — should
stay united on this important issue.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United States for putting forward resolution 2356
(2017). France welcomes its unanimous adoption.
For years, North Korea has been insistently pushing
the development of its nuclear and ballistic programmes
at the highest levels of the regime. It has been
methodically trying to acquire an operational nuclear
arsenal at the sacrifice of its own population. Let us be
clear: each ballistic launche brings the North Korean
regime closer to developing precise and diversified
operational military nuclear capabilities. That is
progressing at an alarming and ever-increasing rate. At
the same time, North Korea possesses other weapons
of mass destruction — chemical and biological — a
danger that must not be underestimated.
The current situation is greately fuelling tensions
on the Korean peninsula. Every country could be within
range of North Korean missiles one day. It is therefore
a security threat for all countries. Moreover, it is the
entire non-proliferation regime — which underpins our
security framework — that is in danger.
Despite our repeated warnings, North Korea has
flouted every one of the Council’s resolutions and has
defied the entire international community. Given the
severity and urgency of the threat — one of the most
acute threats to international peace and security — there
was an urgent need for the Council to express its
concern and reaffirm its authority.
France therefore welcomes the unanimous adoption
of the resolution proposed by the United States, which
makes it possible to reaffirm an unambiguous triple
message of unity, firmness and commitment on the
part of the Security Council. By this resolution, the
Council condemns North Korea’s unjustifiable actions
and punishes individuals and entities that are central

17-157417/11

S/PV.7958

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to the operations of the regime and its programmes,
in particular the ballistic-missile programme, and
their financing.
The resolution is a determined response as well
as a fresh warning. North Korea’s dangerous and
irresponsible headlong rush must come to a stop.
North Korea must become aware that, if it insists on
choosing escalation and provocation, then we will
have no other choice but to increase pressure with
total determination. France has said that sanctions are
not an end unto themselves, but when we are faced
with the irresponsible, unjustifiable obduracy of the
North Korean regime, there is no other solution today
than to stand firm and convince it to return to the
negotiating table.
The present situation is the exact opposite of a
context of dialogue. It is therefore up to North Korea
to sincerely demonstrate through concrete and good
faith gestures that it is ready to invest in a negotiated
solution and contribute to the easing of tensions in
the Korean peninsula. Our objective must remain the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Like others, we welcome
the unanimous adoption of today’s Security Council
resolution 2356 (2017). The Council’s action comes
in response to the intensified pattern of provocations
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
demonstrates, once again, the unity and resolve of the
Council on this issue.
Sweden condemns in the strongest terms the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s repeated
launches of ballistic missiles. Such actions are in
blatant violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We stand with the neighbouring countries
and their peoples, who are living under the constant
shadow of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
threatening behaviour.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continues to show blatant disregard for its international
obligations. The implementation of all the relevant
resolutions, including the one just adopted, is crucial.
We call on all States Members of the United Nations to
meet their obligations in that regard.
Finally, sanctions alone will not solve the
situation on the Korean peninsula. Intensified and
creative diplomatic efforts are needed to avoid
8/11

02/06/2017

misunderstandings and further escalation and to begin
to prepare for a peaceful, diplomatic and comprehensive
solution for the peninsula and the wider region. We
call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
re-engage in a credible and meaningful dialogue with
the international community.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay wishes to take this opportunity to reiterate its
concern about repeated missile launches by North Korea
and the increased tensions on the Korean peninsula.
Such actions constitute a serious threat to international
peace and security and are a clear violation of Security
Council resolutions.
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2356
(2017) because it believes that sanctions are a tool
that the Security Council can use in order to perform
its functions. However, sanctions are not an end unto
themselves; rather, they are a tool for achieving a
political goal, in this case the denuclearization of North
Korea. In the same way, the commitment and firm
determination of Member States to complying with
their obligations and ensuring the correct and effective
implementation of sanctions is needed, while avoiding
adverse humanitarian consequences on the population
of North Korea.
Uruguay stresses the need to work towards defusing
tensions on the Korean peninsula and beyond. North
Korea must respect all Security Council resolutions
and desist from its nuclear ambitions. That would
help to create a peaceful environment and a return to
the path of dialogue, with the ultimate objective of
achieving denuclearization.
From the Security Council, Uruguay will continue
to fight along with the other 14 members to develop new
lines of action and try new approaches to, or modalities
of, negotiation in order to unlock this situation. Uruguay
reaffirms its commitment to achieving a peaceful,
political and diplomatic solution for denuclearizing the
Korean peninsula — one that will sweep away the risk of
a conflict of undesirable and unpredictable proportions.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to express our full appreciation
to the delegations of the United States and China for
preparing and presenting resolution 2356 (2017), which
was just adopted by the Security Council (resolution
2356 (2017)).
17-15741

02/06/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2356 (2017)
sends a clear message by all members of the Council
and the international community that they oppose
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s recent
violations of its commitments in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 2321 (2016) and 2270 (2016). Egypt calls
upon all parties to make further diplomatic efforts to
create a political path towards the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula and to safeguard the international
non-proliferation regime. Egypt stands ready to
support any international effort and any initiative to
peacefully settle the chronic Korean crisis. We reaffirm
the importance of avoiding the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the pivotal role of the
Security Council and the need to speak with one voice.
The international community must continue its positive
interaction and collaboration with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) and its
Panel of Experts in order to implement all the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation voted in favour of resolution
2356 (2017), which strengthens the sanctions regime
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in
accordance with my country’s commitment to a world
free of nuclear weapons, but also to express Senegal’s
position in favour of a denuclearized Korean peninsula.
North Korea’s launches of ballistic missiles, which my
country has strongly condemned every time, attest to
the country’s determination to continue its nuclear and
ballistic-missile programmes.
The previous sanctions have not stopped North
Korea from gradually upgrading its nuclear capabilities
and ballistic missiles. It continues to flagrantly violate
the Council’s resolutions and repeated requests to
discharge its international obligations in this area in a
clear, irreversible and verifiable manner. The actions
of North Korea are therefore not only a threat to the
people inhabiting the peninsula and the region, but they
also seriously undermine the non-proliferation regime
with the goal of developing nuclear-weapon delivery
systems, which greatly exacerbates tensions in the
region and beyond.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm Senegal’s
support for rigorous compliance with the relevant

S/PV.7958

Council resolutions and to reiterate our hope for
a swift resumption of dialogue in order to reach a
comprehensive, peaceful, diplomatic and political
solution to the crisis.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
welcoming the unanimous adoption of resolution 2356
(2017), which once again sends a strong and unified
message of the Security Council in response to the
repeated ballistic missile tests by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
The situation in the Korean peninsula has
indeed been a source of great concern. The ballistic
missile-related activities by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in violation of Security Council
resolutions, seriously endanger regional and
international peace and security. Today’s resolution
once again reaffirms the Council’s unequivocal position
calling on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to abandon all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear
programmes in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner and immediately to cease all related activities.
In our view, this is in the interests of everyone — the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s neighbours,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea itself, the
Korean Peninsula as a whole and the international
community. There is a window of opportunity, as China
has said. We want to see a peaceful resolution of this
problem. Without a doubt, a further escalation of the
situation on the Korean Peninsula will have devastating
consequences for regional and international peace
and security.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should
not be surprised to see people worried. It is therefore
very critical that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea return to its international commitments on
de-nuclearization and fully comply with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council in order to
reduce the increased tension in the region. The full
implementation of the Security Council resolutions on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
the resolution that we just adopted today, has become
all the more vital in the light of the prevailing situation.
For our part, we remain committed to carrying out
our obligations.
Finally, the need to find a peaceful, diplomatic
and political solution to this issue has never been
more urgent. We support all efforts in the search for a

17-157419/11

S/PV.7958

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

peaceful and comprehensive solution through dialouge,
as reiterated by the resolution we adopted today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia emphatically condemns the launching of
ballistic missiles and the conducting of nuclear tests by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We call on
the country to completely, verifiably and irreversibly
abandon its nuclear programme.
We also believe that sanctions are a means and
not an end in themselves. As was agreed at the most
recent Summit of Heads of State and Government of the
Group of 77, which brings together over two thirds of
the Organization, we condemn unilateral sanctions as
violations of international law.
We also encourage all parties involved in this
situation to avoid an escalation of rhetoric and actions
that would increase tensions and put international peace
and security at risk, especially on the Korean peninsula.
We also underscore that we must reject a military
way out of this situation and we must make the most
of the resources provided to us by diplomacy, such a
dialouge and negotiation. We welcome the dual proposal
of a halt to the launching of missels and to nuclear tests
along with a cessation of military exercises.
Lastly, we call for greater participation by Council
members in responding to this and other issues of global
concern when they are addressed.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by thanking the Bolivian presidency for convening
today’s meeting. My delegation is grateful to be a part
of this important meeting.
The latest ballistic-missile launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, on 29 May, was
the ninth in the year 2017 and the third in the month of
May alone. In fact, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has conducted ballistic missile launches on an
almost weekly basis since the inauguration of the new
Government in Seoul, on 10 May. Such provocations
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in

10/11

02/06/2017

clear violation of multiple relevant Security Council
resolutions, cannot be condoned and should be met
with a resolute response. It is for that reason that the
Republic of Korea supported the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2356 (2017) in response to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s series of ballisticmissile launches and other prohibited activities since
9 September 2016.
The new sanctions resolution adopted today sends
a clear message that the Council will not tolerate
repeated ballistic-missile launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, regardless of their range,
type or intended aim-point. With the adoption of this
resolution, which has somewhat deviated from its usual
response pattern on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea ballistic-missile launches, the Council
demonstrated its united resolve to respond squarely in
the face of the series of ballistic-missile provocations
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Resolution 2356 (2017) builds upon and expands
the scope of the existing Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea sanctions regime. The individuals and entities
that will be subject to the travel ban and the assets
freeze under this resolution include the senior officals
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and its
core military apparatus, which are directly responsible
for the regime’s illicit nuclear- and ballistic-missile
programmes. Some businesspersons and commercial
entities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
are also newly designated, which I believe will help
further restrict the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s ability to finance its illicit activities.
I take this opportunity to strongly urge Member
States to fully implement all the relevant Security
Council sanctions resolutions, including resolutions
2270 (2016), 2321 (2016) and 2356 (2017). After all,
the ultimate goal of sanctions and pressure is to bring
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea back to
the negotiating table for denuclearization. In order
to make the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
choose the right path towards dialogue to that end, we,
the international community, should speak with one
voice and act in solidarity by thoroughly implementing
all the sanctions resolutions. I sincerely hope that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will heed the
concerted demands of the international community and
seize the opportunity, without further delay, to chart a
new beginning in inter-Korean relations, as well as in its

17-15741

02/06/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

relations with the international community. Given the
possibility of yet another provocation by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, we must continue to stand
ready to respond to any further provocations in a more
proactive manner.

S/PV.7958

In conclusion, I would like once again to urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cease all
forms of provocation and immediately take steps for
dialogue and take action towards denuclearization.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

17-1574111/11
