S/PRST/2016/10

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 July 2016
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7742nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 July 2016, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls all its previous resolutions and the
statements of its President on the situation in Lebanon. The Security Council
reaffirms its strong support for the territorial integrity, sovereignty, and
political independence of Lebanon.
“The Security Council stresses that the election of a President, the
formation of a unity government and the election of a parliament by May 2017
are critical for Lebanon’s stability and resilience to withstand regional
challenges.
“The Security Council underscores in this regard in the strong est
possible terms its deepest concern over the two -year-long vacancy in the
presidency of Lebanon since the expiration of the mandate of former President
Michel Sleiman on 24 May 2014. The Security Council further expresses deep
concern at the Parliament’s repeated inability to form a quorum and elect a
President. The Security Council underlines that this prolonged vacancy has led
to blockages in the Council of Ministers and rendered the Parliament incapable
of passing critical legislation. The Security Council further stresses that the
vacancy and the resulting political paralysis seriously impair Lebanon’s ability
to address the growing security, economic, social and humanitarian challenges
facing the country.
“The Security Council urges Lebanese leaders to adhere to Lebanon’s
Constitution and National Pact and calls on all parties to act responsibly, put
Lebanon’s stability and national interests ahead of partisan politics and show
the necessary flexibility and sense of urgency to apply mechanisms provi ded
for by the Lebanese Constitution with regard to the election.
“The Security Council reaffirms its call on all Lebanese leaders to act
with leadership and flexibility to convene urgently a parliamentary session and
proceed to the election of a President. The Security Council calls on all
Lebanese parties, including in the Parliament, to apply mechanisms provided
for by the Lebanese Constitution with regard to the presidential election. The
Security Council further calls on all parties to engage in nego tiating a

16-12768 (E)

220716

*1612768*

S/PRST/2016/10

compromise agreement with the aim of ending the political and institutional
crisis in Lebanon.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts of Prime Minister Tammam
Salam to govern under increasingly difficult circumstances and calls on all
parties in Lebanon to enable the Government to function effectively. The
Council is, however, deeply concerned about the inability of the Government
to take key decisions and calls on the political leadership in Lebanon to stand
together in the national interest despite their political differences.
“The Security Council also commended the Government of Lebanon for
the timely holding of local elections and further encouraged the Lebanese
authorities to move ahead within the set calendar for the next legislative
elections.
“The Security Council encourages all parties in Lebanon to demonstrate
renewed unity and determination to resist a slide into violence and conflict.
The Council stresses the importance of enhanced messages of moderation by
Lebanon’s leaders, including intensified dialogues and calls to defuse sectarian
tensions.
“The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms acts of terrorism
on Lebanese territory, and commends the Lebanese Armed and Security Forces
for their commitment and critical role played in preventing and combating
terrorism within Lebanon. The members of the Security Council reiterated in
this regard their call for the continuation of international support for the
Lebanese Armed Forces through additional and expedited assistanc e in areas
where the Lebanese Armed Forces are most critically in need of support,
including counterterrorism and border protection.
“The Security Council underscores its previous calls on all Lebanese
parties to recommit to Lebanon’s policy of dissociation and to cease any
involvement in the Syrian crisis, consistent with their commitment in the
ministerial declaration of the current Government and in the Baabda
Declaration of 12 June 2012.
“The Security Council affirms that the preservation of Lebanon’s
stability is essential to regional stability and security. It encourages regional
partners to engage constructively in resolving the presidential vacancy and
preventing the spill-over of regional crises into Lebanon, and it encourages the
international community to continue supporting Lebanon’s political and
economic stability, including through the continued provision of assistance.
“The Security Council is in this regard gravely concerned by the impact
of hosting over 1,000,000 Syrian refugees registered with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Lebanon, which represents
more refugees per capita than any other country, and its impact on host
communities, on the stability and security of Lebanon and the wider region.
The Security Council underscores that support to Lebanon’s efforts to manage
the impact of the influx of refugees, including on essential services such as
education and health, is crucial to preserving Lebanon’s stability and security.
The Council acknowledges the extraordinary challenges Lebanon and the
Lebanese people continue to face in this regard and Lebanon’s efforts to host,

2/3

16-12768

S/PRST/2016/10

assist and protect those refugees and the importance of upholding human
rights and humanitarian principles.
“In this regard, the Security Council commends the Statement of Intent
presented by Lebanon at the Supporting Syria and the Region Conference in
February 2016 and encourages its full implementation to support Lebanon’s
stability. The Security Council in this regard commends do nors for their
disbursement of funds to date and calls on others to fulfill their pledges of
support.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation for the International
Support Group for Lebanon and urges the Group to continue its work in
coordination with the Special Coordinator to seek opportunities to help
address rising challenges to Lebanon’s security and stability. It welcomes the
proposal made by the President of France on 16 April 2016 in Beirut, Lebanon
to organize a ministerial meeting of the International Support Group for
Lebanon. The Security Council encourages the Special Coordinator for
Lebanon, in the context of her good offices role and in close coordination with
the ISG members, to conduct intensified contacts with Lebanon’s partners, to
convey the above messages, and engage key national and regional stakeholders
with the aim of helping Lebanon towards a solution to the presidential
vacancy. The Security Council further requests the Secretary-General to
provide updates on the presidential vacancy and its impact on Lebanese
institutions in subsequent reports on Lebanon.”

16-12768

3/3
