United Nations

A/RES/55/204

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 February 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 95 (e)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/55/582/Add.5)]

55/204. Implementation of the United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/223 of 22 December 1999 and other relevant
resolutions relating to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in
those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa, 1
Noting with satisfaction that the third session of the Conference of the Parties
to the Convention was held at Recife, Brazil, from 15 to 26 November 1999,
Expressing its deep appreciation to the Government of Brazil for the generous
manner in which it hosted and provided facilities for the third session of the
Conference of the Parties,
Acknowledging that desertification and drought are problems of a global
dimension in that they affect all regions of the world and that joint action of the
international community is needed to combat desertification and/or mitigate the
effects of drought, including the integration of strategies for poverty eradication,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 2
1.
Welcomes the convening of the fourth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa, at Bonn, Germany, from 11 to 22 December 2000;
2.
Also welcomes the very large number of ratifications of the Convention,
and calls upon all remaining countries that have not yet ratified or acceded to the
Convention to do so as soon as possible;
3.
Further welcomes the progress made in producing a draft additional
regional implementation annex to the Convention for the countries of Central and
1
2

00 57139

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
A/55/331.

A/RES/55/204

Eastern Europe, 3 and invites the Conference of the Parties to consider adopting it at
its fourth session;
4.
Stresses the importance of a coherent and timely implementation of the
provisions of the Convention at all levels, including the general provisions and
obligations of all States parties, in accordance with the provisions of part II of the
Convention;
5.
Notes with satisfaction the steps being taken by affected developing
country parties to the Convention, with the assistance of international organizations
and bilateral development partners, to implement the Convention, and the efforts
being made to promote the participation of all actors of society in the elaboration of
national action programmes to combat desertification, and in this regard encourages
countries to cooperate at the subregional and regional levels, as appropriate;
6.
Welcomes the strengthened cooperation between the secretariat of the
Convention and the Global Mechanism, and encourages further efforts in this regard
for the effective implementation of the Convention;
7.
Also welcomes the financial support already provided on a voluntary
basis by some countries, and urges Governments, the private sector and all relevant
organizations, including non-governmental organizations, to make or continue to
make voluntary contributions to the Global Mechanism to enable it to implement its
mandate effectively and fully;
8.
Calls upon the Global Environment Facility to continue to enhance,
within its mandate, its ongoing support for land degradation activities in developing
countries;
9.
Welcomes the decision of the Council of the Global Environment Facility,
at its meeting held from 1 to 3 November 2000, to request the Chief Executive
Officer to explore the best options for enhancing the support of the Facility in
assisting affected countries, especially those in Africa, in implementing the
Convention, taking into account the third replenishment; 4
10. Calls upon the Global Environment Facility and its implementing
agencies to strengthen their cooperation with the Global Mechanism and the
secretariat of the Convention;
11. Encourages the parties to the Convention to provide the necessary
support to the secretariat so as to enable it to discharge effectively its
responsibilities to the Convention;
12. Welcomes decision 2000/23 of 29 September 2000 of the Executive
Board of the United Nations Development Programme aimed at developing
cooperation between the secretariat of the Convention and the United Nations
Development Programme in order to mainstream activities to combat desertification
at the national, subregional and regional levels; 5
13. Urges all parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to pay
promptly and in full their contributions to the core budget of the Convention so as to
ensure continuity in the cash flow required to finance the ongoing work of the
3

ICCD/COP(3)/16, annex.
See ICCD/COP(4)/11/Add.1, decision 9/COP.4, para. 2.
5
See DP/2001/1, para. 231.
4

2

A/RES/55/204

Conference of the Parties, the subsidiary bodies, the secretariat and the Global
Mechanism;
14. Calls upon Governments, multilateral financial institutions, regional
development banks, regional economic integration organizations and all other
interested organizations, as well as non-governmental organizations and the private
sector, to contribute generously to the General Fund, the Supplementary Fund and
the Special Fund, in accordance with the relevant paragraphs of the financial rules
of the Conference of the Parties; 6
15. Requests the Secretary-General to make a provision in the proposed
calendar of conferences and meetings for the biennium 2002-2003 for the sessions
of the Conference of the Parties and its subsidiary bodies, including the sixth
ordinary session of the Conference of the Parties and meetings of its subsidiary
bodies;
16. Invites the Conference of the Parties to contribute towards the
preparation of the ten-year review of progress achieved in the implementation of
Agenda 21 7 and other outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development, inter alia, by elaborating proposals, including options for funding,
aimed at enhancing the implementation of the Convention at the national,
subregional and regional levels, and requests the Executive Secretary to report to the
Commission on Sustainable Development at its tenth session to this end;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution, as well as on the
outcome of the fourth session of the Conference of the Parties;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
sub-item entitled “Implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, particularly in Africa”.
87th plenary meeting
20 December 2000

6

ICCD/COP(1)/11/Add.1 and Corr.1, decision 2/COP.1, annex, paras. 7-11.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,3-14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.

7

3
