TWENTY-FIRST
YEAR
vd MEETING:
29 MAY 1966
&me S&NCE:
VINGT
ET

NEW

19 PjlAT 2966
UN1k.E
ANNBE

YORK

TABLE

OF

CONTENTS
Page

PrOViSiOnal

agenda (S/Agenda/1283) .*...*......a....,........

,..,.. .... ...

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963
addressed to the President of the Security Council on behalf of the representatives of thirtytwo Member States (S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 10 May 1966 addressed to the President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Dahomey, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Liberia,
Libya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Sudan, United Republic of Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Republic, Upper
Volta and Zambia (S/7285 and Add.1 and 2) . . . . ..*............*......,...*.

TABLE
Ordre du jour provisoire
Adoptiondel’ordredujour

(S/Agenda/1283).

DES

1

MATIiiRES

,... .. ... ... .... ..... ..... .,....I.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . . . . . . a,.-

. ...

(Continued overleaf - suite au verso)

S/PV.1283

1
1

TABLE

DES

MATIbRES

(suite)
Page

Question concernant la situation en Rhodesie du Sud: lettres, en date des 2 et 30 aolk
1963, adresseesau Prbsident du Conseilde sdcuriti?au nomdes representantsde 32 Etats
Membres (S/5332et S/5409):
Lettre, en date du 10 mai 1966,adresseeau President du Conseilde securiti! par les rep&sentantsdeI’ Algiirie, du Burundi,du Cameroun,duCongo(Brazzaville), de la C&e d’lvoire,
du Dahomey,de l’Ethiopie, du Gabon,duGhana,de la Guinbe,de la Haute-Volta, du Kenya,
du Lib&-ia, de la Libye, du Malawi, du Mali, du Maroc, de la Mauritanie, du Niger, du
Nigeria, de l’ouganda, de la Rdpubliquearabe unie, de la Republiquedkmocratique du
Congo,du Rwanda,du Sierra Leone, de la Somalie,du Soudan,de la Rbpublique-Uniede
Tanzanie, du Tchad, du Togo, de la Tunis& et de la Zambie (S/7285 et Add.1 et 2). . . 0 . .

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Qfficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adoptedin 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of
the Securl& Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to
resolutions adoptedbefore 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date,
*
*

*

Les totes des documents de 1’Organisation des Nations Unies se oomposent
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d’une tote dans un texte
signifie qu’il s lagit d’un document de ItOrganisation.
Les documents ctu Conseil de securite tcotes S/. . .) sent, en regle generale,
publies dans des Supplements trimestriels aux Documents officiels du Conseil
de st%xxit& La date d’un tel document indique le supplement dans lequel on
trouvera soit le texte en question, soit des indications le concernant.
Les resolutions du Conseil de securite, numerotees selon un systeme adopt6
en 1964, sont publiees, pour chaque annge, dans un recueil de Resolutions et
deGisionsdu Conseif de s&cur&. Ce nouveau systeme, appliquu8r&roactivement
aux resolutions anterieures au ler janvier 1965, est en&i? pleinement en vigueur
il cette date.

1

TWELVE

HUNDRED

Held in New York,
MILLE

DEUX

CENT

Tenue b New York,

AND EIGHTY-THIRD

on Thursday,

19

le jeudi

19 mai

SiANCE

1966, B 15 heures.
Pr&ident:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Bulgaria, China, France, Japan, Jordan,
Mali, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,Uganda,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern 1reland;United States
of America and Uruguay,
agenda

ay 1966, at 3 p.m.

QUATRE-VINGT-TROISIiME

President: Mr. J. G. DE BEUS (Netherlands).

Provisional

MEETING

M. J. G. DE BEUS (Pays-bas).

Pr&ents:
Les repr&entants des Etats suivants:
Argentine, Bulgarie, Chine, Etats-Unis d’Am&ique,
France, Japan, Jordanie, Mali, NigBria, NouvelleZBlande, Ouganda, Pays-Bas f Royaume-Uni de
Grande-Bretagne et d’Irlande du Nerd, Union des
RBpubliques socialistes sovi&iques et Uruguay.

(S/Agenda/1283)

Drdre

du iour provisoire

1. Adoption of the agenda,

1. Adoption de l’ordre du jour.

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963addressed
to the President of the Seourity Council on behalf
of the representatives of thirty-two Member States
(S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 10 May 1966 addressedto the President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad,
Congo (Brazzaville), Dahomey, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Liberia, Libya,
Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan,
United Republic of Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Republic, Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/7285 and Add.1 and 2).

2.

Adoption

Question concernant la situation en RhodBsie du
Sud: lettres, en date des 2 et 30 aoilt 1963, adressdes au President du Conseil de &curite au nom
des repr&entants de 32 Etats Membres (S/5382
et S/5409) :
Lettre, en date du 10 mai 1966, adsessee au
Pr&ident du Conseil de &curite par les representants de l’AIg&ie, du Burundi, du Cameroun,
du Congo (Brazeaville), de la C&e d’Ivoire, du
Dahomey, de l’Ethiopie, du Gabon, du Ghana, de
la Guinee, de la Haute-Volta, du Kenya, du LibBria,
de la Libye, du Malawi, du Mali, du Maroc, de
la Mauritanie, du Niger, du NigBria, del’ouganda,
de la RBpublique arabe unie, de la Rkpublique
democratique du Congo, du Rwanda, du Sierra
Leone, de la Somalie, du Soudan, de la RepubliqueUnie de Tsnzanie, du Tchad, du Togo, de la Tunisie
et de la Zambie (S/7285 et Add.1 et 2).
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

(S/Agenda/l283)

de I’ordre

du jour

L ‘ordre du jour est adopt&

Question
concerning
the situation
in Southern
Rhodesia: letters dated 2 and 30 August 1963 addressed
to the President
of the Security
Council
on behalf
of the representatives
of thirty-two
Member
States
(S/5382 and S/5409):
Letter dated 10 May 1966 addressed
tothe President
of the Security
Council
from the representatives
of Algeria,
Burundi,
Cameroon,
Chad, Congo
(Brazzaville),
Dahomey,
Democratic
Republic
of
the Congo, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory
Coast,
Kenya,
Liberia,
Libya,
Malawi,
Mali,
Mauritania,
Morocco,
Niger,
Nigeria,
Rwanda,
Sierra
Leone, Somalia,
Sudan, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda,
United Arab
Republic,
Upper Volta and Zambia
(S/7285 and
Add.1 and 2)

Question
concernant
la situation
en RhodGsie du Sud:
lettres,
en date des 2 et .30 aoOt 1963, adressbes
au President
du Conseil de skurite
au nom des
repr&entants
de 32 Etats Membres
(T/5382
et
S/5409):
Lettre,
en date du 10 mai 1966, adresske
au President
du Conseif
de skcuritk
put- les representants
de
I’Algkrie,
du Burundi,
du Cameroun,
du Congo
(Brazzaville),
de la C8te d’lvoire,
du Dahomey,
de I’Ethiopie,
du Gabon, du Ghana, de la Guinbe,
de la Haute-Volta,
du Kenya, du LibBria,
de lo
Libye, du Malawi, du Mali, duMaroc,de
la Mauritanie, du Niger, du Nigkia,
de I’Ouganda,
de la
R&pub1 ique arabe unie, de la Rbpublique
d&mocratique
du Congo, du Rwanda,
du Sierra
Leone,
de la Somalie,
du Soudan, de la Rkpublique-Unie
de Tanzanie,
du Tchad, dw Toga, de la Tunisie
et
de la Zombie (S/7285 et Add.? et 2)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the Council’s
decision taken at the 1278th meeting, I now invite the

1. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais): Conform&
ment & la decision prise & la 12788me sgance, j’invite
1

representatives
of India, Pakistan, Senegal, Zambia,
Algeria and Sierra Leone to take the seats at the
Council table and to participate,
without the right to
vote, in the discussion.

les repr&entants de l’Inde, du Pakistan, du SBnBga&
de la Zambie, de l’Alg8rie
et du Sierra Leonea
prendre place II la table du Conseil et 2 participer,
saris droit de vote, aux discussions.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. B. C. kUshra
(&fja), Mr. A. Ciss (Senegal),, Mr. S. M. Kamwwe
(Zambia) and Mr. A. Rabal (Algeria) took places at
the Council table.

Sur 1‘invitation du PrtSsident, M. B. C. Misiwa
(I&e), M. A. CUSS (S&f&~),
M. S. M. Kapwepwe
(Zambie) et M. A. Rahal (Rlg6rie,J prennent placea’
la table du Conseil.

2. Mr, RIJDA (Argentina) (translated from Spanish):
Mr. President, thirty-two African delegations have
addressed a letter to you, requesting an immediate
meeting of the Security Council to deal withthe situation in Southern Rhodesia created by the continued
exist,ence of the regime set up at Salisbury in
November 1965.

2, M. RUDA (Argentine) [traduit de l’espagnol];
Monsieur le President, 32 dW?gations africainesvous
ont demand6 de rdunir immediatement le Conseilde
securite pour traiter de la situation qui r&ulte en
Rhod&ie du Sud du maintien du regime instaure a
Salisbury en novembre 1965.

3. Long before that date the Security Council showed
its concern over the problem that was imminent and,
in resolution 202 (1965), of 6 May 1965, requested
the United Kingdom to take all necessary action to
prevent a unilateral declaration of independence, not
to transfer government under any circumstances, to
promote the attainment of independence by a democratic system of government in accordance with the
aspirations of the majority of the population and to
enter into consultations with a view to convening a
conference of all political parties in order to adopt
new constitutional provisions acceptable to the majority of the people.

3. Longtemps avant cette date, le Conseildeseourite
avait montre qu’il se preoccupait du probleme qui
allait se poser en demandant au Royaume-Uni, par sa
r&solution 202 (1965) du 6 mai 1965, de mettre tout
en ceuvre pour empecher une declaration unilateral0
d’indgpendance, de ne transferer en aucun cas les
pouvoirs & sa colonie, de favoriser l’accessiosdu
pays II l’ind8pendance par un systeme de gouvernement democratique, conformement aux aspirations
de la majorit
de la population, et d’entreprendre
des consultations pour r&mir une confErencegroupant
tous les partis politiques en vue de prendre de nouvelles dispositions constitutionnelles acceptablespour
la majorit du peuple.

4. The lengthy, painful and arduous negotiations
between the United Kingdom Government and the
regime of Ian Smith led nowhere and on 11 November
1965, that regime declared independence unilaterally.
Although the Security Council resolution which I have
just mentioned pursued very sound objectives, they
were total.ly frustrated by the unlawful action of the
Salisbury Government, The next day the Security
Council met at the request of the United Kingdom
Government and, in resolution 216 (1965), condemned
“the unilateral declaration of independence made by
a racist minority in Southern Rhodesia” and called
upon all States not to recognize that regime and to
refrain from rendering it any assistance.

4. Les longues, penibles et delicates n&gociations
entre le Gouvernement britannique et le rBgimed’Ian
Smith n’ont don& aucun resultat et ce regime a
proclam unilat&alement l’independance ie 11 novembre 1965. La resolution du Conseil dont je viens
de parler, qui Btait bien entendu inspiree par les
motifs les plus rationnels, a BtE entibrement contredite par l’action illggitime du Gouvernement desalisbury. SW la demande du Gouvernement britannique,
le Conseil de securite s’est reuni le lendemainet,
par sa resolution 216 (1965), il a condamne“la dgclaration unilaterale d’independance proclam6e Par
une minorit& raciste en Rhodi%ie du Sud” et demand6
a tous les Etats de ne pas reconnafire ce rEgime et
de s’abstenir de lui pr&ter assistance,

5. Later, on 20 November 1965, by resolution 217
(1965), the Council determined that the situation in
Southern Rhodesia was tlextremely grave”, that the
Government of the United Kingdom should put an end
to it and that “its continuance in time”--and I repeat,
in time--” constitutes a threat to international peace
and securitylf. Furthermore and among other things,
the Security Council called upon all States not to
recognize the illegal authority and not to entertain
any diplomatic relations with it; to refrain from any
action which might assist and encourage the illegal
regime, and, in particular, to desist from providing
it with military ewipment and “to do their utmost
in order to break all economic relations with Southern
Rhodesia, including an embargo on oil and petroleum
products”.

5. Par la suite, le 20 novembre, par sa r&3olntion
217 (19651, le Conseil a constate que la situationen
Rhod&ie du Sud Btait “extrbmement grave”, Fe le
Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni devait y mettre fin
et que “son maintien dans le temps” - je dis his%
dans le temps - “[constituait] une menacePour Ja
paix et la securite internationales”. En outret le
Conseil a notamment prie tous les Etats de ne Pas
reconnatire les autorites illegales, de n’entretenir
avec elle aucune relation diplomatique, de slabsten@
de toute action qui aiderait et encouragerait le&lme
illggal, et en particulier de s’abstenir de lui fournir
du materiel militaire, et “de s’efforcer de romPre
toutes lea relations Bconomiques avec la Rhodgsie
du Sud, notamment en imposant un embargo sur Ie
PetrOle et les produits p&roliers”.
2

6. It is important to stress that no State recognized
the Smith rhginle. What is more, approximately
sixty
States responded affirmatively
to the Security Council’s appeal, among them my own. As was mentioned
in the debate that took place at the 1277th meeting of
this Council, my Government, in accordance with the
Security Council resolution,
decreed the suspension
of all trade relations with Southern Rhodesia.

6, Aucun Etat n’a reconnu le r&gime de Ian Smith
- cela, il importe de le souligner - et meme une
soixantaine
dIEtats ont &pondu affirmativement
h
l’appel du Conseil de &curit&
Parmi eux se trouvait l’argentine,
qui, comme il a d&j& &B indique au
Conseil a la 12778me sgance, a decide de suspendre
les relations commerciales
avec la Rhod&ie du Sud
conformement & la r&olution du Conseil.

7. This position of the Argentine
Government, in
support of General Assembly
resolution
2020 (XX)
and Security Council resolution
217 (1965), is based
not only on the respect which all Governments
owe
to the decisions of this international
body and their
obligation to support it to the fullest possible extent;
it also, and primarily,
derives from the categorical,
firm and clear Argentine position of repudiating
regimes based on racial discrimination,
whose mere
existence constitutes,
as I think the history of this
Organization
demonstrates,
a threat not only to
internal but also to international peace and security.
The existence of rggimes based upon racial discrimination shocks the civilized conscience of my Government and my people and no interests,
however important, can change our attitude, which is to repudiate
such rggimes.

7. Cette position du Gouvernementargentin
consistant
& appuyer les r&olutions
2020 (XX) de l’Assembl8e
g&-&ale
et 217 (1965) du Conseil de securite
est
fondle non seulement sur le respect que tout gouvernement
doit avoir pour les decisions
de llorganisation internationale
et l’obligation qu’il ad’appuyer
autant qu’il le peut son action, mais encore et surtout
sur le rejet aussi net que possible, ferme et cat&gorique des regimes
reposant sur la discrimination
raciale, dont la seule existence constitue, con-me le
prouve l’histoire
de l’Organisation,
une cause de
perturbation de la paix et de la s&uritg non seulement
sur le plan interieur,
mais aussi sur le plan international. L’existence
de regimes de discrimination
raciale heurte chez le peuple et le Gouvernement
argentin le sens des valeurs de civilisation
et il
n’existe pas d’int&&s,
aussi importants
soient-ils,
qui puissent nous faire revenir sur notre rejet de ces
regimes.

8. However,
a reading of the working
paper on
Southern Rhodesia prepared by the Secretariaty
for
the Special Committee of Twenty-Foury
makes it
clear that, despite the favourable reaction of a large
number of States, Security
Council resolution 21’7
(1965) has not been fully complied with, particularly
with regard to the embargo on oil and petroleum
products,
by the Governments
of some countries
bordering on Southern Rhodesia. The truth is that
substantial and increasing quantities of oil are entering Southern Rhodesia from neighbouring States, in
defiance of the appeal made by the Security Council
on 20 November, It is also true that, as was stated so
clearly yesterday by the representative
of Uruguay,
resolution 217 (1965) is not legally binding. However,
as he also said, that does not mean that it can be
lightly set aside and the aims of the Security Council
flouted, for has not the international
community conferred on the Security Council primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international
peace and security? The argument adduced by those States for
leaving things as they are is nothing more nor less
than a reftisal at this stage to accept the moral authority of this Council which, on the contrary, ought
to be enhanced by all Members of the United Nations,
Nor, in our opinion, can a resolution
of the Council
be ignored on the basis of apolicyof general repudiation of sanctions. In the first pl.ace, the United Nations
is basedon the system of effective collective measures,
as is made clear .in Article 1 (1) of the Charter; and
that is why resolution 217 (1965) is not mandatory
and is merely a serious and determined appeal for

8. Mais, comme on peut aisement s’en rendre compte
Zr la lecture du document de travail sur la question
de la Rhod&ie du Sud que le Secrgtariat
a 6tablti
2 l’intention du Cornit& des Vingt-QuatreY,
la r&olution 217 (1965) du Conseil, bien qu’elle ait suscite
la reaction
favorable
d*un grand nombre d’Etats
membres,
n*a pas BtB totalement appliquee par les
gouvernements
de certains pays voisins de la Rhod&ie du Sud, notamment en ce qui concerne l’embargo sur le p&role et les produits pgtroliers.
La
v&ritb doit Btre dite ?t ce sujet. Des quantites appr&ciables de petrole, chaque jour plus gxandes, entrent
en Rhod&ie du Sud en provenance d*Etats voisins,
au mGpri,s de l*appel que le Conseil de skcuritB a
lance le 20 novembre. 11 est vrai aussi que, comme
le representant
de l*Uruguay l’a fort bien souligne
bier, la &solution
217 (1965) n’a pas un caractere
juridiquement
obligatoire,
Mais cela ne signifie pas
pour autant, comme ce mtSme representant
l*a dit,
que l’on puisse allegrement la laisser de c&get ainsl
faire fi, je le rGp&te, des decisions
du Cons&l de

y Document
A/AC.109/L.264
and Add.1
and 2; for the text, see
Official Records of the General Assembly,
Twentieth Session, Annexes,
addendum
to agenda item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l),
chap. III, part I, sect. A,
B and E.

u Document A/AC.lW/L.264
et Add.1 et 2; pour le texee voir e
menes officiels de I’Assembl~e
g&&rale,
vitigti.?me session. Annexes,
addirif au ooint 23 de I’ordre du jour (A/6300/Rev.l),
chao. III. Premiere partie. sect. A, B ec E.
y Corn&& spkial
charge! d’&udier
la situation
en ce qui concerne
l’application
de la Dklaraeion
SW l’octroi
de I’lnd8pendance
aux pays
et aux peuples coloniaw.

Y Special Committee
tation of the Declaration
Countries and Peoples.

sikuritk,

que

la

communaute

internatfonale

a charg&

de la responsabilite
principale en ce qui concerne le
maintien de la paix et de la &curitg
internationales.
A notre sens, la formule suggeree par ces Etats, quui
est de laisser les chases comme elles SO& revient
en somme 2 mgconnafire & ce stade l’autorit6
morale
du Conseil, que tous les membres de l*ONU devraient
au contraire renforcer.
On ne saurait nonplus & notre
sens faire fi d*une resolution du Conseil en invoquant
une politique visant au rejet g&n&al des sanctions
d*une man&e
gi%&rale. Et ceci tout d*abord parce

on the Situation with regard to the Implemenon the Graneing of Independence to Colonial

3

to be

que l’organisation
des Nations Unies est fond& stir
un syst&me qui pri%oit des mesures collectives efficaces comme cela ressort
clairement
du paragraphe 1 de l’brticle premier de la Charte,et ensuite
parce que, pr&i&ment,
la r&olution
217 (1965) nta
pas’un caractere obligatoire et qu’elle est seulement
un appel solennel et ferme pour que les relations
&onomiques
avec la Rhod&ie
soient rompues et
l’embargo sur le p&role impos&.

9. We recognize frankly that those States which have
not complied with resolution 21’7 (1965) are, because
they are adjacent, perhaps
in a somewhat more
difficult situation than those which are far from the
south of the African continent. Eut, as matters stand
in this particular case and as the problem of Southern
Rhodesia is becoming increasingly
serious, endangering peace in that continent and in the world, those
Governments
should sacrifice
their economic and
political interests, however important, for the sake of
a more valuable objective, the maintenance of international peace and security.
Their responsibility
in
the eyes of the world is considerable
and grave and
they must heed the appeal of the community of nations.

9. Nous reconnaissons
franchement que les pays qui
n’ont pas donne suite .8 la r&olution
217 (1965) se
trouvent, du fait qu’ils sonl; des pays limitrophes de
la Rhodesie du Sud, dans une situation peut-&re plus
dglicate que ceu? qui sont plus &o&n& de l’Af.frique
australe.
Mais, compte tenu des circonstances de
cette affaire particuli&re
et vu que le probl&rne de
la Rhodesie du Sud slaggrave de plus en plus, mettant
en danger la paix du continent et du monde entier,
ces gouvernements
doivent, B notre sens, aacrifier
leurs int&%ts &onomiques
et politiques, quello qu’en
soit l’importance,
au nom d’un principe superieur,
celui du maintien de la paix et de la s&rite
internationales. Leur responsabilite
face au reste dumonde
ost grande et grave et ils doivent repondre 2 l’al)pel
de la communaut&

10. For the above reasons my Governmentfeelsthat,
before adopting definitive
resolutions
that may lead
to much more serious
confrontations
and the implementation of a series of harsh measures which will
be irreversible,
it would be wise to make a last appeal
to those who have refused to comply with resolution
217 (1965) and to take, as so many Governments
have
done, measures
to make the economic life of the
Smith regime impossible.
We consider
that belore
collective measures are adopted, measures that will
necessarily
be increasingly
harsher
if the failure to
comply continues, the Security Council must make
a final and strong appeal to those who are in duty
bound to respect its authority.

10. C’est pourquoi mon gouvernement estimequ’avant
d’adopter des r&olutions
definitives susceptibles de
conduire & des affrontements
beaucoup plus graves
et & l’application
d’une s&Ye de mesures dent la
rigueur sern irr&ersible,
il serait sage de lancer
un dernier appel a ceux qui n’ont pas cherche 8. appliquer la ri%olution 217 (1965), pour qu’ils prennenl,
comme tant d’autres l’ont fait, des mesures visant
21 emp&her le r&ime
d’Ian Smith de se maintenir
sux le plan 6conomique. Nous estimons qu’&vant
d’adopter des mesures collectives qui seront n&essairement de plus en plus dures si lar&olution
reste
sans effet, le Conseil de s&urit& doit lancer un dernier et Bnergique appel a ceux qui ont le devoir de
respecter
son autorite.

11. Resolution 221 (1966) of 9April1966,dealingwith
the episode of the tanker which arrived at the port of
Beira and the possible
arrival
of further
tankers,
probably enabled the Security Council to prevent the
opening of an important
source of oil supply by authorizing the United Kingdom to use force to prevent
the delivery of that oil and by calling upon Portugal
not to receive oil destined for Rhodesia, nor to allow
the Reira-Umtali
pipe-line to be used. It is only fair
to recognize that Portugal in that case responded to
the Council’s appeal and the United Kingdom acted
speedily on the high seas. This was a resounding
success for the Council, although it must be admitted
that its objective was limited.

11. 11 ne fait pas de doute que la&solution
221 (19661,
du 9 avril 1966, relative & l’arrivee
d’un pktrolier
au port de Beira et a celle, Bventuelle, d’autres Petroliers,
a permis au Conseil de s&curitk d’empechsr
1’accBs 2 une importante source d’approvisionnement
9n p&role en autorisant le Royaume-Uni 2 utiliser
la force pour empecher l’arriv8e
desdits p%rOliers
et en demandant au Portugal de ne pas reCeVOir
10
p&role destine & la Rhod&ie et de ne pas permettre
son transport
par l’ol8oduc de Beira-Urntall,
Le
Portugal a, il faut le reconnai’tre, rgpondu 2 cet aPPe1
du Conseil et le Royaume-Uni,
pour sa Part, est
intervenu rapidement
en haute mer. Le sue&s du
Conseil a E?tE?manifeste bien que, naturellement, son
objectif ait BtB limit&

12. That localized action allowed us to demonstrate
the unity of this Council in the face of the Smith
regime, It was also a serious warning to those who
axe barefacedly trying
to assist that rggime. The
Council calmly but firmly
answered the immediate
and flagrant challenge to its authority,

12. Cette action localisee a permis de faire 1aPreuve
de l’unit8 du Conseil
face au regime d’Ian Smith
Elle a en outre constitue un serieux avertissement
pour ceux qui ant l’impudence de vOUlOir
aider
ce
r@ime. Le Conseil a releve avec &r&it8 mais avec
fermete le defi immediat et flagrant lance a sonautorit6.

13. But, as I said before, supplies have continued to
reach Southern Rhodesia through other channels. The

13. Mais comme nous l’avons d8jbdit, l’aPProvisi”n-’
nement de la Rhodesie du Sud a continue 3 se faire

economic relations
with Southern Rhodesia
broken off and an oil embargo established.

4

oil situation of the Smith r6gime seems to have improved since the beginning -of the year, while its
economic and financial
situation appears to have
seriously
deteriorated.
This combination of factors
has obviously created a new situation which, to a
certain although limited
extent, has changed the
picture as it was in April.

par d’autres voies. La situalion p6trolibre semble
s%tre amEtlior6e pour le regime d’Ian Smith depuis
le debut de l’ann6e, tandis que lasituation 6conomiquue
et financi&re semble avoir subi une s6rieuse d6t6rioration. Cette conjoncture complexe a sans aucun
doute cr66 une situation nouvelle qui a veritablement
et r6ellement modifi6, quoique seulement en partie,
la situation qui existait au mois d’avril,

14. The representative
of the ‘United Kingdom told
us yesterday [128Oth meeting] that the effect of all
the measures
taken has not been entirely negative
and that as an immediate consequence they had led to
the beginning of talks to lay the groundwork
for negotiation betwgen ofi’icials of the United Kingdom Government and officials of the Smith regime. It is impossible
at the present time to assess the scope, importance
and possibility
of success of those talks, We trust
that during them the United Kingdom Government will
adhere to the six points laid down by its Prime
Minister as the unchangeable basis on which a final
solution can be arrived
at. We do not know, and I
do not believe that even the Uniter1 Kingdom Government knows, whelher this is the right path to follow,
but the path does exist and it is being used. In the
light of this latest episode, which appears to be the
first, though as yet not fully ripe, fruit of the Council’s
resolutions,
we believe that the wisest
and most
prudent course to follow would be for the moment to
avoid any hasty action, as the representative
of Japan
said so eloquently yesterday
[1281st meeting], that
might prevent
a final solution
to the Rhodesian
question.

14. Le representant du Royaume-Uni a affi.rm6 hier
[12808me s6ance] que les mesures prises n’ont pas
6t6 dans leur ensemble totalement inoffensives et
qu’elles ne sont pas tomb&es dans le vide; elles ont
eu pour cons6quence imrnBdiate, a-t-i1 ajoutb, l’ouverture de pourparlers visant $ la recherche d’une
base de n6gociation entre fonctionnaires britanniques
et fonotionnaires du regime #Ian Smith. 11 est impossible a l’heure actuelle de juger exactement la
port6e, l’importanoe et les chances de succ&s de ces
conversations. Nous esp6rons qu’en l’occurrence, le
Gouvernement britannique maintiendra les six points
wi, selon les d6clarations du Premier Ministre,
representent les principes fondamentaux et immuables
a respecter pour aboutir & une solution d6finitive.
Pas plus que le Gouvernement britannique, nous ne
savons si c’est 18 la bonne voie, mais cette voie existe
et elle est praticable. Devant ce dernier d&eloppement qui paraft &re le premier fruit, quoique encore
un peu vert, des r6solutions du Conseil, ilnous semble
que la .voie la meilleure et qu’il est le plus prudent
de suivre consiste, comme l’a fort bien dit hier le
repr6sentant du Japon [12818me s6ance], 2 6viter
temporairement toute action trop h&Live capable d’emp&her la solution definitive de la question de la
RhodEsie du Sud.

15. But this does not in any way mean that the Security Council must remain inactive indefinitely while
awaiting the results of the talks. As time goes on, its
patience must obviously be limited, since a situation
as grave and as fraught with danger as this is cannot
be allowed to continue indefinitely, becoming a more
obvious danger to peace with each passing day. The
Council can and must recall the terms of its previous
resolutions and impress upon those who do not comply
with the provisions regarding assistance to Southern
Rhodesia that they must do so without delay and show
clear and definite willingness to prevent the situation
from becoming worse. If, following that appeal, the
policy which we regard as mistaken is persisted in,
then all scruples, all safeguards, must be set aside
and a more difficult road opened, but at the same
time it will be a better defined road for the Council
to follow.

15, Cela ne veut nullement dire que le Conseil doive
ne rien faire en attendant indefiniment le r6sultat de
ces conversations. Sa patience doit n6cessairement
avoir une limite, car il n’est pas possible que cette
situation si grave et si lourde de danger se prolonge,
representant chaque jour plus clairement une menace
pour la paix. Le Conseil peut et doit rappeler les
termes de ses r6solutions ant6rieures et insister
aup& de ceux qui nlen respectent pas les dispositions relatives & l’assistance & la Rhoddsie du Sud
pour qu’ils le fassent saris tarder, et manifestent
clairement et r6solument leur volont6 d’empgcher
que cette situation ne s’aggrave. Si apr&s oet appel
on persiste dans une politique B notre sens erron6e,
tous Ies scrupules, toutes les rdserves tomberont
et une voie plus difficile mais en m6me temps plus
nette s’ouvrira pour le Conseil.

16. We also believe that the talks taking place in
London are not entirely outside the responsibility of
this body which is so deeply concerned with the
problem of Southern Rhodesia, Our legitimate interest,
as we see it, imposes an obligation on the United
Kingdom to inform us, at the right time, of the results
of the talks. The United Kingdom has the main responsibility for finding a solution to the problem, but in
so far as this matter continues to affect peace, as it
does, so too the Security Council has a responsibility
which we cannot in any way disregard.

16. Nous pensons en outre que les conversations qui
se d6roulent a Londres n’6chappent pas entierement a
la comP6tence du Conseil, qui se pr6occupe tant du
probleme de la RhodBsie du Sud. Selon ma d616gation,
notre int6r8t 16gitime impose au Royaume-Uni l’obligation de nous informer le moment venu du r6sultat
de ces conversations. C’est le Royaume-Uni qui a
avant tout la responsabilit6 de trouver une solution
au problbme mais dans la mesure oh cette affaire
continue de mettre la paix en jeu, ce qu’ell&‘fait sans
aucun doute, le Conseil de s6curit6 a lui aussi une
responsabilit6 que nous ne pouvons nullement m6connaflre,
5

17. Finally, I should like briefly to refer to Certain
parts of the draft resolution submitted by the delegations of Mali, Nigeria and Uganda [S/7285/Add.l1.
This draft resolution contains certain focal points
which my delegation supports,
in keeping With the
views we have already expressed,
particularly
the
need for all States, especially those bordering on
Southern Rhodesia, to comply with the embargo on oil
and petroleum products intended for the illegal Smith
regime. We also support the reaffirmation
of the
inalienable rights of the people of Southern Rhodesia
to freedom and isdependence under a democratic
regime and the principle of “one man, one vote”. We
consider that the United Kingdom should, if possible,
consult the African leaders on the future of the
Territory,

18. But we cannot support the reference to the use
of force. While there are means of reachinga peaceful
solution and of recommending measures which do not
presuppose the use of force, we believe that it would
be premature to take the ultimate step. My delegation
defined its position in this respect at the meeting held
on 9 April, when we stated that any resolution under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, and
especially Article 42, must be adopted only in very
extreme cases [1277th meeting, para. 471. At this
juncture we would also add that the use of force
pursuant to the Charter is based uPon the principle
of the prior consent of the State or States using such
force. The Security Council cannot compel any State
to use its armed forces if it does not wish to do so.
Furthermore,
we must in all fairness recognize that
the United Kingdom needs neither the authorization
nor the endorsement of this Council to quell the Smith
rggime. It is the United Kingdom’s problem and its
dilemma. But the world is watching and waiting for it
to act and the chief responsibility
for the final result,
success or failure, will be the United Kingdom’s, as
that country itself has recognized here,

19. The PRESIDENT: My original intention had been
to round off the first part of our debate this afternoon
and then to reserve tomorrow
morning for informal
consultations
among the members
of the Council,
which might possibly have enabled us to reach a
decision tomorrow afternoon. It will now be necessary
to adjourn our debate until tomorrow
morning, but
I hope that we can finish it during the morning, This
makes it. somewhat awkward
as far as the time
schedule is concerned, since it might meancontinuing
into the week-end or into next we_ek, and that, I understand, would be inconvenient, fi&t for the Foreign
Minister of Zambia, and second for a number of the
members of the Committee of Twenty-Four
who must
leave for Africa on Saturday, 21 May. I would suggest,
therefore,
that we begin the informal consultations
immediately without awaiting the final outcome of the
debate. It may then be possible to come to a decision
tomorrow afternoon,

The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.
Lithoin U.N.

17. Enfin, nous voudrions formuler quelques braves
observations sur certaines parties du projet de r&p
lution pr6sent6 par le NigEria, 1.e Mali et lY3u~d~
[S/7285/Add.l].
II y a dans ce projct des idles prigcipales que la d616gation argentine appuie, conform&
ment aux principes qu’elle a dtSjBposBs,enparticulier
la necessitd pour tous
les Etats, surtout ceux qui
sont limitrophes
de la Rhodesie du Sud, de dormer
suite a la demande visant h empbcher le ravitaillcment en p&role et en produits PBtroliers du regime
illkgal de Smith. Nous appuyons aussi la r6affirmation
du droit inalienable du peuple rhod&ien B la libertl
et B l’independance
sous un rEgime dGmocratiqlle,
ainsi que le principe Blectoral selon lequel chaque
habitant doit disposer
d’une voix, et il now parafi
bon que le Royaume-Uni,
si Possible, entre en consultation avec les dirigeants africains au sujet de I’avenir du territoire.
18. Nous ne saurions
appuyer la mention qui est
faite du recours B la force. Tant que l’on peut recommander
et utiliser
des moyens Pacifiques, et
notamment adopter pr6aIablement
des mesures qui
nlimpliquent pas l’usage de la force, nous pensons
qu’il est prGmatur6 dsen venir au dernier reoours,
La delegation argentine a dgfini sa position & ce sujet
a la seance du 9 avril, lorsqu’elle
a dit que toute
r&olution
pr6sent6e en vertu du Chapitre VII de la
Charte des Nations Unies et en particulier de I’Artitle 42 ne devait &se approuvEe B son avis que dais
les cas 10s plus extremes [ 127Gme sBance, par, 413,
Aujourd’hui,
elle rappelle en outre que l’usage de lr
force tel que la Charte le pr6voit repose sur le principe du consentement prealable de lIEtat ou des Et&
qui doivent y recourir.
Le Conseil de sGcurit6 ne
peut imposer a quiconque de rec0uri.r 3,laforce armee
centre son gr6. D’un autre c&b, leRoyaume-Uni - et
cela il faut aussi le souligner - n’a besoin ni de
l’autorisation
ni de l’assentiment
du Conseil pour
aneantir le regime de Smith. C’est la son problemc
et c’est 13 son dilemme; mais le monde suit atleutivement ce que le Royaume-Uni
fait, car, comme le
representant
de ce pays l’a lui-mbme reconnu, il
sera le principal
responsable
des r&ultats,
qu’il
s’agisse d’un suc&s ou d’un Bchec.
19. Le PRESIDENT
(traduit de l’anglais): Ita Pr@misre partie de nos dEbats pour rkserver la mati&
de demain a des consultations
officieuses entre les
membres du Conseil, ce qui nous aurait peuteatre
permis de parvenir
a une decision demain apl+Smidi. 11 nous faut maintenant
remettre le d&at a
demain matin, mais j’esp&re que nous pourrons terminer dans la matinee. Ces arrangements creenl
certaines difficult& du point de vue du calendrier,
car nous risquons d’avoir B poursuivre nostravam
pendant le week-end, voire la semaine prochaine,ce
qui, je crois savoir, generait le Ministre desaffaires
&rang&es de la Zambie ainsi qu’un certain nombre
de membres du Cornit des Vingt-Quatre qui doivent
partir pour 1’Afrique le samedi 21 mai. Je Propose
done que nous commencions immgdiatenlent ncs
consultations officieuses saris attendre llissue des
d6bats. 11 nous sera peut-&re alors possible de
parvenir a une d&i&on demain ap&s-midi.

La se’ance est lede

6
Price:$U.S.0.50(or equivalent
in othercurrencies)

ri 16 h 5.
16&j&November
1967-%m
