TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 16 FEBRUARY 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
..,.... ,..... ......... ...

Page
1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaviile), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran,
Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Ma’li, Mauritania, MorocCo, Nepal, Niger, Philippines,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper
Volta and Yemen (S/8398 and Add.llRev.1 and Add.2) . . . , , . . . , . . . . .

2

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 39O/Rev.l)

SlPV.1390 and Corr.1

THIRTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETIETH MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 16 February 1968, at 11 a.m.
President: Mr. Miguel SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).

oriental civilizations; and I have no hesitation in saying that
I personally have endeavoured to benefit from his example
by observing how he handled this delicate task,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

4. With these words, not eloquent but certainly very
sincere, I am happy to pay this tribute on behalf of the
members of the Security Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 39Wlev.l)
1. Adoption

5. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): I am most grateful to you,
Mr. President, for your kind and generous words about my
modest efforts as President of the Council last month.

of the agenda.

2. The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia
and Zambia (S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (8/8398
and Add.l/Rev.l
and Add.2).

6. I should like to take this opportunity to express my
sincere and grateful appreciation to all my colleagues in the
Council for their unstinting and invaluable co-operation in
the discharge of my responsibilities as President of the
Council. Thanks to the continuing efforts and dedication of
the members of the Council to the cause of peace, the
Council was able to inject an element of restraint into a
potentially explosive situation involving one or more of its
permanent members. In particular, we owe a deep debt of
gratitude to those members of the Council who expressed
their readiness to commit their efforts and the influence
and support of their Governments to finding a way out of
the dangerous situation with which the Council was called
upon to deal.
7. The Security Council has to continue the discussion of
the question now before it on account of the arrogant
defiance by the Government of South Africa of resolution
245 (196X), adopted on 25 January 1968. We are confident, Mr. President, that thanks to your wise and able
leadership, your other outstanding personal qualities, and
the great Latin American tradition that you represent, ive
shall be able to address ourselves resolutely to the situation
created by that Government’s defiance, and will take
effective action to secure compliance with the Council’s
will.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): Before the
Security Council begins its work, I should like to exercise
the prerogative, established by a long-standing and laudable
practice, of paying a tribute to my predecessor in this post,
Mr. Agha Shahi of Pakistan, who was President of the
Security Council during the monthof January this year.

8. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Pakistan for the statement he has just
made and for waiving his right to consecutive interpretation, as well as for the generous words he addressed to
me personally,

2. Mr. Shahi was called upon to preside in distinctly trying
circumstances such as call for outstanding personal qualities
in whoever is fulfilling the functions of President. The
enlightenment, ability, patience, sagacity and diplomatic
tact characteristic
of Mr, Shahi were basic’ factors in
reaching a unanimous decision on the illegal trial of South
West Africans by South Africa, and in seeking formulas for
a peaceful settlement of the second issue discussed by the
Council in January.

9. At the same time I wish to offer to all the members of
the Security Council my most sincere apologies for the
delay in beginning this meeting. You all know the reason
for the delay. Consultations have been taking place, and I
really believe that the time we seem to have lost actually
represents time gained.

3. I think of Mr. Shahi as an admirable example of the
accumulated wisdom and sound sense of the ancient
1

deration of any question, including naturally any report
requested by the Security Council from the Secretary.
General, such as the report contained in document S/8365
prepared at the request of the Council in response to the
question asked by the representative of Algeria at the
1378th meeting.

Adoption of the agenda
10. The PRESIDENT (trunslated from Spatzkh): The
agenda for this meeting appears in document S/Agenda/
1390/Rev.l. The first item is the adoption of the agenda. If
I hear no objection I shall declare the agenda adopted.

17. Having regard to the importance of the question
submitted for consideration by fifty-eight States Members
of the United Nations, I feel that we should consider today
only the question contained in the provisional agenda for
this meeting.

1 1 . Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (tratzsluted from
French): I shall have an opportunity at a later stage of
expressing the high regard which we all feel for Mr. Shahi,
who presided over the Security Council during the month
of January. But before we proceed to the adoption of the
agenda, I should like to raise the following point:

The age&
12. At the 1378th meeting of the Security Council, in
response to a question put to the Council by the Algerian
delegation, the President of the Security Council asked the
Secretary-General to preyare a study 011 the Council’s
practice regarding its members’ credentials. May I ask what
the present situation is in that connexion?

was adopted.

The question of South West Africa
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of Chile,
Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8396
and Add.l/Rev.l and Add.2)

13. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spat&): Contrary
to my usual practice, I shall reply to the Algerian
representative’s question in English.
(The speaker conrinued it1English.]
14. The report of the Secretary-General on the practice of
the Security Council regarding the credentials of its
members has been circulated to the members of the Council
in document S/8365, dated 26 January 1968.
15. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
Fretlch) : May I then ask when the Council will consider the
report of the Secretary-General on the credentials of
members of the Security Council? I should be very grateful
for information from the President on this point.

18. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In view
of the lateness of the hour, I suggest, if there is no
objection, that the meeting should rise and reconvene at
4 p.m.

16. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Algeria, like
any other member of the Council, is perfectly within his
rights, under the rules of procedure, in requesting consi-

The tneeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

2
Litho

in U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35174--February

1971-2,100
