S/2014/774*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 October 2014
Original: English

First report of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 2169 (2014) *
I. Introduction
1.
In paragraph 6 of its resolution 2169 (2014), the Security Council requested
me to report to it every three months on progress made towards fulfilling the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The present
report covers key political and security developments related to Iraq, and provides
an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since the issuance of my
report dated 11 July 2014 (S/2014/485).

II. Summary of key political developments
A.

Internal developments
2.
Since my previous report, the threat posed by the Islamic State in Ira q and the
Levant (ISIL) has continued to undermine the stability and political dynamics of
Iraq. Despite this, the formation of the new Government and the adoption of its
ministerial programme was a significant step towards promoting stability in Iraq,
and was universally welcomed by the international community. Regional and
international partners increased their support for Iraq in its fight against ISIL. ISIL
and associated armed groups, however, continue to control large parts of the west
and north of the country, where they continue to inflict civilian casualties, cause
massive displacement and perpetrate systematic human rights violations that may
amount to war crimes or crimes against humanity.

B.

Political situation
3.
The reporting period witnessed a new stage of political compromise and
enhanced national dialogue. Following the inaugural session of the new Council of
Representatives on 1 July, Iraqi political blocs embarked on 10 weeks of intense
negotiations over the distribution of sovereign and ministerial positions in the
Government, which led to the appointment of a new cabinet and the adoption of its
ministerial programme on the eve of the constitutional deadline of 9 September.

__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons on 11 November 2014.

14-63291* (E)

121114

*1463291*

S/2014/774

4.
The initial breakthrough in forming the new Government came on 15 July,
when the Council of Representatives elected Salim al-Jabouri (National Forces
Coalition) as Speaker, Haider al-Abadi (National Alliance) as First Deputy Speaker
and Aram Sheikh Mohammed (Kurdistan Alliance) as Second Deputy Speaker. On
24 July, the Council of Representatives elected Fuad Masum as the new President of
the Republic.
5.
Disagreement over which bloc in Parliament was the largest initially delayed
the nomination of the Prime Minister and the formation of the new Council of
Ministers. On 11 August, Haider al-Abadi, who had earlier been elected as First
Deputy Speaker, was nominated by the National Alliance, the largest parliamentary
bloc, as its prime ministerial candidate. The same day, the President of Iraq
officially charged Al-Abadi with forming the Council of Ministers. On 14 August,
the outgoing Prime Minister, Nuri al-Maliki, announced that he had withdrawn his
petition before the Federal Supreme Court challenging Al-Abadi’s nomination and
announced his support for him. This last-minute move ensured a peaceful transition
of power in Iraq.
6.
On 15 August, Prime Minister-designate Al-Abadi announced the following as
his top priorities: fighting ISIL, tackling corruption and resolving the outstanding
issues between political blocs that had previously paralyzed the political process.
Formal cabinet formation discussions commenced on 18 August. Negotiations
centred on halting airstrikes and shelling against civilian areas, withdrawing militias
from cities, strengthening the federal powers of the Kurdistan Region of Iraq,
implementing article 140 of the Constitution and revenue -sharing, as well as on the
export of hydrocarbons and the federal bankrolling of the Peshmerga.
7.
On 22 August, in the wake of an attack on a mosque in Ba ni Wais, Diyala, in
which over 60 worshippers were killed and 15 were injured, parliamentary blocs led
by the Speaker of the Council of Representatives temporarily suspended talks with
the National Alliance pending the conclusion of an investigation into t he incident.
Following the arrest of three militiamen accused of involvement in the massacre, the
National Forces Coalition resumed its participation in the government formation
negotiations on 26 August. The same day, the President of Iraq called for a na tional
reconciliation conference in which “all religious, community and political leaders
should work together to install foundations of real reconciliation on the ground”.
8.
On 8 September, the government formation process was concluded and a new
cabinet was approved. Negotiations had accommodated divergent demands from the
political blocs for an inclusive, consensus-based Government. The Kurdistan
Alliance’s endorsement of and participation in the Al-Abadi Government was
conditional on the Alliance’s demands being met within three months. Twenty-eight
ministerial posts were distributed among the National Alliance, the National Forces
Coalition and the Kurdish Alliance. One post went to a woman and one to a member
of the Christian community. The Council of Representatives also approved
Al-Abadi’s proposed ministerial programme, which focused on reforms to tackle
issues such as political fragmentation along sectarian lines, corruption, the
restructuring of the armed forces, and institutional and legal refor m to counter
discrimination and human rights abuses.
9.
The Council of Representatives also endorsed the appointments of three new
Vice-Presidents: former Prime Minister Al-Maliki, former Speaker of the Council of
Representatives Osama al-Nujaifi and former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi. Hamam

2/17

14-63291

S/2014/774

Hamoudi was elected to replace Al-Abadi as First Deputy Speaker in the Council of
Representatives.
10. Posts in four ministries (of the Interior, of Defence, of Tourism and Antiquities
and of Water Resources) were not filled at the time of the appointment of the
Council of Ministers owing to ongoing discussions among the political blocs.
Al-Abadi indicated that he would fulfil the two security ministerial portfolios in an
acting capacity until they had been filled. He gave the political blocs a further week to
reach agreement on their respective candidate for the vacant posts. On 16 September,
however, Parliament approved only the appointment of the Minister for Water
Resources, while the proposed candidates for the posts of Minister for the Interior,
Minister for Defence and Minister for Tourism and Antiquities, failed to get enough
votes. The parliamentary vote on the remaining cabinet posts was postponed to allow
the parliamentary blocs additional time to reach agreeme nt on their candidates. On
18 October, the government formation process was fully completed, with parliament
approving the appointments of the Minister for Defence and the Minister for the
Interior. The ministers from the Kurdistan Alliance were also sworn in.
11. As part of its ministerial programme, on 9 September the Council of Ministers
took another important step by establishing a reconstruction fund to rebuild areas
damaged by the conflict and military operations. Furthermore, the Council of
Ministers agreed to compensate and facilitate the return home of displaced persons
and prepare a national action plan.
12. On 13 September, the Prime Minister announced the halting of shelling and
airstrikes against civilian-populated areas and reiterated his commitment to the
protection of civilians. The announcement was widely welcomed across the political
spectrum, despite remaining concerns as to the effective implementation of this
commitment.
13. Relations between Baghdad and Erbil continued to face challenges arising
from the period prior to the transfer of power between the outgoing and incoming
governments. On 8 and 9 July, a series of mutual accusations between the Kurdistan
Regional Government and the Government of Iraq were widely reported. As a
result, on 10 July the Kurdish ministers suspended their participation in the Council
of Ministers until the new Government had been formed.
14. The Kurdistan Regional Government confirmed on 11 July that Peshmerga
forces had taken full control of oilfields in Kirkuk. On 12 July, the federal Ministry
of Oil condemned the takeover and called for the immediate withdrawal of Kurdish
forces. Disputes between Baghdad and Erbil were aggravated by continued reports
of independent oil sales from the Kurdistan Region of Iraq and ensuing legal actions
taken by the federal Government.
15. On 23 July, the Kurdistan Regional Parliament approved a law to establish the
Kurdistan Regional Independent High Electoral Commission and to identify that
Commission as the body responsible for organizing future referendums. On
26 September, the President of Iraq dismissed speculations of an imminent
declaration of Kurdish independence as suggested in some earlier statements by
Kurdish officials, saying that the Kurdish leadership had decided to remain part of
Iraq and adding that the announcement to hold a referendum in July had been made
at the height of tensions between the two Governments over oil revenues.

14-63291

3/17

S/2014/774

16. During the government formation process there had been discussions of a
possible compromise that would allow the federal budget for 2014 to be approved.
According to the proposed initiative, the federal Government would commit to
releasing — within seven days of the endorsement of its formation by the Council
of Representatives — the Kurdistan Region’s total budget allocation for the period
from 1 January to 31 August 2014 in monthly increments. The Kurdistan Regional
Government would, in turn, commit to exporting, on a daily basis, at least 100,000
barrels of the oil extracted from the Kurdistan Region’s oilfields through the State
organization for the marketing of oil, within three days of the endorsement of the
new federal Government. The agreement was never finalized, however.
17. Ten months into the fiscal year, the lack of a federal budget for 2014 has
adversely affected the Iraqi economy and the implementation of investment
projects. The unpredictable security situation has had an impact on oil exports,
lowering revenues in the first three quarters of 2014 to 75 per cent of budgeted
revenues. Lower oil prices have further affected revenues.
18. On 23 July, the newly elected Council of Representatives established an ad
hoc parliamentary finance committee to expedite the ratification of the draft budget
for 2014. The first preliminary draft of 18 August included a proposal to limit the
existing budget to match the lowered projected oil revenues, as well as to limit
expenditures to operating expenses linked to immediate funding requirements
related to security and internally displaced persons.

C.

Security
19. During the reporting period, ISIL continued to control large swathes of the
country. The security situation in Iraq remained extremely volatile and fighting
continued between ISIL and associated armed groups on the o ne hand and the Iraqi
security forces and Peshmerga forces on the other. Between 2 and 7 August, ISIL
launched a new wave of attacks against Kurdish-controlled areas that resulted in the
takeover of a number of towns and villages in the districts of Hamdan iya, Mosul,
Sinjar, Shekhan, Tal Afar and Tal Kaif in Ninewa governorate, as well as,
temporarily, of the town of Gwer in Makhmour district in Erbil governorate
following the withdrawal of Kurdish Peshmerga forces. As a result, approximately
200,000 people were displaced, including representatives of the Yazidi, Christian
and Shabak minorities, who fled for fear of genocide. Important strategic locations,
including the Syrian-Iraqi border crossing at Rabiya and the Mosul dam on the
border between Ninewa and Dohuk governorates, also fell into the hands of ISIL but
were retaken by Peshmerga forces with the assistance of United States -led
airstrikes. Between 5 and 12 October, ISIL made further territorial gains by taking
control of the centre of the town of Hit, as well as several villages in Western Hit
district in Anbar. On 11 October, the Anbar Provincial Council requested the
Government of Iraq to seek deployments of coalition ground forces to help in the
fight against ISIL.
20. Intense fighting between the Iraqi security forces and ISIL and associated
armed groups also continued in Diyala and Salah al-Din governorates. At the time
of drafting the present report, only 30 km separated insurgent -controlled areas in
Salah al-Din and Diyala, which, if taken, would create a highly significant
encirclement of northern Baghdad. ISIL seized control of areas in the subdistrict of

4/17

14-63291

S/2014/774

Mansuriyah, while fierce fighting between ISIL and Peshmerga forces for control of
Jalawla continued throughout the reporting period, with t he town changing hands on
several occasions. Meanwhile, the situation in Dhuluiya, southern Salah al -Din
governorate, remained dire. Dhuluiya, a strategically important town on the river
Tigris, has been under constant ISIL attack since mid -June and suffered scores of
civilian casualties; only a limited number of local tribal fighters resisted the attack.
Iraqi security forces were deployed to the area on 3 September but have so far not
succeeded in driving ISIL out.
21. During the reporting period, the western governorates of Iraq remained largely
under the control of ISIL and associated armed groups. ISIL continued to
consolidate its hold on areas under its control, including Mosul. The districts of
Anah, Al-Qaim, Hit, Fallujah and Rutba, as well as most of Haditha and Ramadi in
Anbar governorate, also remain under the control of ISIL and associated armed
groups, with pro-government fighters and Iraqi security forces maintaining only
small pockets of territory in Ramadi and Haditha. Operations by the Iraqi security
forces and tribal fighters are particularly focused on defending the dam at Haditha,
which is strategically important, as well as areas around Ramadi, Abu Ghraib and
Yusufiyah, near Baghdad.
22. ISIL has also expanded its illegal income-generating activities through the
control of lucrative resources in Iraq, including several oilfields, pipelines and oil
infrastructure, such as the Ajil oil and gas field in Salah al -Din governorate. During
the reporting period, UNAMI was informed that large quantities of oil looted from
pipelines and storage tanks in ISIL-controlled areas were being smuggled. Other
illegal income-generating activities include the extortion of businesses and
individuals, the sale of stolen antiquities and the kidnapping of persons for ransom.
23. The increasing threat posed by ISIL, coupled with the commitment of Iraqi
political parties to form a Government of national unity, has led to an increase in
security-related cooperation and coordination between the Iraqi security forces, the
Peshmerga, local tribes and armed groups to jointly fight ISIL. The Prime Minister
of Iraq also pledged to strengthen local engagement in security through the
formation of a national guard composed of volunteers from each governorate.
Lawmakers are currently drafting legislation for the national guard system.
24. At the request of the Government of Iraq, on 8 August the United States of
America started launching targeted airstrikes against ISIL positions. In September
and October, other coalition partners joined the air campaign against ISIL targets.
Several countries have also provided military assistance to Iraq through the
deployment of advisers and equipment. The combined efforts of targeted airstrikes
and increased security cooperation between Iraqi security and Peshmerga forces
have allowed for some areas to be brought back under State control, including the
Ain Zalah oilfields near Zummar in Sinjar district on 7 August and the Mosul dam
on 8 August. On 31 August, Iraqi security forces succeeded, with the aid of United
States airstrikes and volunteer fighters, in breaking the ISIL siege of the
predominantly Turkmen town of Amerli in northern Salah al -Din governorate. Since
7 September, the United States has been launching aerial attacks on ISIL pos itions
around Haditha dam to support government forces in maintaining control of the
area.

14-63291

5/17

S/2014/774

D.

Regional and international developments
25. The deteriorating security situation in Iraq has affected neighbouring States,
the territory of which ISIL has declared it intends to use to expand its activities.
Increased ISIL activity along the borders of Iraq has led a number of countries to
reinforce their security measures. The July offensive by ISIL in Sinjar and the
Ninewa plains triggered the movement of Kurdish fighters from Iran (Islamic
Republic of), the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to the Kurdistan Region of Iraq,
as well as to Ninewa and Kirkuk, in support of the Peshmerga. In a positive
development, on 20 September, ISIL freed 49 personnel of the Turkish consulate in
Mosul who had been held hostage since 11 June.
26. The formation of the new Government was universally welcomed by the
countries neighbouring Iraq. In its ministerial programme, the new Government
emphasizes the country’s desire to enhance its status and influence within the
international community and to improve bilateral relations with countries in the
region. The programme provides, inter alia, for building an international front to
fight terrorism in Iraq, addressing existing differences over water resources with
Iran (Islamic Republic of), the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey, and enhancing
diplomatic representation. On 11 September, in his first official trip as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Ibrahim al-Jaafari visited Saudi Arabia. After that visit, it
was announced that Saudi Arabia had decided to reopen its embassy in Baghdad.
27. The Islamic Republic of Iran too has expressed its support to the new
Government of Iraq, emphasizing the importance it attaches to Iraqi terri torial
integrity, national unity, development and security. On 10 July, the Islamic Republic
of Iran shut the border crossing at Parviz Khan, in Kermanshah Province, to oil
trucks from Iraq amid alleged threats against Iranian hauliers and other Iranian
citizens in Iraq. Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and the President of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, have expressed their country’s
willingness to support Iraq in its fight against terrorism, were it to seek such
assistance. During a visit to Iraq from 24 to 26 August, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Mohammad Javad Zarif, met the then Prime
Minister-designate of Iraq, Haider al-Abadi, and the leadership of the Kurdistan
Regional Government, offering his country’s full support in the fight against ISIL.
Iranian officials have pledged to support the protection of religious holy sites in
Karbala and Najaf. Tehran has also acknowledged that it is providing advice to Iraq
through military advisers. Both the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government have welcomed the assistance of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
28. In response to requests from the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
Regional Government, a number of countries have been providing military
assistance through the deployment of military advisers and military equipment, as
well as assistance in surveillance and intelligence-gathering. Life-saving
humanitarian assistance, including through the establishment of camps and the
provision of air drops and air lifts, has also been extended to displaced persons in
affected areas.
29. These activities were accompanied by a series of regional and international
initiatives. The fight against ISIL and support to Iraq were part of the discussions at
the summit of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization held in Newport, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, on 5 September. The ministers for

6/17

14-63291

S/2014/774

foreign affairs of the Council of the League of Arab States, at a meeting held in
Cairo on 7 September, reiterated their support for Iraqi efforts to fight ISIL. On
11 September, Saudi Arabia held a meeting in Jeddah between the United States,
Turkey and some Middle Eastern States (the members of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, as well as Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon) to forge a coalition to fight ISIL.
The meeting concluded with a communiqué in which participants declared their
shared commitment to counter the threat posed by terrorism, including through a
coordinated military campaign against ISIL, if dee med appropriate.
30. At the International Conference on Peace and Security in Iraq, which was held
in Paris on 15 September and which was jointly hosted by the Presidents of France
and Iraq, the President and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq thanked the
international community for its support in the fight against terrorism and urged the
continuation of military assistance, including in the form of airstrikes. Participants
called on the international community to increase its humanitarian and
reconstruction assistance to the Government of Iraq, while expressing appreciation
for the role of the United Nations in facilitating the provision of such assistance.
31. The international community’s military and humanitarian assistance has been
welcomed by the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government. At
the Paris conference, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq underscored the need
to involve the Islamic Republic of Iran in these efforts. On 15 September, the
influential Shiite cleric Muqtadr al-Sadr issued a statement warning against the
deployment of international ground troops in Iraq, which he would consider a new
occupation. On 20 September, thousands of people demonstrated in Baghdad in
support of Al-Sadr’s stance. On 19 September, during a sermon, Grand Ayatollah Ali
al-Sistani welcomed the international coalition against ISIL but, at the same time,
urged the political leadership of Iraq to uphold the country’s sovereignty.

III. Update on the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
32. In the period leading up to the government formation process, my Special
Representative for Iraq actively engaged with the heads of political blocs to promote
agreement on the election of the national leadership and to advocate for the
formation of an inclusive Government, within the constitutional timeline, that would
represent the interests of all components of Iraqi society. He offered the full support
and good offices of UNAMI towards the completion of this process.
33. I visited Iraq on 24 July and met key national political and religious leaders,
including the newly elected President, Fuad Masum, the then Prime Minister, Nuri
al-Maliki, the Speaker of the Council of Representatives, Salim al-Jabouri, the
President of the Kurdistan Region, Masoud Barzani, along with other Kurdish
leaders, and Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, in the city of Najaf. I conveyed to all
Iraqi interlocutors my support for an inclusive government formation process with
real power-sharing and within the constitutional timelines, as well as my solidarity
with all Iraqi people in their struggle against terrorism.

14-63291

7/17

S/2014/774

34. Following the election of the Speaker of the Council of Representatives and of
the President of Iraq, my Special Representative continued to advocate for the
timely appointment of the next Prime Minister, the formation of the Council of
Ministers and the adoption of a ministerial programme that would address the
pressing issues facing Iraq. As part of these advocacy and outreach efforts, he
regularly met the Speaker and the President, as well as the leading candidates for
the premiership, including Al-Abadi and Al-Maliki, to urge for the speedy formation
of the Government within the constitutional timeline and a peaceful transition of
power.
35. My Special Representative visited Najaf on 19 July to hold discussions with
Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, Ayatollah Muhammad al-Hakim, Ayatollah
Muhammad al-Yaqoubi and Sayed Muqtada al-Sadr, all of whom expressed support
for the formation of an inclusive Government that enjoyed broad -based support as
well as for the role played by the United Nations Mission in Iraq. He also delivered
my letter to Grand Ayatollah al-Sistani, in which I strongly condemned human
rights violations against civilians perpetrated by ISIL, the Iraqi security forces and
other armed groups and in which I encouraged him to continue to call for
non-sectarianism and non-violence.
36. Heightened tensions between Baghdad and Erbil over outstanding issues
threatened to push the government formation process beyond the constitutional
timeline. In the lead-up to the parliamentary vote on whether to endorse the Prime
Minister’s cabinet, my Special Representative acted as a broker between the two
parties so that they could overcome their differences. On 8 September, in
Suleymaniah, he met with the leaders of all Kurdish political parties, encouraging
them to join the Government of Al-Abadi. Following the visit, Al-Abadi made a
public commitment to address the concerns of the Kurdistan Regional Government,
which allowed the Kurdistan Alliance to rejoin parliament. My Special
Representative also engaged in intense discussions with Sunni political leaders,
including the current and former Speakers of the Council of Representatives and the
Deputy Prime Minister, Saleh al-Mutlaq, urging their blocs to join the proposed
Government. With Kurdish ministers yet to be sworn in, on 12 October my Special
Representative met the Kurdistan Region’s leaders and urged them to take their
rightful place in the Government without delay and to discuss their outstanding
differences within the Council of Ministers. On 16 October, the Prime Minister
informed my Special Representative that Kurdish ministers, as well as the Minister
for Defence, the Minister for the Interior and the Minister for Tourism, would be
sworn in on 18 October.
37. My Special Representative also actively engaged with the heads of political
blocs to advocate for the representation of women and minorities in the new cabinet
and, in September, issued two press releases calling for such representation. Despite
his efforts and the willingness of the Prime Minister to see more women and
minority representatives in his Government, onl y one woman and one Christian hold
ministerial posts.
38. My Special Representative continued to advocate among the political leaders
of Iraq for progress on countering violence and terrorism, on responding to the
plight of the internally displaced and on promoting reconciliation, social cohesion,
democratic governance and the rule of law.

8/17

14-63291

S/2014/774

39. Following the fall of Sinjar district, on 3 August my Deputy Special
Representative for Political Affairs met the President and the Deputy Prime Minister
of Iraq to explore ways to provide urgent, life-saving humanitarian assistance to the
population trapped in ISIL-controlled areas. He also met a number of Yazidi
members of parliament, as well as religious and community leaders. In addition, he
met members of the diplomatic community to urge for assistance in fighting ISIL
and ensuring the protection of civilians.
40. In August, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs paid two
official visits to the Kurdistan Region to discuss United Nations assistanc e and ways
of rapidly and efficiently responding to the influx of internally displaced persons
into the Region. He also attended the meeting of the Kurdistan Regional
Government Committee for Emergency Response to discuss United Nations
humanitarian efforts.
41. On 15 August, my Special Representative briefed the European Union Foreign
Affairs Council in Brussels on the situation in Iraq, during which the Council
reiterated its firm commitment to the country’s unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, committed itself to stepping up European Union humanitarian support,
welcomed the efforts of member States to support the Iraqi fight against terrorism
and reaffirmed its strong support for the role of the United Nations in Iraq.
42. In September, my Special Representative met the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Islamic Republic of Iran and visited Qatar and the United Arab Emirates to
discuss the need for a sustainable political dialogue in Iraq, as well as for a
comprehensive regional approach to addressing the threat posed by ISIL to Iraq and
the region.
43. On 15 September, my Special Representative attended, on my behalf, the
International Conference on Peace and Security in Iraq held in Paris. On
21 September, he briefed the Security Council and stressed that the new Government
of Iraq would need international support as it worked to restore security to large
parts of the country.

B.

Human rights developments and activities
44. The armed conflict between the Iraqi security forces and ISIL continued to
exact a heavy toll on the civilian population of Iraq. Between 11 July and
13 October 2014, at least 3,677 civilians were killed and 5,816 wounded in
incidents of armed violence and terrorism. The governorates most affected by
violence were Baghdad, Ninewa, Salah al-Din, Diyala, Kirkuk and Babil.
45. UNAMI continues to monitor the situation of civilians in relation to the
ongoing armed conflict and terrorism, and has issued two public reports on the
protection of civilians. On 1 September, the Human Rights Council adopted
resolution S-22/1, in which it condemned the violations and abuses of human rights
law committed by ISIL and associated armed groups against civilians and requested
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to dispa tch a mission to
investigate those violations with a view to avoiding impunity and ensuring full
accountability.
46. UNAMI has verified that systematic and widespread violations of international
law have been perpetrated by ISIL and associated armed group s, including attacks

14-63291

9/17

S/2014/774

deliberately targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure, executions and other
targeted killings of civilians, abductions, rape and other forms of sexual and
physical violence perpetrated against women and children, destruction or
desecration of places of religious or cultural significance, forced recruitment of
children, wanton destruction and looting of property, and denial of basic rights and
freedoms. Particularly affected were the diverse ethnic and religious communities of
Iraq, including the Turkmen, Shabak, Christian, Yezidi, Sabaean, Kaka’e, Faili Kurd
and Shiite Arab communities, which ISIL and associated armed groups intentionally
and systematically targeted for serious human rights violations. Many of the attacks
may constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity.
47. Between 17 and 20 July, thousands of Christians were forced to flee Mosul
and other areas of Ninewa governorate after ISIL gave them an ultimatum to
convert, pay jiziye (protection tax), leave or face death. The Turkmen-populated
town of Amerli in Salah al-Din governorate, which came under ISIL siege on
12 June, was subjected to similar treatment: its residents too were threatened by
ISIL to either convert or be killed. In the first week of August, tens of thousands of
civilians fled from their homes when ISIL advanced into areas of Sinjar and Tal
Afar districts in Ninewa governorate and deliberately targeted the Yezidi, Turkmen,
Shabak and Christian communities, among others. On 3 August, ISIL captured
Yezidis in the village of Qiniyeh, in Ninewa governorate, executing at least 70 men,
and, on 15 August, UNAMI received reports that ISIL had killed up to 400 men in
the Yezidi village of Kocho.
48. Violation by ISIL of women’s rights continues to be of grave concern. Women
and children from minority communities have been abducted, subjected to rape and
other forms of physical and sexual assault, and trafficked as slaves. UNAMI has
confirmed reports that up to 2,500 women and children have been abducted by ISI L
and there is grave concern for their well-being. ISIL has also attacked and killed
prominent female community leaders and human rights activists. In Ninewa
governorate, at least three female candidates in the 2013 governorate elections and
in the April 2014 council-of-representatives elections were targeted and killed by
ISIL. On 22 September, a female lawyer and human rights activist was publicly
killed by ISIL after she posted comments critical of ISIL on social media. On
12 August, my Special Representative for Iraq and my Special Representative for
Sexual Violence in Conflict issued a joint statement condemning reports of sexual
violence perpetrated by ISIL against women and teenage girls and boys from Iraqi
minority communities.
49. Civilians living under ISIL control continued to be subjected to grave and
systematic violations of their basic human rights, with ISIL enforcing rules and
codes of conduct based on its interpretation of Islam, often inflicting harsh penalties
for transgressions, including death sentences. These sentences are handed down by
sharia courts whose members are appointed by ISIL. At least five death sentences
were carried out during the reporting period in Ninewa governorate alone. Sunni
Arabs who refused to acknowledge ISIL or to accept its rules were also targeted.
The town of Dhuluiya in Diyala governorate, which is predominantly inhabited by
Sunni Arabs, was under attack by ISIL since mid-June and its inhabitants threatened
with death for resisting the group’s demand to surrender the town.
50. Places of religious and cultural significance under ISIL control were attacked
and wantonly destroyed. On 3 August, ISIL destroyed the Shiite shrines of Sayida

10/17

14-63291

S/2014/774

Zainab and Saiyed Zakariya in Sinjar. On 23 July, ISIL blew up the Sunni shri ne of
Imam Yahya Abu al-Qasim in al-Shafa, west of the city of Mosul. On 24 July, ISIL
destroyed the tomb and mosque of the Prophet Jonah, a historic religious site sacred
to both Muslims and Christians and, on 27 July, ISIL destroyed the tombs of two
Sufi sheikhs, both in Mosul. Between 28 and 31 August, ISIL bombed four ancient
Kaka’e shrines in Hamdaniya in Ninewa governorate. The systematic persecution of
and attacks on religious and minority communities and their cultural and religious
heritage is part of a deliberate policy by ISIL aimed at suppressing or cleansing
minority ethnic and religious groups from areas under its control. On 17 July, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization organized an
emergency expert meeting on safeguarding the cultural heritage of Iraq and
established an emergency response action plan.
51. ISIL and associated armed groups have also perpetrated human rights
violations against non-civilians, murdering captured members of the security forces
and government personnel. For example, on 16 July, in Awenat, south Tikrit,
42 soldiers captured after clashes between Iraqi security forces and armed groups
were later executed. In relation to what is believed to be have been the mass murder
of up to 1,700 Iraqi servicemen captured at Camp Speicher, near Tikrit, on 11 and
12 June, the relatives of the missing men staged several demonstrations demanding
the Iraqi authorities to shed light on the fate of their missing relatives. The
Government announced that a criminal inquiry had been set up to establish whether
negligence on the part of the Government or of the army had contributed to the
plight of these men.
52. Areas of the country not directly affected by the ongoing armed conflict
continued to be affected by violence. Baghdad, in particular, was rocked by attacks
deliberately targeting civilians and public places. The deadliest attack occurred on
22 July, when a double suicide bombing in Baghdad killed at least 29 civilians and
wounded 55. Reports continued to be received regarding the discovery of
unidentified bodies, usually of men with gunshot wounds to the head who were
believed to have been killed by unidentified armed groups and militias. During the
reporting period, 117 such bodies were found in Baghdad alone.
53. Airstrikes and shelling carried out by the Iraqi security forces continued to
cause considerable numbers of civilian casualties. Two of the deadliest airstrikes
occurred in Mosul on 16 July, killing 12 civilians and wounding 32, and in Kirkuk
on 13 August, killing five civilians, including a 14-year-old boy, and wounding seven.
54. The ongoing armed conflict and acts of terrorism continued to have
detrimental effects on children in Iraq. The Task Force on Children and Armed
Conflict, co-chaired by UNAMI and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF),
received reports of 239 child casualties (42 girls, 80 boys and 117 of unknown
gender), of whom 135 were killed (22 girls, 45 boys and 68 of unknown gender) and
104 were wounded (20 girls, 35 boys and 49 of unknown gender) from the
beginning of July to 15 September 2014, mostly owing to indiscriminate shelling
and improvised explosive devices. There was a marked increase in reports of child
recruitment by ISIL in all areas under its control and by pro-government militias in
all conflict areas.
55. The reporting period witnessed the continued deterioration in the situation
regarding the safety of journalists. Cases of violence and deliberate attacks against
media professionals and institutions were reported. Leyla Yildizhan, a journalist

14-63291

11/17

S/2014/774

also known as Deniz Firat, was killed on 8 August. Other journalists are facing
threats to their lives and other forms of harassment in relation to the performance of
their duties.
56. I remain seriously concerned about the lack of respect for due process by law
enforcement agencies and for fair trial standards by the judiciary, in particular in
relation to persons arrested and detained pursuant to the Anti -Terrorism Law
(No. 13 of 2005).
57. Iraq continues to execute persons sentenced to death. Since the beginning of
2014, Iraq has carried out 60 executions, including of four men convicted on 16 July
under the Anti-Terrorism Law. My calls and those of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for a moratorium on the implementation of the
death penalty, in compliance with relevant General Assembly resolutions, have so
far gone unheeded by the Government.
Camp Hurriya
58. UNAMI continues to monitor the human rights and humanitarian situation of
the residents of Camp Hurriya, a temporary transit location, and to facilitate
solutions to camp management issues between the Government of Iraq and
representatives of residents. As at 18 September 2014, 3,160 residents had been
registered with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR); of those residents, 2,733 continue to live in Camp Hurriya.
59. The United Nations continues to seek durable solutions for the residents
through resettlement and consular and humanitarian channels. As at 13 October,
395 individuals had been relocated outside Iraq, of whom 30 had left for Albania
through an independent channel, 123 had been relocated through consular channels
to nine countries, 212 had been relocated through humanitarian channels to t hree
countries and 30 had been relocated through resettlement channels to five countries,
namely Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Seven
individuals had been voluntarily repatriated, with the help of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, to the Islamic Republic of Iran. A group of
240 individuals has recently been accepted by the Government of Albania under the
humanitarian stream and preparations are under way for their departure from Iraq.
In addition, five people from Camp Hurriya have been accepted by three countries
and are waiting to depart from Iraq. A total of 1,249 requests involving 18 countries
remain pending for solution through the humanitarian, resettlement and consular
streams.
60. My Special Adviser for the Relocation of Camp Hurriya Residents Outside of
Iraq continues to work in close coordination with UNHCR and with a wide range of
stakeholders to find relocation solutions for the remaining residents. During the
reporting period, my Special Adviser visited several capitals to discuss potential
relocation arrangements with key governmental officials, United Nations agencies
and other stakeholders.

C.

Humanitarian assistance, reconstruction and development
61. The armed conflict continued to exacerbate the humanitarian situation during
the reporting period, with over 1.8 million Iraqi citizens displaced since the

12/17

14-63291

S/2014/774

beginning of 2014. In August alone, an estimated 600,000 civilians were displaced.
The displaced population is currently dispersed across more tha n 1,800 sites across
Iraq. An estimated 850,000 internally displaced persons are residing in the
Kurdistan Region, over half a million of whom are in Dohuk governorate. The
Kurdistan Region is already hosting most of the 220,858 Syrian refugees in Iraq,
thus additional absorption capacity is limited. An estimated 760,000 internally
displaced persons are in the central belt of Iraq, where access is limited in many
areas under ISIL control, and an estimated 170,000 are in the southern governorates,
in particular in the cities of Najaf, Karbala and Basra.
62. In response to the scale and complexity of the humanitarian crisis in Iraq, on
13 August the United Nations declared the humanitarian situation in Iraq to be a
“level 3 emergency”, level 3 being its highest emergency level, and designated a
deputy humanitarian coordinator to support the humanitarian response. From 11 to
15 September, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator visited Iraq to discuss the humanitari an emergency and the
United Nations response with senior representatives of the Government of Iraq and
the Kurdistan Regional Government, including the Presidents of the two
Governments. She also visited Camp Khanke, in Dohuk.
63. The strategic response plan for 2014-2015 was launched on 23 October. The
response focuses on displaced families, host communities and people located in
conflict-affected areas. It does not include the previous caseload of approximately
1 million people displaced by earlier conflicts in Iraq. It prioritizes areas based on
cross-cluster vulnerability analysis, including the proportion of people in need. The
response plan covers a two-year period and is expected to cost $2.2 billion. The
funding requirements for this response incorporate programming already funded by
several donors, in particular a significant contribution from Saudi Arabia. In total,
$835 million has been received or pledged to date, including $596 million against
the strategic response plan. These funds have enabled humanitarian partners to
quickly scale up relief operations in response to the large and sudden influx of
displaced people and to acquire some of the items needed for winterization. As the
scale of the crisis escalated further after August, however, available funding became
critically insufficient to meet all needs.
64. During the reporting period, UNICEF delivered assistance to 600,000
internally displaced persons, mainly in the form of water distribution and sanitation
programmes. UNHCR supported more than 490,000 displaced persons across Iraq
by providing essential shelter and living aid. The UNHCR -led Protection Cluster
monitored the needs of 346,188 individuals across Iraq to determine their needs and
continues to provide legal assistance, advocacy, referral and other targeted
assistance. Since July, about 30,000 families have been covered by protection
monitoring and 7,500 families have received legal assistance. The International
Organization for Migration (IOM) distributed emergency items to over 2 10,000
internally displaced persons. The World Health Organization (WHO) provided
medicine and medical supplies to almost 950,000 beneficiaries, recruited
220 doctors and nurses and helped departments of health in all governorates to
strengthen disease surveillance systems. UNICEF and WHO supported the Ministry
of Health with a mass polio immunization campaign in August, which reached
3.75 million children under 5 years of age. The World Food Programme (WFP) and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations reached over 986,000
people throughout Iraq with food items. In Dohuk governorate, WFP continued to

14-63291

13/17

S/2014/774

provide over 100,000 individuals with hot meals twice a day until September, when
cooking stoves were provided to the community. The United N ations Development
Programme (UNDP) drilled water wells to serve 1,000 people in the new camp of
Dawoodia and provided legal aid to refugees and displaced persons. It also assisted
local authorities in maintaining health and sanitation services in 100 scho ols and
within host communities. The United Nations Population Fund deployed 50 nurses
and midwives to provide reproductive health services to 2,350 internally displaced
women in Dohuk. The United Nations Office for Project Services has distributed
solar-powered lights to 400 internally displaced families in Dohuk and is working
with the Government to install solar-powered street lights and off-grid photovoltaic
systems in health facilities, community centres, schools, and police and fire stations
in host communities. UNHCR provided one-time cash assistance to approximately
10,000 families in central and southern Iraq.
65. The pressure on local communities across the country is growing, as the
continuing influx of internally displaced persons has created a massive shelter crisis
that has also had an impact on the country’s education sector. With 2,000 schools
currently providing shelter to internally displaced persons throughout the country,
the start of the academic year has already been delayed until 22 Oc tober. Since the
Camp Coordination and Camp Management Cluster was established in late August,
UNHCR and other agencies have supported government authorities in establishing
five of the 36 camps planned to be built throughout the country to accommodate
approximately 300,000 internally displaced persons. As winter approaches, the
United Nations humanitarian country team has started winterization programmes to
install family tents on concrete slabs and provide internally displaced persons with
thermal insulation kits for the tents, winter clothes and solar water heaters.
66. At the beginning of September, a gender capacity adviser was deployed to Iraq
to provide technical support on mainstreaming gender into the humanitarian
response. The United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women provided psychosocial support and equipped internally displaced women
with income-generating skills in Erbil.
67. During the reporting period, there was no significant change in the situation of
the 220,858 Syrian refugees in Iraq. Access to Syrian refugees in Al -Qa’im
continued to be difficult owing to ISIL control of the border between the Syrian
Arab Republic and Iraq. On 21 August, Islamic Relief Worldwide, a partner of WFP,
successfully delivered 1,200 WFP food parcels to the camp in Al-Qa’im. Since July,
over 6,000 Syrians have returned to their home country through the Peshkhabour
border crossing point.
68. In Camp Domiz, 100,000 Syrian refugees received assistance through the WFP
voucher programme, which provides every registered refugee with $31 per month.
IOM also continued its livelihood project at Domiz, while UNHCR facilitated
employment opportunities through skills development and opened a maternity ward
in August, where some 30 deliveries occur each week. Also in August, UNDP
started a sexual and gender-based violence programme in Syrian camps within the
Kurdistan Region.
69. During the reporting period, there was minimal activity on the development
agenda owing to the government formation process, high levels of insecurity
leading to the relocation of the majority of United Nations staff to Erbil and the
huge demands emanating from the humanitarian crisis. The Ministry of Planning

14/17

14-63291

S/2014/774

agreed, however, to the extension of approximately 20 projects to be implemented
in 2015. The Kurdistan Regional Government has transferred $5.6 million (of the
$16 million pledged) to the partnership trust fund. In addition, the United Nations
country team, in coordination with UNAMI, has drafted policy briefs for t he
incoming Government, covering issues such as public financial management,
decentralization and revenue-sharing, social protection, economic diversification,
public sector modernization, the hydrocarbons law, social cohesion risks as a
consequence of demographic shifts arising from the conflict, and durable solutions
for internally displaced persons.

D.

Security and operational issues
70. During the reporting period, the deteriorating security environment prompted
the United Nations to take mitigating measures to ensure the safety and security of
its personnel, including the relocation of international and national non -essential
staff to duty stations outside Baghdad but still within Iraq, the introduction of an
upper limit on the number of staff present in Baghdad, the development of updated
evacuation plans for remaining critical staff in the capital and the provision of
timely security updates and counselling services to all staff.
71. Notwithstanding the Organization’s efforts and my personal in tercession with
the Government, it has not been possible to conclude a status -of-mission agreement
for UNAMI, more than 11 years after the Mission was established. The absence of
an agreement continues to significantly hamper effective United Nations opera tions
in Iraq.

IV. Observations
72. Since my previous two reports, in which I stressed the gravity of the
challenges facing Iraq, the security and humanitarian situation in the country has
deteriorated further and remains of great concern. I thank t he Security Council for
its role in mobilizing international support for Iraq, where the threat of terrorism can
only be defused through the sustained and comprehensive engagement and the
active participation of national, regional and international partner s. I urge the
international community to further strengthen and expand support for the
Government of Iraq in its fight against terrorism in accordance with international
law, while also putting the protection of civilians at the forefront of its efforts.
73. I am particularly encouraged by the formation of the new Government of Iraq,
which has demonstrated commitment to resolving long-standing issues through an
inclusive political process and a comprehensive reform package. I urge the
international community to extend its full support to the new Government, including
for the implementation of the emerging national consensus on power-sharing, the
strengthening of democratic institutions and the restoration of security and political
stability. I also call upon the countries in the region to engage constructively with
the new Government to facilitate the deeper integration of Iraq into the region and
the international community. The United Nations will continue to make every effort
to assist the Government and the people of Iraq in this process.

14-63291

15/17

S/2014/774

74. I welcome the initial steps taken by the new Government of Iraq towards
national reconciliation, reconstruction and political and security reform. I particularly
welcome the order given by the Prime Minister to susp end Iraqi airstrikes in civilian
areas and his commitment to the protection of civilians. I urge the Iraqi authorities
to fully uphold this commitment. I also welcome the Council of Ministers’ decision
to establish a reconstruction fund to rebuild areas da maged during military
operations, and plans to compensate and facilitate the return of the displaced. I am
also encouraged by the Council of Ministers’ decision to initiate the creation of a
national guard. This will empower both federal and local actors t o be mutually and
effectively engaged in maintaining the security of each governorate and face all
possible threats. The United Nations stands ready to assist in all these important
endeavours.
75. I am encouraged by the fact that security cooperation and coordination
between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government has
increased substantially in their joint fight against ISIL. I welcome the commitment
of the Prime Minister of Iraq to resolving the outstanding budgetary disputes
between his Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government. The issue of
revenue- and budget-sharing needs to be resolved in accordance with the
Constitution and in the interest of the Iraqi people. Only direct and constructive
engagement can resolve the differences between Baghdad and Erbil. The United
Nations will continue to facilitate this process.
76. I strongly condemn the terrorist attacks and human rights abuses that are
continuously taking place in Iraq at the hands of ISIL and associated armed groups.
I am appalled by the killing, kidnapping, rape and torture of Iraqis, as well as by the
recruitment and use of children, by ISIL. Minority communities have been
particularly targeted by ISIL, which has sought to systematically and deliberately
cleanse territories under its control. Some of these acts may constitute war crimes
and crimes against humanity. I urge the Government of Iraq and the international
community to work towards ensuring that all perpetrators are brought to justice. All
parties, including ISIL, associated armed groups and other militias, must respect
human rights and abide by all applicable obligations under international
humanitarian law, including those related to the protection of the civilian
population.
77. The mounting humanitarian crisis in Iraq remains a grave concern. The United
Nations has scaled up its humanitarian effort across the country. I call upon the
Government to establish a national strategy to address the situation of internally
displaced persons, as well as to restore essential social services throughout Iraq. The
United Nations family in Iraq stands ready to provide the technical support
necessary for improving the coordination and delivery of humanitarian assistance. I
should like to thank those Member States that have provided generous support for
United Nations humanitarian efforts in Iraq, which has helped save thousands of
lives. Nevertheless, I am concerned that available funding will quickly be exhausted
before the winter and I urge the Government of Iraq and the donor community to
continue their support.
78. A military solution alone will not solve the problems in Iraq. The conditions
that breed discontent and violence need to be addressed as a priority through an
inclusive political and socioeconomic agenda that addresses the needs of all
components of Iraqi society, while promoting the rule of law and respect for human

16/17

14-63291

S/2014/774

rights. Disaffected communities, particularly those currently located in conflict
areas, must be brought back into the democratic process. I urge all groups to seek
the resolution of their grievances by accepting the Constitution and immediately
engaging with the Government of Iraq in a serious dialogue with the goal of
achieving political reconciliation and standing together against the danger of
terrorism and violence in order to achieve a better future for all Iraqis. UNAMI
stands ready to assist in these processes in accordance with its mandate.
79. I remain very concerned about the continued absence of a status -of-mission
agreement for UNAMI. I call upon the Government of Iraq to cooperate with the
United Nations in taking swift action to ensure its finalization and entry into force. I
also seek the support of the Security Council in encouraging the Government to
ensure the earliest possible resolution of this issue.
80. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Nickolay Mladenov,
and the staff of the United Nations in Iraq for their relentless and often courageous
efforts. They will continue to support and assist the new Government and all the
people of Iraq. I trust that international partners, including members of the Security
Council and countries neighbouring Iraq, will continue to support my Special
Representative in the implementation of his mandate.

14-63291

17/17
