UNITED
N ATIONS

General Assembly
Diatr.
GENERAL
A/RES/46/39
20 December 1991

Forty-eixth seeaion
Agenda item 63
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(on the report of the First Committee (A/46/676)J
46/39.

Israeli nuclear armament

The General Assembly.
Bearing in mind its previous resolutions on Israeli nuclear armament, the
latest of which is resolution 45/63 of 4 December 1990,
Recalling its resolution 44/108 of 15 December 1989, in which, inter
alia, it called for placing all nuclear facilities in the region under
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, pending the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East,
Recalling also that the Security Council, in its resolution 487 (1981),
called upon Israel urgently to place all its nuclear facilities under Agency
safeguards.
Noting with grave concern Israel's persistent refusal to commit itself
not to manufacture or acquire nuclear weapons, despite repeated calls by the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the International Atomic Energy
Agency,
Taking note of resolution GC(XXXV)/RES/570, adopted on 20 Septetnber 1991
by the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Taking into consideration the final document on international security
and disarmament adopted by the Ninth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 4 to 7 September
1989, 1/ and in particular its paragraph 12, which relates to Israel's nuclear
capabilities.
1/

01-U1927

See A/44/551-S/20870, annex.

A/RES/46/39
Page 2

Deeply alarmed by the information with regard to the continuing
production, development and acquisition of nuclear weapons by Israel and its
testing of their delivery systems in the Mediterranean and elsewhere, thus
threatening the peace and security of the region, and equally alarmed by
reports of Israel's placing on alert its nuclear arsenal during conflicts in
the Middle East,
Aware of the grave consequences that endanger international peace and
security as a result of Israel's development and acquisition of nuclear
weapons and Israel's collaboration with South Africa in developing their
delivery systems.
Deeply concerned that Israel has not committed itself to refrain from
attacking or threatening to attack safeguarded nuclear facilities,
1.

Deplores Israel's refusal to renounce possession of nuclear weapons;

2.
Expresses grave concern at the cooperation between Israel and South
Africa in the military nuclear fields;
3.
Expresses its deep concern regarding the information on Israel's
continuing production, development and acquisition of nuclear weapons and
testing of their delivery systems;
4.
Reaffirms that Israel should promptly apply Security Council
resolution 487 (1981), in which the Council, inter alia, requested it to place
all nuclear facilities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards and
to refrain from attacking or threatening to attack nuclear facilities;
5.
Calls upon all States and organizations that have not yet done so
not to cooperate with or give assistance to Israel that could enhance its
nuclear-weapons capability;
6.
Requests the International Atomic Energy Agency to inform the
Secretary-General of any steps Israel may take 'to place its nuclear facilities
under Agency safeguards;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely Israeli nuclear
activities and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-seventh
session;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "Israeli nuclear armament".
65th plenary meeting
6 December 1991
