S/PV.6967

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6967th meeting

Wednesday, 15 May 2013, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Togo)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Kadiri
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Park Yong Min
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Tatham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2013/261)

13-33436 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1333436*

S/PV.6967

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.

who see no immediate reprieve to the ordeal that
presently confronts them. There are expectations that
the international community will show solidarity with
their plight and decide on some clear steps to bring an
end to the impunity with which armed groups have
unleashed a reign of terror on the entire population.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2013/261)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of the Central African Republic and
Chad to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Nicolas Tiangaye, Prime Minister of the Central
African Republic, and request the Protocol Officer to
escort him to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Nicolas Tiangaye, Prime Minister of the
Central African Republic, was escorted to a seat at
the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Margaret Vogt, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/261, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.
I now give the floor to Ms. Vogt.
Ms. Vogt: I wish to commend the Security Council
for its dedicated attention to the situation in the Central
African Republic since the beginning of the conflict
there in December 2012, and especially following
the coup d’état on 24 March against the Government
of François Bozizé and the attendant degradation
of security in the whole country. The Council’s
deliberations have been followed with much interest
within the country and in the region. Expectations are
high among the people of the Central African Republic
for the outcome of this particular meeting, since there
is a growing sense of despair among the population,

2

The report before the Council (S/2013/261) provides
an analysis of the situation in the Central African
Republic since the launch of the Séléka offensive in
December. It underlines the impact of the rebellion on
the people; the State’s capacity and infrastructure; on
security and human rights; on the humanitarian situation,
especially where medical matters are concerned; and
on access to food, basic needs and services, as well as
the high risk of famine if the current situation persists.
It also analyses the regional implications of the Séléka
rebellion.
The Secretary-General stresses in the report
that even at the best of times the State capacity and
infrastructure of the Central African Republic were
rudimentary, while health services were at emergency
levels similar to situations seen in countries that
have been in conflict for a long time. Now, even
those facilities have all but disappeared. An already
challenging human rights environment, marked by
systemic violations of rights even by law enforcement
officers, has collapsed into a state of anarchy and total
disregard for international law as elements of Séléka
have turned their vengeance against the population.
Indiscriminate and often targeted killings, rampant
rape, assaults on the innocent population, the flagrant
recruitment of children as soldiers, the looting of
homes, not just of the rich but even of already struggling
citizens — not even the SOS village was spared, nor
were churches or convents. These acts continue, almost
two months since Séléka took over the reins of power.
The leadership is unable or unwilling either to control
the ranks of the militia groups or to rein in local
commanders.
The leaders of the region have strongly mobilized
to fill the security vacuum that the rebellion created
and try to contain the situation in the Central African
Republic, as the country appears to have become a
safe haven for different foreign rebel forces seeking
to exploit the natural resources for which the Central
African Republic is known. Public evidence shows that
strip mining of the diamond and gold resources of the
Central African Republic have exponentially expanded
in areas controlled by Séléka since the rebellion began.
13-33436

S/PV.6967

Further complicating the picture is the growing
insecurity in the neighbourhood as the conflict now
poses a direct threat to the security of its neighbours,
especially the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Chad and Cameroon. These serious threats to the
peace and security of the people of the Central African
Republic and the Central African region make the
re-establishment of security and the rule of law in the
Central African Republic the highest priority issue.
The various summits held in Libreville, N’Djamena
and most recently Brazzaville laid out solid political
ground rules for the new regime in Bangui to follow,
as well as a clear road map of tasks that must be
accomplished to enable the restoration of a democratic
dispensation in the Central African Republic. First, all
hostilities must cease and the security must be restored
throughout the territory of the Central African Republic;
and secondly, constitutional order must be restored,
pursuant to the January Libreville Agreements, with
the Prime Minister assuming executive powers, while
the self-proclaimed President Michel Djotodia heads
the National Transitional Council and is Head of the
Transition.
The scenario, as implemented by the de facto
authorities, suggests a different setting. The Transitional
Council, which was supposed to be representative of
all political persuasions in the country and to assume
the legislative role of the National Assembly, fell short
of this expectation as controversy surrounded the
procedure through which its members were nominated;
hence the decision of the Heads of State at the 18 April
summit at N’Djamena to expand the membership of
that body to 135. The transitional arrangement is to last
for a period of not more that 24 months, ending with
elections in which the leaders of the transition would
not be eligible to present themselves.
While Mr. Djotodia openly declared his acceptance
of the decisions of the Heads of State of the Economic
Community (ECCAS) of Central African States, he
has proceeded to do the contrary. He insists on his
role as President, constantly referring to the decrees
naming him President and his appointment of the Prime
Minister, whom he claims to have the power to remove,
contrary to Libreville. He continues to run the country
by presidential decrees.
The international community, especially the
African Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie and the Security Council, as well as

many Member States bilaterally, have firmly declared
their support for the ECCAS political framework for
the Central African Republic. However, if this is to
work, a number of important measures would have
to be taken. The distinctive roles and responsibilities
of the executive Prime Minister and the Head of the
Transitional Government would have to be defined in
the framework of a transitional charter that would lay
the ground rules for engagement during the period of
the transition.
With respect to human rights, the Séléka offensive
destroyed much of Central African Republic’s justice
system. In the 10 jurisdictions of the Republic, Séléka
elements have destroyed most of the infrastructure that
supported the justice system, including courthouses,
appeals courts, court dossiers, prisons, prison
registries and prosecutor files. The justice system,
including prisons, will need to be rebuilt entirely,
after vast resources have been spent on it through the
Peacebuilding Fund. The destruction of administrative
files related to birth and citizenship will undoubtedly
create a problem during the registration of voters for
the upcoming elections.
The Séléka offensive dismantled the policing
architecture.
National
security
and
defence
forces — the gendarmerie, police and national
army — have disintegrated, and despite repeated calls
for them to resume their duties, to date only a small
number of the police and national armed forces officers
have resumed their functions.
The current crisis underscores the urgency need for
security sector reform and to create an effective and
inclusive security sector capable of providing security
throughout the country. Broader security sector reform
should be based on political consensus. It should
include the restoration of State authority, the collection
of small arms and light weapons, and community
recovery programmes, as well as the reintegration of
ex-combatants into formal security and defence forces.
The abuses and violations committed by Séléka
combatants and other armed elements, including cases
of rape, maiming, recruitment of children and forced
marriages, are a source of grave concern in terms of
the protection of civilians. They constitute serious
violations of human rights and humanitarian law. The
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the Secretary-General have

13-334363

S/PV.6967

expressed their concern about the deteriorating security
situation in the Central African Republic.
It is critical that the Council unequivocally
pronounce itself on the need for these abuses to stop now
and for perpetrators to be held individually accountable
for their actions. We believe that the time is ripe for
the Council to consider the imposition of individual
sanctions against the architects and perpetrators of
these gross violations. We do not want a desperate
population to be left with no choice but to take the law
into its own hands. The International Criminal Court
(ICC) is also closely monitoring developments in the
Central African Republic, and the Prosecutor of the
ICC has issued a statement warning that the crimes
committed against civilians were under close scrutiny
by her Office. We believe that the Council needs to
send a similar message.
On the humanitarian situation, the latest crisis
has exacerbated an already difficult situation for the
population of the Central African Republic. Human
rights violations against civilians and population
movements continue. Over 49,000 refugees have
now been registered in neighbouring countries since
December, primarily in the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Chad, Cameroon and the Republic of the
Congo. We should not forget that the population of the
entire Central African Republic is only 4.5 million.
Substantial numbers of refugees continue to arrive in
these countries. In addition to the estimated 173,000
displaced since December, another 33,000 persons had
already been displaced, bringing the total number of
internally displaced persons to over 200,000.
The number of violent attacks dramatically
increased in the first quarter of 2013 as a result of
persisting insecurity in the country. More than 60 per
cent of those attacks are attributed to armed groups.
Since the beginning of 2013, at least one person has
been attacked every day.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, 60 per cent of rural inhabitants,
who depend upon agriculture for their livelihoods, are
affected by the current crisis. More than 80,000 people,
including 57,000 children under the age of 5, are
estimated to be at risk of severe food insecurity during
the upcoming lean season, from now until September.
Those figures are likely to increase with the rise in food
prices triggered by the crisis. If seeds are not distributed
during the current planting season, coupled with the

4

increase in prices revealed by recent assessments in
Bangui, there could be a risk of basic food shortages.
That could eventually lead to acute food and nutritional
insecurity in both rural and urban areas. With schools
closed or occupied and teachers absent, at least 656,000
children currently have no access to education.
Difficult humanitarian access due to insecurity
and limited road networks is the number one constraint
for reaching those in need of assistance. Access has
become severely curtailed since December amid the
breakdown of law and order, with many humanitarian
offices and warehouses around the country having
been looted. While all parties have in principle agreed
to facilitate humanitarian access, insecurity is limiting
humanitarian actors’ ability to reach those in need of
assistance, including internally displaced persons, host
communities and victims of human rights violations.
Despite those constraints, United Nations agencies
and programmes are organizing joint assessment
missions to the field to identify needs and the
humanitarian impact of the crisis. Missions to some
provinces have revealed that the humanitarian situation
is worsening in the areas of health, water and sanitation,
nutrition and protection, food security and education.
The most urgent needs are in the food-security sector,
where households have altered their diet by changes
to their food sources, as well as the need for garbage
disposal. Further assessments are planned in the
coming weeks.
Additional funding is urgently required to support
the humanitarian response capacity. The annual
humanitarian appeal for the Central African Republic,
totalling $129 million, was 29 per cent funded as of
10 May. It was estimated in March that an additional
$42 million was required to respond to the new needs
triggered by the crisis. That amount is likely to increase
further.
I believe that there is an urgent need to help restore
security and stability in the Central African Republic.
That should be done by deploying a neutral security
force that would contain the current state of anarchy
and force the rebel elements to conform to the security
framework laid down in Libreville. That framework
provides that all security forces be cantonned/
regrouped, disarmed, demobilized and screened for
absorption into a reformed security force. The Security
Council and the entire international community
must act quickly to protect the people of the Central

13-33436

S/PV.6967

African Republic from the assault they are under by
armed groups. The situation in Bangui is particularly
pressing, as the city has the largest population
concentration — approximately 1.5 million out of a
total population of 4.5 million in the entire country. But
that effort should not be limited to Bangui.
The presence of such a neutral stabilization force,
together with the close political support of the followup committee established by the region and the justestablished international contact Group to support
the transition, is critical in providing a security and
political blanket that would enable the authorities to
implement the Libreville Agreements and would allow
the Prime Minister to play his role as executive head of
Government. The international effort would also help
to ensure that assistance would not be abused to fuel
impunity and authoritarianism.
We welcome the current initiative by the Economic
Community of Central African States to expand its
force to 2,000, which requires the urgent support of
the international community. It will also be critical for
the regional force to review its strategic objectives and
concept of operations to give the force some teeth. A
meeting is taking place today precisely to look into the
issue. That short-term initiative needs to be quickly
followed up by an expanded regional force, possibly
coordinated by the African Union and with the support
of the international community. However, for the very
immediate term, a bridging arrangement is required to
stop the current carnage.
Through
the
United
Nations
Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
the Organization has worked closely with the region
in defining the parameters for the transition, based on
solid democratic principles and legality. Experience has
taught us that such principles are not merely words, but
critical foundations for sustainable peace and security.
To establish a credible and enduring political framework
following the transition, the foundations must be
laid down now. Crucial transitional tasks — such as
establishing election-management bodies; defining the
electoral constituency; disarmament, demobilization
and
reintegration;
security
sector
reform;
regionalization; developing rule-of-law and justice
mechanisms; social and economic development and
so on — require a representative body that reflects the
interests of the entire society, otherwise the transition
may result in another round of conflict. That is why we
insist on the Libreville Agreements as the legal basis.

For the United Nations, the role of the Prime
Minister as the juridical face of the transition is critical,
as that position was the product of an agreement to
which everyone had subscribed. We strongly believe
that we should not encourage a system of impunity in a
situation through which a democratic order is overturned
by force of arms, even when confronted with serious
governance challenges. The Libreville Agreements
were designed to address some of the grievances put
forward by the rebels while respecting the democratic
framework. The coup d’état overturned this transitional
process towards and forcefully imposed a new order. It
is critical that we support the region, ECCAS and the
African Union, and regional actors in re-establishing
the basic principles of Libreville.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Vogt
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Tiangaye (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): It is a great honour for me to speak before the
Security Council. I should like to take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I wish to assure you of the full support of
my delegation during your term of office. I take this
opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, for the work he
accomplished on his watch in April.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/261)
to the Council represents an opportunity for me and
my country an opportunity to convey the gratitude
of the Central African Republic to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for the continued support
of the United Nations for the quest for peace, stability
and development in this highly fragile State, beset by
almost ongoing instability. Here we wish also to thank
the Special Representative, Ms. Margaret Vogt, as well
as all of her team.
The report before us is clear and concise in its
description of the situation on the ground in the Central
African Republic as it was previously and is now. An
tragedy of unprecedented scope is unfolding before our
eyes today in this State of 4.6 million inhabitants, and
we take note of this. The Central African crisis, which
has long been forgotten, must once again take centre
stage and be included on the agenda of the Security
Council.

13-334365

S/PV.6967

The tragedy that is gripping the Central African
Republic at all levels is characterized by disturbances
to the public order, violence, abuses, summary
executions, rape, the recruitment of child soldiers, and
crimes against World Heritage wildlife, exemplified by
the incidents of poaching in Dzanga Sangha reserve
last week, in which more than 20 elephants were killed.
It has inevitably had a humanitarian impact, including
increased insecurity.
Since the taking and looting of a number of cities
in the province, up until the entry of Séléka troops into
the capital of Bangui on 24 March, the city of Bangui
has witnessed almost three weeks of light and heavy
fire, which has led to a massive displacement of people
within and outside the city. It has been characterized by
insecurity caused by the looting, rape, destruction and
killings perpetrated by lawless elements of the Séléka.
That also applies to those charged with protecting
public and private establishments. Lack of security on
the roadways and in regions has made the circulation
of persons and goods impossible, thus hampering
economic recovery.
The continuing insecurity at the level of strategic
infrastructure, such as fuel-storage facilities in Kolongo
and facilities related to water and electricity distribution
and to the dredging activities of the Ubangi river; the
systematic looting of documents and bureaucratic
materials from administrations, of pharmaceutical
products and of medical and biomedical material from
hospitals; and the destruction of production facilities,
which has made it impossible for most companies to pay
their tariffs and taxes to the State, poses a threat to the
stability resulting from the Libreville Agreements and
the decisions of successive summits of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) held
in N’Djamena. All of those violations disrupt the daily
lives of people and provide a particularly painful and
disturbing illustration of the situation.
Nevertheless, generally speaking, the process of the
implementation of the structures recommended by the
most recent Summit of Heads of State and Government,
held in N’Djamena on April 18, has been moving
forward in a manner satisfactory to Central Africans
with respect to the recommendations that have been
made.
However, the situation remains worrisome, despite
the goodwill of the Government and the efforts of the
Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central
African Republic (MICOPAX). Indeed, certain
6

incidents that have been noted continue to be worrisome
for national and international public opinion and could
hinder the ongoing efforts of the Government and the
international community to achieve security, peace
and stability in the Central African Republic and the
subregion.
Given that chaotic situation, which has caused deep
upheaval within the State, what do we intend to do, and
how shall we do it?
First and foremost, on the institutional and
political fronts, pursuant to the recommendations
of the Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and
Government of ECCAS held in N’Djamena on April
18, in the coming days, following broad consultations,
a Government will be established, a Government of
national unity.
Although the National Transitional Council was
supposed to have 105 members, the ECCAS subregional
authorities increased it to 135, so as to ensure the
broadest representation possible in the transition
management process.
The illegally elected Office of the National
Transitional Council should be abolished in the coming
days so as to adapt to current circumstances. Here I
would recall that the outlines of this political transition
were sketched out by ECCAS during the various
Summits held in N’Djamena on 3 and 18 April, as well
as in Brazzaville, on 3 May.
It is clearly stated in the N’Djamena declaration
that all actors involved in managing the transition,
including the Head of the transition, the Prime Minister,
the Ministers and the members of the Office of the
Transitional National Council cannot present their
candidature during the next presidential elections.
We would note that the international community
has unequivocally condemned that forcible and
unconstitutional change. However, ECCAS noted
the election by the National Transitional Council of
Mr. Michel Djotodia as the President of the Republic
and conferred upon him the title of Head of the
Transition. ECCAS also recognized the legitimacy of
the Prime Minister, because he was the head of the
Government of National Unity established under the
Libreville Agreements of 11 January 2013.
Concerning the security situation and the rule of
law, as we have indicated, the collapse of the State
and the lack of any defence or security forces have led

13-33436

S/PV.6967

to a security vacuum resulting in total anarchy, with
widespread violence and serious violations of human
rights, including the looting of public and private
property, arbitrary arrests and detentions, sexual
violence against women and children, torture, rape,
targeted killings, the recruitment of child soldiers and
other atrocities committed by uncontrolled Séléka
elements and unidentified groups.
Nor was the United Nations spared, as residences
of both national and international staff were looted and
pillaged, and vehicles stolen. Bangui is witnessing an
alarming situation, where the looting and pillaging of
houses has reached an unprecedented and unimaginable
level, setting the country back several decades. All
of this has been accompanied by car theft and armed
robbery. Schools and many businesses in Bangui have
not fully reopened because of insecurity.
Outside Bangui, security conditions continue to
deteriorate as Séléka elements engage in vandalism,
violations of human rights and attacks on the civilian
population. It should be noted that the looting primarily
targets non-Muslims and spares Muslims. This situation
is a source of resentment in the Christian communities
and inflames religious tensions.
Finally, the climate of insecurity in the Central
African Republic affects the stability of the entire
subregion.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) thrives in
lawless areas and remains a threat to security and the
rule of law, having killed at least seven people and
carried out kidnappings in the reporting period. At the
same time, a leader of the group has been killed and some
of its fighters have defected. Uganda had at one point
announced the suspension of its monitoring activities
in LRA area of activities following a statement by the
Head of State of the transition, but reversed its decision
following an agreement reached between the various
institutions engaged in the hunt for Joseph Kony and
his men.
We note that the Séléka offensive destroyed
a large part of the country’s judicial system and
administrative infrastructure, including town halls.
That will ultimately raise questions about voting lists
in the electoral process ahead. The Séléka offensive
has destroyed law enforcement. The forces of defence
and security — the gendarmerie, the police and the
army — have disintegrated. Despite repeated calls for
the old forces of defence and security to go back to

work, so far only a small number of officers of the army
and police have rejoined the ranks. Although Séléka
took control of all political and military levers of the
country after seizing power, it cannot restore order.
Despite the efforts of the Government in the fields
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and security sector reform, its results have not been
commensurate with its investment. The Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), which
had deployed nearly 700 men, has seen the number of its
personnel rise to 2,000; hence the urgency of deploying
them fully equipped and trained with a mandate to use
force. The reform of the security sector, which was
long on standby, should be activated in order to lay
the groundwork for creating new forces of defence and
security.
With respect to the protection of human rights, the
precarious situation deteriorated even further during
the conflict, with summary executions and targeted
attacks motivated by religious or tribal affiliation,
violence against women and girls, the recruitment
of child soldiers, and so on. In short, human rights
violations of every stripe have been committed, and we
must find ways and means of stopping them.
The humanitarian situation deteriorated after
Bangui fell. Nearly 47,000 people have fled the
country to seek refuge in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Congo, Cameroon and Chad. Nearly
1.5 million have been displaced internally. The absence
of a humanitarian corridor, insecurity and the looting
of property, warehouses and vehicles belonging to
non-governmental organizations complicate the work
of relief and other assistance to the people.
This chaotic situation leads us to ask the Security
Council to inscribe the situation in the Central African
Republic on its agenda in order to ensure that it will no
longer be a forgotten crisis. Faced with the dissolution of
the army, and in order to save a people in great distress
and before the necessary deployment of the 2,000man force of the ECCAS Mission de Consolidation
de la Paix — which we would like to see opened to
non-member States of the ECCAS space — we ask
France, which is endowed with a clear United Nations
mandate, to intervene by force to disarm Séléka, whose
abuses the Central African people have been compelled
to endure.
We also ask the European Union and the African
Union to do everything possible to fund and/or

13-334367

S/PV.6967

provide other resources to the forces that would
intervene under that mission. We ask the United
Nations to appoint a special rapporteur to investigate
violations of human rights in the Central African
Republic in order to determine the extent of the crimes
committed and prosecute their perpetrators in national
and international courts alike, and to assist in the
opening of humanitarian corridors in order to allow
humanitarian actors to provide relief and assistance
to displaced persons and other populations. We call
on the international community to mobilize to provide
the significant emergency relief that is critical to the
survival more than 1.5 million victims waiting for
relief.
Finally, we suggest that a Chairman be appointed
to the currently leaderless Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, by
mutual agreement with the Central African authorities.
Once we have resolved the security situation, even if
only partially, we can begin to rebuild the State and to
consider calmly preparing the transparent and credible
elections that everyone wants.
Before concluding, allow me to convey the heartfelt
gratitude of my Government to the United Nations, the
African Union, the European Union, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the ECCAS States,
France, the United States of America, the United
Kingdom, Belgium, Luxembourg, Australia, China,
Japan, Germany, the Republic of Korea, the Kingdom
of Morocco, Uganda, and all bilateral and multilateral
partners that have always supported the Central African
Republic in its relentless pursuit of peace and stability.
To all those who have been overtaken by fatigue,
we ask them to continue despite it all to believe in
the Central African Republic and to act on its behalf.
Helping the Central African Republic is to continue
stabilizing the subregion of Central Africa. Helping
the Central African Republic is to consolidate peace
in Africa. Helping the Central African Republic is to
fulfil the international community’s duty of solidarity
vis-à-vis one of its members clinging to life, peace and
the fulfillment his people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chad.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I have
the honour and privilege to speak on behalf of the
presidency of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS). I wish at the outset to welcome

8

the presence of His Excellency Mr. Nicolas Tiangaye,
Prime Minister of the Central African Republic. I wish
to express to my congratulations and admiration for the
sacrifice he is making to save his country.
I should also like to welcome the presence of
Ms. Margaret Vogt, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Central African Republic. I
have taken note of her imporant and moving statement
on the situation in the Central African Republic.
I should like to quote His Excellency Mr. Idriss
Deby Itno, President of the Republic of Chad in his
capacity as the current Chairman of of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS),
speaking to his peers on 18 April at N’Djamena during
an extraordinary ECCAS summit on the situation in
Chad:
“The Central African Republic is like a wound
in the heart of Central Africa. Despite all remedies
proferred to resolve the crisis in the country, the
wound only appears to have been healed. We need
to engage seriously to end the situation of recurring
instability — this time decisively, I hope.”
We must ensure that the wound does not turn into
gangrene and infect the entire subregion. The tell-tale
signs of such contagion are already present, as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
clearly spelled out. Since 24 March, the security and
humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic,
which had already been worrisome enough, has
deteriorated considerably. Uncontrolled armed groups,
comprised of many thousands of men, continue to
plunder, extort and commit atrocities across the extent
of the country’s territory. The country’s people await
in distress, in vain, concrete action by the international
community and the Economic Community of Central
African States in better protecting them.
The international community has condemned the
unconstitutional change that occurred in the Central
African Republic, as has the Economic Community
of Central African States in not recognizing the selfproclaimed President. Subsequently, realpolitik led
ECCAS to advocate a plan for ending the crisis that,
while restoring some level of law and order, would take
into account the realities on the ground. The institutions
for an 18-month transition have therefore been put
in place, including a road map for the transitional
Government in order to redress the situation. The

13-33436

S/PV.6967

political Agreements signed at Libreville on 11 January
set out the core commitments for the transition period.
As the Council is aware, following the coup, an
extraordinary ECCAS summit was held at N’Djamena
on 3 April. In addition to ECCAS member States,
participants also included His Excellency Mr. Jacob
Zuma, President of the Republic of South Africa, His
Excellency Mr. Boni Yayi, President of the Republic of
Benin, as well as the United Nations, the European Union
and the International Organization of la Francophonie.
That meeting not only condemned the seizure of power
by force in the Central African Republic, but it also
called the leader of the Séléka coalition, Mr. Michel
Djotodia, the self-proclaimed President, to comply with
the Libreville Agreements.
At the end of the summit, the ECCAS Heads of
State proposed setting up a panel including all the
forces of the country capable of acting as the executive
branch and a constituent assembly. That is to take place
in the context of widespread involvement on the part
both of the Libreville signatories and civil society or
political elements. The principle of supporting the
transition through a monitoring committee and the
establishment of an International Contact Group,
including regional and international organizations
and bilateral and multilateral partners, was also
agreed to. All stakeholders in the Central African
Republic, including the self-proclaimed President, have
unconditionally accepted the road map proposed by the
ECCAS summit.
Against that backdrop, according to the most
recent information available to us, on the basis of broad
consultations, a National Transitional Council has been
put in place to act as a constituent assembly that involves
all of the country’s stakeholders. As the Prime Minister
has emphasized, this constituent assembly’s main task
is to draft a constitution in preparation for elections
within 18 months. The National Transitional Council
elected the head of the Séléka coalition as President for
the transitional period. However, the Council should be
expanded to make it much more legitimate and better
represent the people of the Central African Republic.
Prime Minister Tiangaye, appointed under the
Libreville Agreements, has had his term extended to
include greater powers, and he cannot be removed
during the transition period. If circumstances require,
the transitional President and the Prime Minister may,
by mutual agreement, carry out a reorganization of

the Government. The transitional President, Prime
Minister and other members of the transitional
Government cannot stand in the next elections. Under
the terms of the transition, a constitutional referendum
and parliamentary and presidential elections will be
organized on the basis of a legal system and a consensual
time table will be established for a return to undisputed
democratic and constitutional order. It is clear that
nothing is possible without security for persons and
property, or without the material and financial resources
required by the transitional authorities to carry out their
duties. It is precisely to address such issues that ECCAS
agreed to establish an International Contact Group,
which held its first meeting in Brazzaville 3 May.
On the security front, it is imperative to neutralize
the armed gangs. To that end, we must bear in mind
the ECCAS N’Djamena declaration of 18 April,
which emphasizes the need for the cantonment of all
uncontrolled armed elements. It should also be recalled
that, in order to ensure a minimum of security for the
country, the Central Africa Multinational Force should
be increased to 2,000 troops, while the international
community should be strongly urged to support
MICOPAX with material and financial resources
in order to increase its workforce and enhance its
effectiveness. The Commission of the African Union
is called upon to take appropriate measures to evaluate
MICOPAX needs in the areas of staff, equipment
and financing. The task of generating forces based
on a concept of operations and a concept of logistics
support should have the support of Africa and the entire
international community.
The international community, in particular the
Security Council, has a duty to extend solidarity and
assistance to the Central African Republic, which is
in dire straits given the political and social chaos that
prevails in the country.
In the meantime, the Economic Community of
Central African States is doing everything in its power
to aid the people of the Central African Republic.
Its modest forces are working on the ground to help
the transitional authorities reduce insecurity as
much as possible. It is imperative that Africa and the
international community as a whole commit to concrete
action alongside ECCAS and get behind the transition
in order to help people in danger.
In conclusion, I would like to inform the Council
that the transitional President of the Central African
Republic has just begun a visit to the countries of

13-334369

S/PV.6967

the subregion, starting with Chad. On that occasion,
President Deby Itno, in his capacity as the current
Chairman of ECCAS, urged the transitional President
to scrupulously respect his commitments, particularly
that of ensuring that order and security are rapidly
restored and human rights respected.

10

The President (spoke in French): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

13-33436
