A/RES/55/90

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 February 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 114 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/602/Add.1)]

55/90.

Effective implementation of international instruments on
human rights, including reporting obligations under
international instruments on human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/138 of 9 December 1998, as well as other relevant
resolutions, and taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2000/75 of
26 April 2000, 1
Recalling also the relevant paragraphs of the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights on
25 June 1993, 2
Reaffirming that the full and effective implementation of United Nations
human rights instruments is of major importance to the efforts of the Organization,
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 3 to promote universal respect for and observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that the effective functioning of the human rights treaty bodies
established pursuant to United Nations human rights instruments is indispensable for
the full and effective implementation of such instruments,
Conscious of the importance of coordination of the human rights promotion
and protection activities of the United Nations bodies active in the field of human
rights,
Recalling that the effectiveness of the human rights treaty bodies in
encouraging the realization by States parties of their obligations under United
Nations human rights instruments requires constructive dialogue aimed at assisting
States parties in identifying solutions to human rights problems, which should be
based on the reporting process supplemented by information from all relevant
sources, which should be shared with all interested parties,

1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum
(E/2000/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
2
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
Resolution 217 A (III).

00 56479

A/RES/55/90

Recalling also the initiatives taken by a number of human rights treaty bodies
to elaborate early warning measures and urgent procedures, within their mandates,
with a view to preventing the occurrence or recurrence of serious human rights
violations,
Reaffirming its responsibility for the effective functioning of human rights
treaty bodies, and reaffirming also the importance of:
(a) Promoting the effective functioning of the periodic reporting by States
parties to those instruments,
(b) Securing sufficient financial, human and information resources for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to enable the
human rights treaty bodies to carry out their mandates effectively, including in
regard to their ability to work in the applicable working languages,
(c) Promoting greater efficiency and effectiveness through better
coordination of the activities of the United Nations bodies active in the field of
human rights, taking into account the need to avoid unnecessary duplication and
overlapping of their mandates and tasks,
(d) Addressing questions of both reporting obligations and financial
implications when elaborating any further instruments on human rights,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 4
1.
Welcomes the submission of the reports of the persons chairing the
human rights treaty bodies on their eleventh 5 and twelfth 6 meetings, held at Geneva
from 31 May to 4 June 1999 and 5 to 8 June 2000, respectively, and takes note of
their conclusions and recommendations;
2.
Encourages each treaty body to continue to give careful consideration to
the relevant conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the
persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies, and in this context also encourages
enhanced cooperation and coordination between the treaty bodies;
3.
Welcomes the initiative of the persons chairing the human rights treaty
bodies of inviting representatives of Member States to participate in a dialogue
within the framework of their meetings, and encourages them to continue this
practice in the future;
4.
Welcomes the comments by Governments, United Nations bodies and
specialized agencies, non-governmental organizations and interested persons on the
final report of the independent expert on enhancing the long-term effectiveness of
the United Nations human rights treaty system 7 and the report of the SecretaryGeneral thereon; 8
5.
Emphasizes the need to ensure financing and adequate staff and
information resources for the operations of the human rights treaty bodies, and with
this in mind:
(a) Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to provide adequate
resources in respect of each human rights treaty body, while making the most
efficient use of existing resources, in order to give the human rights treaty bodies
4

A/55/278.
A/54/805, annex.
6
A/55/206, annex.
7
E/CN.4/1997/74, annex.
8
E/CN.4/2000/98 and Add.1.
5

2

A/RES/55/90

adequate administrative support and better access to technical expertise and relevant
information;
(b) Calls upon the Secretary-General to seek, in the next biennium, the
resources within the regular budget of the United Nations necessary to give the
human rights treaty bodies adequate administrative support and better access to
technical expertise and relevant information without diverting resources from the
development programmes and activities of the United Nations;
(c) Welcomes the plans of action prepared by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to enhance the resources available to all the human
rights treaty bodies and thereby strengthen the implementation of the human rights
treaties, and encourages all Governments, United Nations bodies and specialized
agencies, non-governmental organizations and interested persons to consider
contributing to the appeal for extrabudgetary resources for the treaty bodies made by
the High Commissioner until the regular budget funding meets their needs;
6.
Encourages ongoing efforts to identify measures for more effective
implementation of the United Nations human rights instruments;
7.
Takes note of the measures taken by each of the human rights treaty
bodies to improve their functioning, as reflected in their respective annual reports,
and encourages continuing efforts by the treaty bodies and the Secretary-General to
assist States parties in meeting their reporting obligations and to reduce the backlog
in the consideration of reports by the treaty bodies;
8.
Welcomes the continuing efforts by the human rights treaty bodies and
the Secretary-General aimed at streamlining, rationalizing, rendering more
transparent and otherwise improving reporting procedures, and encourages the
Secretary-General, the treaty bodies and the persons chairing the treaty bodies at
their next meeting to continue to examine ways of reducing the duplication of
reporting required under the different instruments, without impairing the quality of
reporting, and of generally reducing the reporting burden on States parties, including
through an ongoing examination of proposals for reports focused on a limited range
of issues, the harmonization of the general guidelines regarding the form and
content of reports, the possibility of consolidating overdue reports, the timing of
consideration of reports and the methods of work of the treaty bodies;
9.
Calls upon the Secretary-General to complete as soon as possible the
detailed analytical study comparing the provisions of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 9 the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, 9 the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, 10 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 11 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 12 and
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment, 13 which is being prepared with a view to identifying duplication of
reporting required under those instruments;
10. Urges States parties to contribute, individually and through meetings of
States parties, to identifying practical proposals and ideas for improving the
functioning of the human rights treaty bodies;
9

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
11
Resolution 34/180, annex.
12
Resolution 44/25, annex.
13
Resolution 39/46, annex.
10

3

A/RES/55/90

11. Welcomes the publication of the revised Manual on Human Rights
Reporting, 14 and encourages the updating of the Manual to reflect new developments
in the field of human rights, including the adoption of new instruments;
12. Underlines the importance of providing technical assistance to a State,
upon its request, in the process of ratifying human rights instruments and in the
preparation of its initial and subsequent reports;
13. Welcomes the work done by the Secretary-General to compile in a single
volume all the general guidelines regarding the form and content of reports to be
submitted by States parties that have been issued by the human rights treaty bodies,
and encourages the Secretary-General also to compile the rules of procedure for the
treaty bodies;
14. Reiterates its concern about the persistent backlog of reports on the
implementation by States parties of certain United Nations instruments on human
rights and about delays in the consideration of reports of the human rights treaty
bodies;
15. Also reiterates its concern about the large number of overdue reports, and
again urges States parties to make every effort to meet their reporting obligations;
16. Urges all States parties whose reports have been examined by human
rights treaty bodies to provide adequate follow-up to the observations and final
comments of the treaty bodies on their reports;
17. Encourages the human rights treaty bodies to continue to identify
specific possibilities for technical assistance, to be provided at the request of the
State concerned, in the regular course of their work of reviewing the periodic reports
of States parties, and encourages States parties to consider carefully the concluding
observations of the treaty bodies in identifying their needs for technical assistance;
18. Urges each State party to translate, publish and make widely available in
its territory the full text of the concluding observations on its reports to the human
rights treaty bodies;
19. Welcomes the contribution to the work of the human rights treaty bodies
made by the specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies, and encourages
the specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies, the Commission on
Human Rights, including its special procedures, and the Subcommission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the persons chairing the human rights treaty
bodies to continue to explore specific measures to intensify this cooperation
between them and to improve communication and information flow in order to
improve further the quality of their work, including by avoiding unnecessary
duplication;
20. Recognizes the important role played by non-governmental organizations
in all parts of the world in the effective implementation of all human rights
instruments, and encourages the exchange of information between the human rights
treaty bodies and such organizations;
21. Recalls, with regard to the election of the members of the human rights
treaty bodies, the importance of giving consideration to equitable geographical
distribution and gender balance of the membership and to the representation of the
principal legal systems and of bearing in mind that the members shall be elected and
shall serve in their personal capacity and shall be of high moral character,
acknowledged independence and recognized competence in the field of human
14

4

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.GV.97.0.16.

A/RES/55/90

rights, and encourages States parties, individually and through meetings of States
parties, to consider how to give better effect to these principles;
22. Takes note of the discussion of the payment of honorariums to the
members of the human rights treaty bodies included in the report of the SecretaryGeneral,4 and of other work being done by the Secretary-General on this subject,
and encourages Member States to consider possible follow-up;
23. Encourages the Economic and Social Council, as well as its functional
commissions and their subsidiary bodies, other United Nations bodies and the
specialized agencies to consider the feasibility of participation by representatives of
the human rights treaty bodies in their meetings;
24. Welcomes the continuing emphasis by the persons chairing the human
rights treaty bodies on closely monitoring the enjoyment of the human rights of
women within their mandates;
25. Also welcomes the contributions of the human rights treaty bodies, within
their mandates, to the prevention of violations of human rights, in the context of
their consideration of reports submitted under their respective treaties;
26. Invites the Secretary-General to submit the reports of the persons
chairing the human rights treaty bodies on their periodic meetings to the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session on measures taken to implement the present resolution, on
obstacles to its implementation and on measures taken or planned to ensure
financing and adequate staff and information resources for the effective operation of
the human rights treaty bodies;
28. Decides to continue to give priority consideration at its fifty-seventh
session to the conclusions and recommendations of the periodic meetings of the
persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies, in the light of the deliberations of
the Commission on Human Rights, under the item entitled “Human rights
questions”.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

5
