S/2021/732

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 August 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 20 August 2021 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8838th meeting of the Security Council,
convened on 18 August 2021 under the item entitled “United Nations pea cekeeping
operations: technology and peacekeeping”. The interventions of the briefers and
Council members will be published as an official record of the Security Council
(S/PV.8838).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for the
8838th meeting, the following delegations and entities submitted written statements,
copies of which are enclosed: Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil, Ecuador,
Egypt, Fiji, Finland, Germany, Guatemala, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Nepal, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, South Africa, Switzerland, Ukraine and the United Arab Emirates.
These statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council in
accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from the
President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the
members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic, and reference to the document will be made in S/PV.8838.
(Signed) T. S. Tirumurti
President of the Security Council

21-11710 (E)

150921

*2111710*

210921

S/2021/732

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
United Nations peacekeeping operations are a tool of primary importance to
international peace and security. They have played an important role in the promotion
of political processes, the implementation of ceasefires, protection of the civilian
population, promotion of human rights and the provision of humanitarian assistance,
at the same time offering hope to persons affected by conflict the world over.
In reality, it is clear that the growing complexity in which peacekeeping
operations carry out their work exposes the troops to increasing threats to their
physical and psychological integrity. This makes it more difficult for these missions
to increase their effectiveness as a tool for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
Threats stemming from ethnic struggles, terrorism and the use of improvised
explosive devices, exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
pose great risks to the Blue Helmets in the 12 peacekeeping operations currently
deployed.
We have watched with concern an alarming increase in the number of deaths
among peacekeeping personnel last year and during the early months of 2021.
Ensuring the security of the men and women in uniform who risk their lives to serve
under the United Nations flag is critical and should be a collective priority.
Argentina would like to emphasize six factors that it sees as key to guaranteeing
the protection of personnel in peacekeeping operations. The first is the need to
increase training in the area of security and protection, both in the pre-deployment
phase for personnel and when they are in the field.
The second factor is the immediate need to address the use of improvised
explosive devices, which continue to be one of the main sources of danger for the
personnel deployed.
As a third factor to consider, the integration of new technologies for indivi dual
and camp security is an essential element in addressing the threats to which deployed
troops are exposed. Therefore, it is necessary to be especially aware that not all
countries have achieved equal conditions of technological and economic development
allowing them to purchase adequate equipment, including for purposes of training in
the use of such technologies in the field. We would thus like to highlight the
importance of developing cooperation in the area of technology in peacekeeping
operations even further, for the purpose of standardizing the training of Blue Helmets
and the capacities of troop- and police-contributing countries. The need thus arises
for the States who possess technological development in this field to be open to offer
those advances to those which are not at the same level. That is to say, there must be
a true desire to apply the principle of solidarity in that area both pre -deployment and
in the field. Without such cooperation, the progress made in the development of
technology that could be used to make peacekeeping operations more effective and
secure would not have a real impact in the field.
As the fourth factor to highlight, Argentina considers that incorporating a true
culture of accountability against impunity for those who attack peacekeeping
personnel constitutes an essential element for their protection and safety, not only for
reparations to victims but also to make an example of the attackers in order to
discourage similar conduct.
2/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

The fifth factor that our country would like to highlight in this context is the
need to improve medical support in the field, as well as infrastructure and training for
personnel, taking into account that a considerable number of the casualties in
peacekeeping operations are due to security and occupational health problems.
As the sixth and last factor, Argentina would like to stress the importance of
recognizing questions of gender in peacekeeping operations in order to ensure a
favourable environment with appropriate medical services available to each of their
members in accordance with their needs.
The time has come to intensify our common efforts and assume the shared
responsibility to guarantee the security of peacekeeping personnel. Argentina is ready
to work with all Member States to contribute to those efforts.

21-11710

3/46

S/2021/732

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Australia to the
United Nations
Australia pays tribute to all peacekeepers who have been killed or injured in the
service of peace and calls for greater accountability for crimes against peacekeepers.
The safety and security of our blue helmets, as well as the civilians they are mandated
to protect, must remain the highest priority.
Australia commends India for prioritizing the cross-cutting theme of technology
in peacekeeping through this important United Nations Security Council open debate
on “Protecting the protectors: technology and peacekeeping” and for encouraging the
Council to remain engaged on the implications of critical and emerging technologies
on peace and security.
Technology can play a central role in addressing the challenges and threats faced
by multidimensional peacekeeping missions, accelerating progress under all pillars
of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. A range of tools and capabilities exist that
can improve mandate delivery and in-field services, reduce attacks against
peacekeepers and address systemic challenges.
We have already seen the significant impact of technologies such as unmanned
aerial systems to enhance situational awareness and improve mission planning.
Technology also has an important role to play in strengthening early warning and
rapid response systems. This can improve a mission’s ability to protect civilians,
including preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence and in
situations of mass atrocity. Australia welcomes the strategy for the digital
transformation of United Nations peacekeeping to fully utilize resources and support
implementation of broader, system-wide reforms such as the Secretary-General’s
Data Strategy.
At the same time, we must be mindful that technologies can also be used in ways
that cause harm. The international community must work together to both build
awareness of emerging opportunities and collaborate transparently in mitigating
risks – including by expanding in-mission digital literacy to ensure the responsible
use of technology and data. Training and capacity-building partnerships will be
increasingly important, and the multilateral system will continue to have a key role
in addressing and shaping the impact of technologies.
One lesson of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has been our ability to
work across the digital domain and to continue to collaborate over vast distances. In
the past year, Australia has leveraged technology to launch an online peace operations
training platform for Indo-Pacific troop-contributing countries. Australia also invests
in technology-based solutions, such as the roll-out of a telemedicine system and
improved counter-improvised explosive device capabilities within peacekeeping
missions. We see technology as a key enabler to evaluate whole-of-mission
performance and support a culture of continual improvement.
Australia will continue to advocate for digital transformation to advance the
women and peace and security agenda. Women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation and decision-making in peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes are
essential to promoting stability, social cohesion and sustainable peace.
The success of digital transformation in peacekeeping will be contingent on
strong partnerships and leadership at all levels. Looking ahead to the upcoming
Peacekeeping Ministerial in Seoul, Australia will continue to prioritize multilateral,
cross-regional and regional partnerships, innovation and mainstreaming of
technology as integral to peace operations and building sustainable peace.
4/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I congratulate India for assuming the presidency of the Council in the month of
its seventy-fifth Independence Day and for the productive conduct of the Council’s
work. I also thank India for convening today’s open debate.
I thank the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for their comprehensive and useful briefings.
The United Nations peacekeeping operations have become more complex in
nature, posing new challenges for the peacekeepers deployed on the ground. The
armed groups are becoming more and more dangerous with access to new
technologies and equipment. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
added further complexities in the implementation of the mandates by the
peacekeepers.
At the same time, technology can potentially improve the quality of
peacekeeping in many ways. Effective, innovative and responsible use of technology
in the field can help mandate implementation and ensure safety and security of the
peacekeepers.
In this regard, we consider the new strategy for the digital transformation of
United Nations peacekeeping as a welcome development, which will help in the
implementation of Action for Peacekeeping commitments. We note with appreciation
other important initiatives of the Secretariat, including the Unite Aware platform,
which helps the missions to enhance situational awareness.
Bangladesh has always been in the forefront in contributing to world peace. For
over three decades, Bangladesh has been participating in the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and we have been consistently placed among the top troop and police-contributing countries for many years. Our peacekeepers have constantly
been adapting to the new realities and contexts by supporting United Nations efforts
to make peacekeeping more effective and fit for purpose.
Bangladesh co-leads with Italy the Group of Friends on Leading Environmental
Management in the Field, which is dedicated to supporting the implementation of the
United Nations environmental strategy for peacekeeping. We are equally committed
to supporting the successful implementation of the digital transformation strategy.
Bangladesh would also like to share its own journey to a “Digital Bangladesh” in the
mission areas.
Let me share some thoughts on technology and peacekeeping.
First, use of technology in peace operations can contribute to more effective
implementation of mandates, including by enhancing field support, safety and
security, and protection of civilians. Therefore, it is important to integrate
technologies, especially digital technology, in the peacekeeping mandates. However,
such integration should be done in close consultation with the troop- and policecontributing countries and other stakeholders, particularly to assess and address the
capability gaps.
Second, use of technologies can significantly enhance the safety and security of
the peacekeepers, particularly by facilitating real-time communications and
improving situational awareness within the mission. It can also be used for awareness
campaigns, trend analysis and strengthening the early warning mechanism, which are
critical for protection of civilians. In this regard, capacity-building of peacekeepers
21-11710

5/46

S/2021/732

and availability of the best and most up-to-date technologies are of utmost
importance.
Third, the use of technology has enormous potential to stop the spread of
disinformation and hatred. Digital technology in particular can be effectively used to
disseminate positive information on the contribution of peacekeepers in the local
community, as a means to tackle anti-United Nations sentiment, which often results
in attacks against the peacekeepers.
Fourth, technology is a key enabler in reducing the environmental impact of
peacekeeping operations. We also believe that for technology to be sustainable and
user-friendly, it needs to be reliable and cost-effective. Encouraging home-grown and
local solutions to environmental hazards as well as engaging community in
environmental management is important. In this regard, incentivizing use of
renewable energy including solar power in the field could be an important step.
Fifth, while incorporating the digital technologies, the responsible use of data
should be one of the topmost priorities. A transparent and trustworthy mechanism can
help in building a tech-enabled peacekeeping operation. In this regard, cooperation
and coordination among the national authorities, United Nations agencies and other
stakeholders is vital.
Sixth, adopting and integrating new technologies require new investment. Costefficiency is also crucial for sustainable projects. We, therefore, need to think how
the new investments/funds will be managed for the sustainable running of technologybased projects, including through prioritization of resources. Prioritization of
resources is essential in this regard.
Finally, digital technologies can play a crucial role in implementing the women
and peace and security agenda, especially in ensuring greater participation of women
in peacekeeping. It can also help the peacekeepers on the ground in community
engagement, especially with the youth, and help promote the youth, peace and
security agenda.
The use of digital technologies offers immense benefits in fulfilling
peacekeeping mandates. However, technology alone cannot do all that is required for
further strengthening the United Nations peacekeeping operations. It merely lays the
foundation, but more technologically enabled peacekeeping will require genuine
political will and strengthened partnerships among the Member States, particularly
among the members of the Security Council.

6/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

Annex IV
Statement on behalf of the Permanent Representative of Brazil to
the United Nations, Ronaldo Costa Filho
First and foremost, please allow me to commend the Indian presidency of the
United Nations Security Council for the month of August for convening such a critical
debate on the use of new technologies to enhance the safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers on the ground.
Peacekeeping has been – and remains – an absolute priority for the Brazilian
Government. As an incoming Council member, Brazil is committed to maintaining all
aspects of peacekeeping front and centre in the Security Council’s agenda.
In that context, the safety and security of blue helmets is a priority that requires
the Security Council to remain vigilant and actively engaged on the matter.
As one of the Co-Chairs of the newly established Group of Friends on the Safety
and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers (alongside my colleagues from China,
Indonesia and Rwanda), it fell on me the high honour of addressing the Security
Council on 25 May to highlight the Group's concern about the recent increase in the
number of blue helmets killed by malicious acts in recent years.
The concern is not unwarranted. As the operational environment peacekeepers
encounter in the field grows increasingly more challenging – characterized by
regional conflicts, ethnic strife, terrorism, the use of improvised explosive devices,
not to mention the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic – it is only fitting that
the Security Council steps up to the plate in order to minimize the risks peacekeepers
are exposed to in carrying out the mandates handed to them by this very organ.
There is no mistake that innovation and the use of new technologies can be a
powerful tool to counter the threats against peacekeepers and also to assist in the
implementation of the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
especially the protection of civilians. There are tasks that can be safely delegated to
technological instruments while sparing casualties and suffering on the part of
military and police officers as well as civilian staff in the context of a peacekeeping
mission.
However, as it has been proven time and again, technological advancement is
oftentimes a double-edged sword. Therefore, the use of new technologies must be the
object of careful regulation, scrutiny and oversight in order to avoid the creation of
the kind of situations the deployment of peacekeeping operations seeks to circumvent
in the first place, including violations of national sovereignty and disrespect to the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. A case in point: the use of unmanned
aircraft merits close attention by all involved stakeholders – Secretariat, field
missions, host nations and troop- and police-contributing countries – both in the light
of its legitimate possibilities and the potential added risks the mishandling of new
technologies might bring about.
With that in mind, it is highly important that the Secretariat keeps member States
up to date on the use of new technologies in peacekeeping operations. One other
aspect that should be taken into consideration by the Council is that the use of new
technologies does not entail the undesirable diversion of resources from other critical
areas pertaining to the safety and security of peacekeepers.

21-11710

7/46

S/2021/732

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Cristian Espinosa
[Original: Spanish]
Allow me once again to congratulate India for its conduct of the work of the
Security Council for the month of August, and for organizing this debate under the
agenda item on United Nations peacekeeping operations.
I appreciate the statement by the Secretary-General, in particular the strategy
for the digital transformation of peacekeeping missions. I also welcome the
presentation by the Chair of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat,
and by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of India, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar.
This meeting addresses issues that are central to Ecuador-- on the one hand, the
efforts for protection and security of peacekeeping personnel, and on the other, rapid
technological development, with the challenges and opportunities it brings with it.
Because of the importance we attach to the security and efficiency of
peacekeeping missions, on 30 March 2020, Ecuador co-sponsored Security Council
resolution 2518 (2020), in which we referred to the development by the Secretariat of
a strategy to better integrate the use of new technologies in order to improve
situational awareness of personnel and their capacity.
With this resolution, we also expressed our serious concern at the threats posed
by landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive devices. At the
Arria-formula meeting “Protecting the Peacekeeper: Suppressing the Deployment of
Improvised Explosive Devices against Peace Operations” organized by Kenya on
26 March 2021 and co-sponsored by Ecuador, we stressed the need to provide
equipment with adequate technology to peacekeeping personnel.
Today’s debate also offers us the possibility of formally emphasizing the
conclusions expressed during the Arria-formula meeting of 17 May 2021 on the
impact of emerging technologies on international peace and security. While in many
contexts, health conditions have impacted peace and security, affecting humanitarian
access in conflict zones, digital technologies have been beneficial in minimizing the
interruption of processes for peacekeeping.
Technological solutions can assist United Nations peacekeeping operations in
fulfilling their mandates in complex environments with greater effectiveness, among
other things, by allowing them to adapt of the changing dynamic of conflicts.
Technology can improve capacity for early warning and action; security of
camps and convoys, with stable Internet connections and integrated communications
networks; improve monitoring and analysis of conflicts; promote energy efficiency
and reduce environmental contamination. We also support the presidential statement
S/PRST/2021/11 of 24 May 2021.
As an organization we must ensure that we are maximizing the benefits of
technology, including digital, cyber and materials technologies, for our own
operations. We cannot achieve greater efficiency if we are not equipped with the tools
that will enable us to overcome new challenges to security. It is our responsibility to
promote and make use of technological development to facilitate peace.
For example, we welcome the decision to address technology and medical
capacity building, as one of the crosscutting themes to be discussed at the Ministerial
Meeting on United Nations peacekeeping operations in Seoul, at the end of 2021.

8/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

The work of peacekeeping personnel is vital for the implementation of the three
pillars of the United Nations, taking into account the objectives of protectio n of the
civilian population and of lasting peace.
Lastly, Ecuador recognizes that with modern, well-equipped and protected
peacekeeping operations, the objective of international security and protection of the
civilian population in conflict zones and fragile zones can be achieved. Therefore, it
is also vital to build capacity in the areas of justice and responsibility, to ensure that
crimes against the personnel of those missions do not enjoy impunity. For that reason,
Ecuador co-sponsored the draft resolution adopted as resolution 2589 (2021) by the
Security Council today.

21-11710

9/46

S/2021/732

Annex VI
Statement of Egypt
[Original: Arabic]
Egypt plays a leading role in the United Nations peacekeeping system, whet her
by contributing personnel to the military and police components of peacekeeping
missions, helping to develop policies and concepts, or participating in peacekeeping
training.
Egypt has been one the greatest supporters of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, starting with its participation in the United Nations Operation in the
Congo in 1960. Egypt is the seventh largest contributor of army and police personnel
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, with more than 3,000 male and female
peacekeepers in service. It is also the third largest contributor of police forces. Egypt
currently participates in six United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa
(Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of Congo, Mali, the Sudan, South
Sudan and Western Sahara) by providing regular military and police units,
non-commissioned officers and observers. Moreover, Egypt is one of the largest
troop-contributing countries to two of the most dangerous peacekeeping operations,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) and United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic.
Egypt attaches particular importance to the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations, in keeping with its support for the women, peace and
security agenda. Accordingly, Egypt has led the way on that front by including, to
date, 85 women in its peacekeeping forces. Egypt, in keeping with its role as an
effective actor in establishing international peace and security, strives assiduously to
grow its contributions to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Those
contributions give Egypt the opportunity to solidify the prominent role it plays in
resolving conflicts and bringing about stability in Africa.
Egypt is one of the leading supporters of efforts to reform the United Nations
peacekeeping system. When Egypt held the presidency of the African Uni on, it
exhorted African countries that contribute troops to peacekeeping operations and
those that host such operations to be actively involved in implementing the United
Nations Action for Peacekeeping initiative. In that connection, in November 2018,
Egypt hosted a high-level regional conference in Cairo that produced the Cairo road
map for enhancing the performance of peacekeeping operations, which the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union adopted in October 2020 as a common African
position on developing and enhancing the performance of peacekeeping operations.
In addition, Egypt is working at the United Nations to ensure coherence between
peacekeeping efforts, on the one hand, and peacebuilding, reconstruction and post conflict development efforts, on the other. Egypt will make that a high-priority issue
during its tenure as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission in 2021, in keeping with
the great importance that the President of the Republic attaches to post-conflict
reconstruction and development in Africa, and in line with the vision that Egypt put
forward in the statement by the President of the Security Council (S/PRST/2017/27),
which was adopted in response to an initiative that Egypt launched during its
membership of the Council.
With regard to operational aspects, the Cairo International Centre for Conflict
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding is one of the leading training centres, in
particular at the African level. The Centre runs many training programmes to build
the capacity of African personnel in various aspects of peacekeeping, in accordance
10/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

with the highest standards and United Nations training programmes. In January 2020,
the Centre, in collaboration with the Police Academy and the Integrated Training
Service of the United Nations Secretariat, held a training workshop for the
commanders of formed police units in United Nations peacekeeping missions that
received considerable attention in peacekeeping circles within the Organization.
In January 2021, the Ministry of the Interior inaugurated the Egyptian Training
Centre for Peacekeeping Operations at the Police Academy. That Centre represents
an important addition to the distinctive capabilities of the various components of the
Egyptian peacekeeping training system, including its military, police and civilian
components, and enhances the position of Egypt as a key player in assisting and
providing training to other African countries that participate in peacekeeping
operations.
As part of ongoing efforts to develop United Nations peacekeeping operations,
enhance their performance, reduce their cost and enable to respond to developments
in the complex theatres in which they operate, the United Nations has increasingly
been replacing large, slow-moving units with light forces that can be deployed rapidly
and have specialized capabilities (helicopters, commando and rapid deployment units,
reconnaissance drones, mobile medical intervention teams and specialized police
teams). In addition, modern technology can be used in peacekeeping operations.
Accordingly, and taking into account technical developments, the issue of the
security and safety of forces has become increasingly important, given the complex
nature of conflicts and the heightened threat levels facing peacekeeping operations,
in particular MINUSMA, the situation of which is of great interest to my country
owing to the large number of attacks that have been committed against that Mission
and the casualties suffered regularly by it troops, which include Egyptian
peacekeepers.
In conclusion, Egypt will continue to actively pursue bilateral contacts with
Member States and the United Nations Secretariat within the framework of the Group
of Friends on the Safety and Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, with a view to
pushing for the adoption of effective steps to promote the security and safety of
troops, including by enhancing medical capabilities in fields of operations, and
improve the capacity of missions to collect and analyse information.

21-11710

11/46

S/2021/732

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Fiji to the United Nations
Fiji welcomes this Security Council open debate on this important subject of
technology and peacekeeping. The rapid development of technology has tra nsformed
how societies function and has shaped the nature of conflicts around the world.
Today, the peacekeeping environment has increasingly become more complex,
partly due to innovations in technology and its application in wars and conflicts.
These have increased the challenges to peacekeepers in carrying out their roles; these
also offer new possibilities for better and safer peacekeeping.
The United Nations has recognized that using technology in peacekeeping will
enhance all aspects of peacekeeping. By leveraging technology, peacekeepers will
improve performance, be more responsive to threats, save lives and fulfil their
mandates more efficiently.
Fiji welcomes the initiatives by the Department of Peace Operations to
mainstream relevant technology into peace operations. This is a major challenge to
the United Nations. Funding costs, capacity-building, protection of data and systems,
keeping abreast of developments in technology are challenges that the United Nations
will need to overcome. For many and especially small troop- and police-contributing
countries, this may be a stretch and they will need technical support as well.
Fiji would like to highlight the following:
The Secretary-General has outlined his 2018 strategy on new technologies for
the United Nations system, providing a framework for the United Nations system.
The Department of Peace Operations strategy for the digital transformation of United
Nations peacekeeping is a step towards achieving this overall strategy. This strategy
will need to be supported by all Member States through predictable funding and
capacity-building. The Council has an important role in supporting and by including
technology in peacekeeping in its regular agenda.
Partnerships are important for funding, acquiring and matching the required
technology and providers with the end users. United Nations peacekeeping is not
adequately resourced to keep pace with the rapid developments in technology, and
large troop- and police-contributing countries still lag in their use of technology in
peace operations.
Fiji welcomes the United Nations initiatives on the Partnership for Technology
in Peacekeeping and the United Nations C4ISR Academy for Peace Operations, to
name some, to mainstream the use of technology in peace operations and provide
capacity-building. The Partnership for Technology in Peacekeeping plays an
important role in coordinating partnerships. The United Nations Technology in
Peacekeeping conferences have provided a multilateral forum for all stakeholders to
set objectives, identify gaps and assemble partnerships needed to advance the
integration of technology into peacekeeping.
Collection, use and protection of data in peacekeeping is a sensitive issue, due
to the multinational nature of United Nations peacekeeping, and it can impinge on
host country sovereignty. Guidelines will need to be established and adhered to, by
field missions and all peacekeepers, regarding the collection and the protection of
data. Data collected in peace operations should only be used for peacekeeping
purposes. Its use, protection and disposal should conform to international laws and
norms, and host country guidelines.

12/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

Technology and its products introduced into field missions will need to be
accessible and available to all peacekeepers when required, in line with their roles.
Peacekeepers often work in harsh and hostile conditions, isolated and far from major
infrastructure. Unequal access and unwarranted restrictions can adversely impact
performance, safety and security and mission mandates. Systems should be designed
to be effective in isolated and austere environments, user-friendly, responsive and
robust.
The increase in use of technology and connectivity also increases the
vulnerability of United Nations peace operations to malicious and deliberate acts
using information and communications technology. Technological systems that are
introduced to peace operations will need to be robust to prevent interference, which
will have an impact on peace operations.
Fiji has been contributing to peacekeeping for over 40 years. The safety and
security of all peacekeepers are of paramount importance to Fiji. Fiji reco gnizes that
technology can enhance the performance, safety and security and protection of our
peacekeepers.
Fiji has continued to improve technological support to its peacekeepers. Fiji is
working closely with our bilateral partners in capacity-building to improve
proficiency in the use of technology.

21-11710

13/46

S/2021/732

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Finland to the
United Nations
On behalf of the Nordic countries – Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and
Finland – I wish to thank India for raising this important topic on the Security
Council’s agenda. The Nordics are strong supporters of the Secretary -General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, and we welcome the strengthened focus to
integrate new technologies in the field, in the context of peacek eeping.
The Nordic countries have been steadfast contributors to United Nations
peacekeeping since its very beginning. The safety of our peacekeepers remains a
fundamental priority for us, as it is also a prerequisite for fulfilling the core task and
mandate of peacekeeping, namely, to maintain international peace and security and to
protect the local populations from conflict and violence.
Responsible, effective and sustainable peacekeeping relies on our ability to
protect the protectors.
***
Integrating new technologies in peacekeeping operations is imperative in order
to respond to the emerging threats and challenges of today’s operating environments.
Technology can significantly increase the mission’s safety and security through, for
example, better situational awareness, improved readiness and enhanced field
support, including medical and logistical support, and countering the threats posed by
mines and improvised explosive devises. In this regard, it is essential to focus efforts
and funding on new technologies to improve early warning systems.
New technologies yield significant opportunities; they can increase
effectiveness and bring savings. At the same time, their introduction must be field focused, predictable and driven by the practical needs of the end users on the ground.
And they must be matched with improved capacity and training, especially as
increased use of new technologies may also create new risks for missions, including
as vectors for hybrid threats. We, Member States, have a shared responsibility to
ensure that the resources and capabilities match the requirements of today’s needs.
***
New (digital) technologies have proven their value in the protection of civilians
and ensuring accountability, including in preventing conflict-related sexual violence
and bringing perpetrators to justice. The use of digital technologies must be in
compliance with international law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law. In this context, it is particularly important to follow the “do no
harm principle” and to take gender aspects into account. Norms of responsible State
behaviour provide important guidance for States in relation to the use of digital
technologies.
Climate change and environmental degradation are widely recogniz ed as threat
multipliers and, in many cases, drivers of conflict. Therefore, it is of utmost
importance that sustainable and responsible solutions are employed throughout all
operations and mandate delivery. The Nordic countries encourage utilization of ne w
technology in peacekeeping contexts in order to reduce the missions’ environmental
footprint and, where possible, to improve the health, safety and security of local
communities as well as United Nations personnel. The Nordics encourage the

14/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

inclusion of climate-related security risks in the analyses of country- and regionallevel conflicts.
***
The Secretary-General’s Road Map for Digital Cooperation and the United
Nations digital toolkit in the peace mediation context have provided a useful
framework and recommendations for integrating new technologies even more
comprehensively into the agendas of the United Nations. We also welcome the new
strategy for the digital transformation of United Nations peacekeeping.
Looking ahead to the United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial in Seoul later
this year, the Nordic countries look forward to contributing to this discussion even
more in the context of United Nations peacekeeping.

21-11710

15/46

S/2021/732

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
Germany welcomes the Indian initiative to hold an open debate of the Security
Council on “Technology and peacekeeping”.
The use of modern technologies is becoming increasingly important if we want
to seize our resources more efficiently in order to achieve mission objectives, to
implement mandates (for example with regard to the protection of civilians) and to
protect peacekeepers more effectively.
The safety and security of our peacekeepers remains of utmost importance and
is not negotiable. Technologies can make a tangible difference and they contribute to
saving the lives of peacekeepers, who operate in increasingly dangerous environments
and who are exposed to complex threat scenarios. One concrete example is camp
protection: while a basic protection level is required to control the perimeters of the
camp and the areas around the camp, additional technologies, such as a detection and
warning system against indirect fire, will further contribute to enhancing the
protection of camps.
Germany provides the sense and warning system MANTIS for the airspace
around Camp Castor and the United Nations super camp in Gao, Mali, thereby
improving the safety and security of all peacekeepers deployed therein.
The utilization of technologies must assist the fulfilment of mandated tasks, and
it will contribute to the provision of essential situational awareness. Modern
unmanned aerial systems like the German Heron 1 capability to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) are means
of first choice to monitor large, often remote areas. These systems and other
technologies can also contribute to supporting accountability and to minimizing harm
to civilians in armed conflict.
The current United Nations pilot project “Radio mining” in MINUSMA
(co-financed by Germany and the Netherlands) serves as an additional example for
the improvement of the Mission’s situational awareness by analysing radio broadcasts.
Data-based monitoring of hate speech and calls to violence in social media at the
local, regional and national levels, artificial intelligence-based early warning systems
and other technological tools all contribute to better anticipating of risks and violence
and, hence, increase the security of both United Nations peacekeepers and local
civilians in the operational areas.
In order to be able to leverage the opportunities and the potential of
technologies, training of peacekeepers in particular on digital technologies remains
critical. We need a common understanding of the effective use of the different forms
of technologies, and their respective advantages for the mission, but also limitations
and potential risks they might carry.
At the same time, it is clear that only enhancing digital capabilities and
deploying high-end technologies to missions will not create an advantage all by itself.
Structures have to be aligned, processes to be optimized and interoperability to be
enhanced in order to set necessary preconditions for the full integration and maximum
impact of modern technologies on mandate fulfilment.
In this context, Germany welcomes the launch of the strategy for the digital
transformation of United Nations peacekeeping as a cornerstone for the enhanced
integration of technology in peacekeeping and is looking forward to the discussions
on technology as a cross-cutting theme for the Peacekeeping Ministerial in Seoul this
December.
16/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Guatemala thanks the delegation of India, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council of the United Nations for the month of August 2021, for convening
this ministerial open debate on “Protecting the protectors: technology and
peacekeeping”. At the same time, we also thank the distinguished panellists for their
presentations.
Guatemala shares the criteria mentioned in the concept note circulated by the
delegation of India, in that often peacekeeping missions are underequipped, with
major gaps, facing threats from armed groups, from criminals and terrorists, many of
whom have access to sophisticated weapons and technology. No mission can be
expected to succeed in today’s complex shipments , without the ability to innovate
and major effective use of technology.
The majority of United Nations peacekeeping missions are deployed in complex
and high-risk environments that have compelled the United Nations to better integrate
technology into its field operations. This integration of technology can improve
situational awareness and early warning/action, enhance camp and convoy security,
provide stable Internet and integrated communication networks, strengthen conflict
monitoring and analysis. It is our interpretation that technological solutions can
support United Nations peacekeeping operations in implementing their mandates in
complex environments, helping them to adapt to changing conflict dynamics and
taking advantage of increased efficiencies.
Guatemala believes that the use of new technologies is necessary and useful
within the framework of the implementation of the mandates of the peacekeeping
missions. However, technology must be implemented according to the principles and
aspects included in the frameworks of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and of the full implementation of the three principles of the peacekeeping
operations, namely: consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except for self-defence and/or defence of the mandate.
Guatemala reiterates its concern that peacekeeping personnel continue to be
attacked and that this Organization continues to have casualties on the ground.
Improving the protection and safety of the personnel in peacekeeping operations must
remain a priority. In this regard, we are pleased that measures are taken to improve
the analysis of security initiatives, by making informed and timely decisions about
the activities to be carried out and how to manage the risks faced by the personnel.
This information must be transferred to the troop/police-contributing countries
promptly. The safety of United Nations personnel must continue to be a priority for
the Organization.
Peacekeepers have been the target of direct attacks by terrorist groups; therefore
Guatemala reiterates its position that peacekeeping missions are not designed to fight
terrorism. Guatemala continues to question the scope and implications that the so called robust peacekeeping operations may have. We believe that this type of
operation misrepresents the basic function pursued, since peacekeeping operations
are neither designed nor equipped to impose political solutions through the continued
use of force.
Guatemala believes that the international community has an important space to
strengthen the implementation of the three pillars of work of the United Nations, with
concrete actions that would have a direct and positive impact with the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Security Council, namely providing the host
21-11710

17/46

S/2021/732

country with full access to the Internet, taking into account the impact on the peace
and security mandate. It is our interpretation that technology as a strategic enabler
can be used to enhance security in the field. United Nations personnel, who must
perform in remote and isolated environments, experience many risks of which they
are often unaware and personnel at headquarters do not have such information. In this
regard, the use of communication tools and good use of technology can help gather
real-time information that allows United Nations personnel to stay updated on the
security status in the different mission areas; United Nations personnel must receive
timely and up-to-date information on security in the mission areas.
Guatemala recognizes that early warning systems can be applied to all fields
where a threat to a certain population is predicted, either from armed groups or
criminals whose purpose is to harm civilians in different local communities or
villages. To forecast and prevent future threats and avoid the loss of human lives and
property, for the system to function in an optimum way, it must be integrated by the
population to be protected and the public authorities in charge of mitigating insecurity
actions.
Finally, Guatemala highlights that, based on the feedback from the field, the use
of communication equipment in different peacekeeping missions is not balanced and
equal, taking into account that some missions have a lack of adequate equipment to
be able to carry out effective communication. In some cases, coverage is not available
as a result of obsolete equipment and lack of Internet, limited tactical communication
within the components of the mission and a strategic communication network that is
not used to full capacity. We strongly believe that the United Nations has an important
space to improve this operative issue.

18/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

Annex XI
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of Indonesia to the United Nations, Mohammad K. Koba
Let me begin by thanking India for convening this open debate.
As the face of conflict changes along with the growth of new challenges such
as improvised explosive devices, terrorism and pandemics, the environment where
peacekeepers are deployed has been becoming more complex and dangerous.
The recent increase in the number of attacks against peacekeepers shows how
dangerous the current environment is. Indonesia commends the continued work and
dedication of peacekeepers in these challenging circumstances.
To tackle these ever-growing challenges, peacekeepers need to be fully equipped
with adequate resources to ensure that they could exercise their mandates effectively,
efficiently and safely.
In this regard, let me share the following points.
First, harnessing technology in peacekeeping operations is essential.
Responding to these ever-growing challenges, peacekeepers need to be able to
adapt and innovate rapidly to execute their mandates.
This is especially important in improving peacekeeping intelligence and
situational awareness; strategic communication and community engagement; the use
of technology; and addressing occupational and safety hazards.
We call for all stakeholders to enhance the application and sharing of emerging
technologies in peacekeeping operations, especially in improving the safety and
security of peacekeepers.
Moreover, the application of technology could also be beneficial in increasing
the participation of female peacekeepers in line with resolution 2538 (2020).
In this regard, my delegation welcomes the launch of the strategy for the digital
transformation of United Nations peacekeeping and looks forward to its
implementation.
Second, strengthening training and capacity-building: Indonesia firmly believes
that harnessing technology also calls for proper training in the effective and efficient
application of such technology in missions.
To this end, both predeployment and in-mission training are crucial to prepare
peacekeepers in harnessing any technological improvements.
Indonesia emphasizes the indispensable importance of strengthening the
partnership between all stakeholders in training and capacity-building, especially in
introducing new technological innovations in the field.
Hence, we call for the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing countries
and the Secretariat to enhance communication and partnership in dispersing
technological innovations in a peacekeeping operation.
Third point, prioritizing the safety and security of peacekeepers:
technological innovation in peacekeeping operations should always be aimed towards
enhancing the mission’s effectiveness and efficiency in implementing its mandate
while ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers.

21-11710

19/46

S/2021/732

As a major troop and police contributor, Indonesia attaches great importance to
the safety and security of peacekeepers.
We reiterate the commitment made by the international community in this
endeavour through Security Council resolution 2518 (2020), the report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Declaration of Shared Commitments
of the Action for Peacekeeping. The Action for Peacekeeping Plus also puts a
particular focus on improving the safety and security of peacekeepers, which includes
promoting accountability.
Indonesia calls for all stakeholders to redouble our efforts to implement these
frameworks in the face of rapidly evolving challenges in the field.
We also believe that dialogue remains essential in our joint effort to implement
these frameworks. Together with Brazil, Rwanda and China, Indonesia has
established and is co-chairing the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of
United Nations Peacekeepers to further enhance the dialogue on this issue.
To conclude, Indonesia would like to reiterate its strong commitment to be a
part of the collective commitment to improve the safety and security of peacekeepers,
including through harnessing technological advantages.
Peacekeepers have dedicated their lives and made the sacrifice for the cause of
peace. Their safety and security must remain our top priority.

20/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

Annex XII
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations, Zahra Ershadi
The United Nations peacekeeping operations have been a vital tool for the
fulfilment of the very first and yet the most important purpose of the Organization,
namely “to maintain international peace and security, and to that end: to take effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for
the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace”.
Despite all its challenges, the use of this tool needs to be continued and also
further improved to ensure that peacekeeping operations keep pace with the changing
complex nature of the peace and security context.
In this context, we emphasize the unique and crucial role of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations as the only United Nations forum mandated
by the General Assembly to review comprehensively the whole question of United
Nations peacekeeping operations in all their aspects.
We also underline that the establishment of any peacekeeping operation or
extension of mandate of existing ones or their improvement must be in full conformity
with the principles set forth in the United Nations Charter as well as the basic
principles that have developed to govern such operations.
To that end, special attention must be paid to the full respect for the principles
of sovereign equality, political independence and territorial integrity of all States and
non-intervention in matters that are essentially within their domestic jurisdiction, as
well as impartiality, the consent of the parties, and the non-use of force except in selfdefence and defence of the mandate.
Iran continues to support the implementation of the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which aims at ensuring
collective efforts to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping in order to address urgent challenges facing contemporary
peacekeeping operations.
We emphasize that the policy formulation and decision-making process in all
stages of peacekeeping operations, including with respect to protecting the
peacekeeping forces, must be conducted with the active participation of troop - and
police-contributing countries.
The use of modern technologies should aim at increasing the safety and security
of United Nations personnel, including peacekeepers. At the same time, their use must
be considered on a case-by-case basis and must uphold the principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly the respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Member States, and also the fundamental principles of peacekeeping,
especially the consent of the host State.
We also stress the importance of defining the legal, operational, technical and
financial aspects related to the use of modern technology, in an inclusive and
transparent manner, in appropriate intergovernmental processes. At any rate, any and
all information gathered through advanced technological means must be used
exclusively for the fulfilment of the clearly defined mandates of the operation
concerned.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has hosted one peacekeeping operation of the
United Nations for more than 10 years after the end of the eight-year war imposed as
a result of Saddam Hussein’s aggression against Iran. Likewise, to date, Iranian forces
21-11710

21/46

S/2021/732

have participated in eight peacekeeping operations of the United Nations and four
Iranian citizens have lost their lives in such operations. We stand ready to further
contribute to the peacekeeping operations logistically and militarily, by deploying
troops, military observers, police and civilians.

22/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy would like to thank the Government of India for organizing this open
debate. Today’s event is particularly timely, as it takes place in conjunction with the
adoption of the resolution on protecting the protectors, promoted by India and which
Italy co-sponsored, and with the recent publication of the strategy for the digital
transformation of United Nations peacekeeping, jointly launched by the Department
of Peace Operations, the Department of Operational Support and the Department of
Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance.
Nowadays, technology is undeniably playing an increasingly prominent role in
our society, being an important driving force for inclusive growth, reshaping working
methods and redefining the concept of “security”.
In increasingly complex areas of operations, where peacekeepers face multiple
challenges and serious threats from actors often having access to cutting -edge
equipment, technology could make the difference in enhancing the safety and security
of blue helmets and in allowing them to carry out their mandates more efficiently and
effectively, including when it comes to the protection of civilians.
Italy is the first contributor of blue helmets among Western countries and is
among the main contributors to the peacekeeping budget. We have thus a great stake
in ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers. We firmly believe that
technologies, especially digital ones, may be crucial enablers leading to increased
situational awareness, to a deeper, analysis-driven understanding of the area of
operations, to enhanced field support and to a more incisive multilayered risk
management. Technology may also allow for a reconfiguration of peacekeeping
missions on the ground, making their presence less visible, thus less intrusive and
more acceptable to local populations.
The successful use of unmanned aerial vehicles in peacekeeping operations is
the tangible example of potential benefits stemming from technology and advanced
equipment. In this vein, Italy regularly offers valuable units and assets to the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, such as manoeuvre units, complemented
by a number of niche skill sets and enablers, and utility helicopters.
Technology remains however a double-edged sword to “be handled with care”.
We are convinced that new technological tools, especially those allowing for mining
data, should always be used in an ethical, deontological way, in line with United
Nations guidelines and international law, including human rights law and
international humanitarian law.
That is why we believe that an adequate training of peacekeepers is pivotal. The
familiarization both with advanced equipment and with procedures aimed at using it
in an appropriate manner should be a crucial part of the peacekeepers’ curricula. In
this vein, Italy – through the Center of Excellence for Stability Police Units and
through bilateral programmes – is proud to provide specialized training to
peacekeepers and to conduct capacity-building activities that respect human rights.
Finally, Italy is co-chairing along with Bangladesh the Group of Friends on
Leading Environmental Management in the Field. This is yet another area where it is
possible to foster a fruitful cross-pollination between emerging technologies and
environmental sustainability. An example of this synergy could be mainstreaming the
use of clean technologies and renewable energies in order to minimize the impact of
peacekeeping operations on the ecosystems and on the local communities.

21-11710

23/46

S/2021/732

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I thank the President for convening this important open debate.
United Nations peacekeeping retains a significant role in maintaining
international peace and stability. Today, peacekeepers are deployed in many
challenging environments, and Japan believes it is paramount for all stakeholders,
including troop- and police-contributing countries, Member States, the United
Nations Secretariat and host countries, to ensure their safety and help them implement
their mandates more effectively and efficiently. Here, modern technology must play
a role in enhancing their capabilities.
Simply providing technology to missions or to those in need will not alone be
sufficient to make the most of its benefits. Also, all stakeholders are responsible to
ensure that the technology will be applied in accordance with relevant rul es and
policies such as the United Nations rules and regulations, international law, and laws
and regulations of the host country. The use of technology should take a human centric approach and the dignity of individuals should always be respected. Illicit
transfer or theft of technology and technology-related information should not be
allowed. Therefore, critical is Member States’ assistance to capacity-building of
peacekeepers to be deployed and of missions in maximizing the enabling potential of
technology.
Today, as a firm believer of training and capacity-building’s possibilities to
enhance peacekeeping’s performance as a whole, I would like to showcase two
examples of Japan's good practices.
Training and capacity-building of peacekeepers (United Nations C4ISR
Academy for Peace Operations)
Japan has been a committed supporter of the United Nations C4ISR Academy
for Peace Operations since it was founded in 2015 with the aim of providing
standardized, mission-specific training. Japan has contributed approximately
$4.3 million of voluntary budget to the Academy in total to date, thus strengthening
communications within missions.
Peacekeepers have diverse backgrounds, and when the United Nations procures
and incorporates a certain technology into peacekeeping, it is critical that all
peacekeepers are capable of applying it in the field. Standardized training is therefore
fundamental.
Gender considerations must also be reflected in training and capacity-building.
As technology is more often deployed to the field, female and male peacekeepers
must have equal opportunities to gain necessary skills. Part of Japan’s grants directly
support the women's outreach course, in which 177 female military and police officers
from 57 countries have participated.
Assistance to mission application of technology (telemedicine project)
Besides training and capacity-building for peacekeepers, it is also critical to help the
missions adopt new technologies, particularly in relation to preserving the lives and
safety of personnel.
Responding rapidly to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak, Japan
offered grants of $1.5 million for a telemedicine project by the United Nations
Secretariat. With this, the United Nations will plan pilot projects of applying
24/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

telemedicine in certain missions on the ground, which will provide technological
solutions to save the lives of peacekeepers deployed in remote places.
It is expected that through this project, the United Nations will identify the
telemedicine capabilities needed in other missions, which will lead to a broader
adoption of tele-technology in the future.
To have such contributions and reduce capacity gaps in the use of technology,
we would like to urge partnerships among the United Nations, Member States and
troop- and police-contributing countries to be further enhanced. For instance, the
Triangular Partnership Programme provides a systematized arrangement to make this
matching easier, and it has helped Japan to make timely and relevant contributions to
missions and personnel.
In closing, Japan believes these and other efforts will help the United Nations
incorporate technology into its missions in a way that will allow technological
innovation to become a true strategic enabler.
We stand ready to continue our efforts in this regard.

21-11710

25/46

S/2021/732

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Kazakhstan to the
United Nations
We thank the Indian presidency for drawing attention to the changing nature of
conflicts that have turned more violent, demanding new approaches not only in
conflict resolution but also protection of the blue helmets and blue berets. We pay a
tribute to all peacekeepers who have sacrificed their live for the noble cause of peace.
The increasingly complex mandates and extremely hazardous operating
environments of peacekeeping missions require an overhaul of strategies in all areas:
early warning, intelligence-sharing, ground and aerial reconnaissance, weaponry for
both offensive and self-defence, communication and night equipment, transport, field
hospital units and medical evacuation to mention a few.
Generally, uniformed national contingents are deployed with communications
equipment to allow only internal communication. However, we need a modernized
infrastructure that facilitates communications through the chain of command with
units, sectors and missions headquarters to enable prompt and speedy responses.
In more recent years, a wider range of technology solutions have become
available to address challenges faced on the ground. It is noteworthy that the
fragmented and diverse requirements from vastly varied missions, such as the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, are now consolidated into a more structured and formal
arrangement.
Kazakhstan, therefore, welcomes the Partnership for Technology in
Peacekeeping initiative (PTP), formally established in 2014, which has now opened
new opportunities for effective engagement and capability.
The annual PTP international symposium is the main event of the initiative and
provides a valuable ongoing platform for a high-level technology engagement
between the United Nations and the Member States. We are pleased to announce that
the fifth PTP international symposium was held in Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan, in May
2019. This platform identified current challenges in peacekeeping, with the
corresponding technology solutions and arrangements for establishing partnership
arrangements between varied troop-contributing countries.
Several significant developments that followed are noteworthy.
First, the heightened situational awareness, as well as data-driven peacekeeping
required for both crisis and longer-term decision-making, which resides in various
mission components. Hence, we need an effective management of the information
cycle, combined with the use of data for predictive analysis in our missions.
In this regard, Kazakhstan welcomes the situational awareness technology
platform Unite Aware, which captures and presents information to decision makers in
an intuitive manner, thereby enhancing the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Second, telemedicine, which was a focus area at the PTP symposium in
Kazakhstan, currently has a funded follow-up pilot project arising from the
deliberations of the symposium. Telemedicine is a valuable tool, capable of
augmenting medical support to deployed units. It requires an integrated support
package that includes adequate provision for training and equipment sustainment at
both ends of the link. This new approach has the potential for substantial cost savings,
26/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

as well as cost-effective medical care, and fewer costly evacuations. We thus need to
research further into new advances to better protect the lives of peacekeepers.
Third, the Smart Camp initiative, based on the recommendations of the
environment and eco-responsibility working group at the PTP symposium in
Kazakhstan, can ensure an improved quality of life and protection for our personnel
in the field. It means a search for excellence at all levels, and from the ground to
headquarters level. It is more than just clarity of political vision and mandate. A high
comprehensive performance entails support, equipment, training and utilization of all
scientific developments to have a positive impact on the protection of civilians, safety
and security of peacekeepers, and implementation of all mandated tasks, as well as a
comprehensive framework of high accountability.
Kazakhstan stands ready to engage in all multilateral measures to integrate new
technologies in the increasingly threatening and deadly conflicts that peacekeepers
are deployed in.

21-11710

27/46

S/2021/732

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the
United Nations, Amrit Bahadur Rai
Let me begin by extending my sincere appreciation to the Government of India
for organizing this high-level open debate, under its presidency of the Security
Council, on the important issue of technology and peacekeeping.
I would also like to commend the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing.
We live in a time of spectacular technological evolution. Innovations are being
made in the fields of digital technology, artificial intelligence, robotics, biotechnology
and unmanned vehicles, among others. And such innovations are widely available for
people including miscreants.
Most of today’s military employ autonomous weapon systems, cyberwarfare,
robotics and artificial intelligence among others. However, United Nations
peacekeeping missions are yet to benefit sufficiently from these technological
advances. They lack a wide range of technological enablers which help them maintain
peace and ensure the safety and security of the populations they serve. Furthermore,
the current pandemic revealed the fragilities of peacekeeping missions with regard to
the health and safety of peacekeepers themselves.
As one of the largest troop- and police-contributing countries, Nepal is
concerned about the increasing complexity of peacekeeping missions as they face
asymmetric and unconventional threats. Possible abuse of modern invention is
another facet which poses threats to the safety and security of peacekeeper s. Conflict
areas have become more precarious, risky and challenging with such unconventional
threats from criminals and terrorists.
Evolving threats warrant United Nations peacekeepers to be more agile,
responsive, efficient and confident being equipped with new technologies. We cannot
wait longer to integrate technological innovation into United Nations peacekeeping,
as such innovations are essential for situational awareness, mobility, safety and
security, command and control as well as eco-friendly adaptation in peacekeeping
missions. Modern technologies are also useful in data analysis, gathering of
intelligence, real-time monitoring of the situation, countering improvised explosive
devices and reduction of the environmental footprint, among others. New
technologies must be integrated both at the tactical as well as the strategic level to
protect blue helmets and enhance their capacities to deliver results. Only better and
technologically equipped missions and personnel can better protect civilians and
deliver the mission mandate effectively.
Nepal supports the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping and Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiatives. We also support the soon-to-be-finalized strategy for
the digital transformation of United Nations peacekeeping. Nepal believes that the
upcoming Peacekeeping Ministerial Meeting to be held in Seoul under the cross cutting theme of technology and medical capacity-building would be an important
event for strengthening our partnership in equipping our peacekeepers with new
technologies.
Strong and effective partnership among Member States is essential for
integrating modern technologies in United Nations peacekeeping missions. While we
all are effortful to incorporate modern technologies, there exists a wide gap between
“haves” and “have-nots”. Large numbers of peacekeeping personnel come from those
developing countries which are trying hard to catch the benefits of advanced
technologies. Therefore, the need for strengthened partnership among troop- and
28/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

police-contributing countries, the United Nations and developed countries is essential
for integrating new technologies in peacekeeping as an enabler to our collective
efforts. There is a need for enhanced triangular partnership to enable troop- and
police-contributing countries through transfer of technologies and adequate training
for capacity-building.
To conclude, Nepal emphasizes the sustainable partnership of all stakeholders
to enhance the technological capacity of the peacekeeping missions for effective
mandate delivery. Our collaboration is needed more than ever to narrow capability
gaps, improve peacekeeping performance and leave transforming impacts to those
people whom United Nations peacekeeping serves. Nepal is committed to making
every possible effort to embrace new technologies for its peacekeepers in cooperation
with all relevant stakeholders.

21-11710

29/46

S/2021/732

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations, Munir Akram
Innovation and modern technology have immense potential to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping in the face of mounting challenges. From fulfilling the basic
needs of peacekeepers such as access to water, energy and health to improving
mobility, communications and camp security, technology could make peacekeeping
safer, secure and hence more effective. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has further ramped up the reliance on technology with information and
communications technologies, such as stable Internet and efficient interoperable radio
systems, becoming vital for timely communication in the peace operations.
Designing peacekeeping-specific technologies
Advancing safety and security of peacekeepers and protection of civilians
Both the Security Council and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations have encouraged the use of field-focused, reliable and cost-effective
technologies that are driven by practical needs of end users on the ground. This means
designing peacekeeping-specific technologies which advance the protection of
peacekeepers as well as the security of the local population.
Improving water accessibility
For example, to improve water access to peacekeepers and communities,
advanced technologies focused on water recycling, rain capture and water usage
efficiency should be embraced.
Upgrading health-care technologies
Similarly, health-care technologies are critical enablers for the success of
peacekeepers, especially those deployed in remote areas. High-tech air ambulances,
video telemedicine and well-equipped medical personnel could serve a twofold
objective: one, reduce casualties and two, boost peacekeepers’ morale by displaying
United Nations duty of care towards its personnel.
Improving camp security and convoy protection
A greater focus should also be on technological solutions that could strengthen
camp security, convoy protection and peacebuilding capabilities of peace operations.
As a troop-contributing country with current deployment in 8 out of the 12
United Nations peacekeeping missions, Pakistan considers improving the field medical
system vital for strengthening peacekeeping performance. Agile casualty evacuation/
medical evacuation supported by corresponding air assets; optimal level of field
hospitals; detailing a medical team with each long-range patrolling convoy; and
involving medical personnel in operational planning, especially in high-risk missions,
are the key determinants of life-saving interventions in peace operations.
Accelerating the introduction of counter-improvised explosive
device technology
In recent years, mines and improvised explosive devices have become one of
the leading causes of peacekeeping casualties with the sophistication of such attacks
having risen sharply in several peace operations. To address this pressing challenge,
peacekeeping should accelerate introduction of counter-improvised explosive device
30/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

technologies such as mine-resistant vehicles, improvised explosive device jammers
and ground-penetrating radars. Matching the scale of the threat with the right
technological solutions could enhance situational awareness and facilitate safer
contingent mobility, thus improving performance while mitigating the risk exposure.
Over the years, Pakistan has made a concerted effort, with significant success,
to integrate counter-improvised explosive device technologies and capabilities in its
military planning. We have established a counter-improvised explosive device
training school and a police school of explosives handling, which offer state-of-theart courses on detecting and defusing improvised explosive devices; on gathering and
analysing forensic evidence; and on conducting post-blast investigations. Equipped
with these capabilities, Pakistan is strengthening its already deployed engineering
companies with explosive ordnance disposal and vertical platoons. Given their
exceptional mobility skills which enable them to respond swiftly to any threat or
developing situation, these platoons offer a unique value in protecting lives of
peacekeepers as well as the civilian population.
Ensuring a responsible use of technology
The recent Action for Peacekeeping Plus document rightly envisages an
innovative and tech-enabled peacekeeping architecture for the future. Its realization
would require strengthening trust between various stakeholders, especially the host
States, tech-contributing countries and troop-contributing countries. Using technology
to collect, store and access data has always invoked certain sensitivities and concerns.
A responsible use of technology, which respects national sovereignty and addresses
confidentiality concerns, could expedite the integration of cutting-edge solutions in
peace operations. We therefore recommend that the United Nations system explore
the options for establishing an inclusive framework for the governance of new
technologies, including in the peacekeeping domain.
Pakistan supports the application of new methods, new technologies and new
ways of thinking to United Nations peacekeeping. However, it should be done with
full transparency and in consultation with Member States – an approach advocated in
the 2021 report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and other key
United Nations documents on peacekeeping operations, such as the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
Leveraging technology for dispute and conflict resolution
Based on this approach, “technology” and “innovation” should be committed to
improving the dispute and conflict resolution and mandate implementation capabilities
of peacekeeping missions. They should not be merely leveraged as tools to advance
narrow tactical objectives or promoted as a panacea for overcoming peace and
security challenges. Lasting peace is achieved, not just through improving technical
capabilities of peace operations, but through political engagement driven by solemn
commitment to conflict prevention, peace processes and just political solution to
conflicts. A fundamental requirement for sustainable peace is to enable the
peacekeepers to fulfil their mandated role in fragile security environments. No
amount of technology introduction can bring peace if peacekeepers are denied the
ability to operate in accordance with their mandate.
Harnessing technology to strengthen the peacekeepers
Similarly, technology cannot be a substitute for capable and professional
peacekeepers. Rather than supplanting the human resource in peace operations,
technology should seek to supplement their capabilities. In each mission, the

21-11710

31/46

S/2021/732

deployment of an adequate number of professional peacekeepers, equipped with right
skills and commensurate resources, should be our collective priority.
Promoting green initiatives
As a country deeply committed to climate action, Pakistan welcomes the
commitment to “green solutions” set out in this year’s report of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations. Eco-friendly initiatives combined with resourceefficient practices in field missions can contribute to cost savings, improve selfsufficiency and resilience, leaving a positive legacy for the local communities.
My own country’s experience shows that nature-based solutions to environmental
challenges can create jobs, promote ecosystem-based adaptation and support
economic recovery in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. The catalytic impact of
such green initiatives could feed into the wider United Nations peacebuilding agenda
centred on sustainable development and addressing the root causes of c onflict.
Building partnerships
Moving forward, Pakistan will continue to contribute critical assets, like utility
aviation, signals communication units, engineering companies alongside affordable
field solutions to ensure rapid deployment, especially of infantry units. We look
forward to strengthening this contribution through innovative partnership projects,
both with the Secretariat and Member States, to develop cost-effective, tailor-made
solutions for United Nations peacekeeping. The upcoming Peacekeeping Ministerial
preparatory conference, jointly organized by Pakistan and the Netherlands in October
this year, will dedicate a session to digital technology and innovation, paving the way
for required pledges at the Ministerial Meeting in Seoul.
Bridging the digital gap
As a troop- and police-contributing country, we would also like to underline that
training and capacity-building will play a crucial part in seamless implementation of
the United Nations digital strategy. United Nations-supported training frameworks,
such as the Triangular Partnership Programme and light coordination mechanism,
could focus on building self-sufficient training capacities of host States and troopand police-contributing countries. Support in the development of a national cadre of
trainers, provision and refinement of training materials and building national
capacities to use sophisticated, high-tech equipment are areas that would require
consistent focus and priority. Enhanced national capabilities would surely optimize
the effective and efficient use of modern technologies in the field.

32/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We wish to thank the distinguished speakers for their valuable presentations this
morning, as well as the document circulated among delegations on a strategy for
digital transformation to help strengthen United Nations peacekeeping operations,
which invites us to reflect on the fundamental need to incorporate the use of
technology in actions to consolidate international peace and security.
The use of technology in peacekeeping operations is more important now than
ever before; if technological developments in keeping with current advances are not
available, the ability to meet the stated objectives, which are principles of particular
interest to the international community, are at serious risk.
From the beginning of the first peacekeeping operations, the forces deployed by
the United Nations had considerable technological superiority over the threats they faced;
however, in recent years the technology gap with violent groups has been shrinking.
Current peacekeeping forces require better technology for military and police
operations to assist in meeting the demands of care for the environment, energy
efficiency, observance of the law and social responsibility, inter alia; technology is
essential for facing these challenges through a structure that allows such operations
to work in harmony with the communities in the zones where multinational forces are
deployed.
For the forces we send to these operations, it is essential to strengthen surveillance
and analysis of conflicts through the systematic application of technology that enables
us to process data on potentially violent scenarios more efficiently, with the objective
of providing early warning to political decision-making centres in order to take
measures to prevent conflicts from beginning, spreading or intensifying.
The use of advanced technologies by these forces facilitates training and
capacity-building, which has been demonstrated in the particular context of the spread
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, when virtual media and
technological platforms were a highly useful tool for capacity-building and training
of peacekeeping personnel anywhere in the world.
A good example has been the intensive use of medical technology, which has
helped to increase the effectiveness of health care services, including in the most
remote missions, considerably reducing mortality and morbidity among the personnel
of peacekeeping missions.
Another important contribution of the implementation of new technologies in
such operations is the improvement in the capacity for criminal investigation and
accountability through facial recognition, electronic surveillance, data bases, etc.
Current technology offers important tools to detect and identify criminal conduct that
can cause harm to the civilian population or United Nations troops. Such technologies
increase surveillance capacity and in turn offer solid evidence enabling such cases to
be brought to court.
Lastly, I would like to underline that Peru is in agreement with the views of the
presenters that the use of innovative technologies will contribute to a tangible
improvement in coordination and deployment of United Nations peacekeeping missions;
it will also help to improve the security of peacekeeping personnel with regard to
surveillance of camps and convoys, disarming of explosives, and unmanned vehicles,
which could reduce the exposure of our personnel to risk and protect them from proximity
to and/or presence in areas where there is a high probability of violent incidents.
21-11710

33/46

S/2021/732

Annex XIX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the
United Nations
Poland would like to thank India for organizing this timely and important
debate. We also express our appreciation to Secretary-General António Guterres for
his valuable intervention.
Peacekeeping remains one of the most effective United Nations tools in the
promotion and maintenance of international peace and security. Today’s United
Nations peacekeepers often operate in complex security environments, facing
asymmetrical threats. While peacekeeping is constantly evolving to meet new
challenges and implement multidimensional mandates, we need stronger preventive
measures in order to address new security risks and threats.
The 2015 report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
underscored the need to ensure effective uptake of field-appropriate technology in
support of peace operations and stated that technology and innovation are critical for
the operational impact of current and future United Nations peace operations. In this
vein, Poland fully supports the call to better integrate the use of technologies in order
to improve the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Keeping in mind the challenges and opportunities arising from the application
of technology and innovation in peacekeeping, we need to advance the technologies
that are field-focused, reliable and cost-effective. It is particularly important to study
how the use of technology can enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers,
strengthen their health and well-being, support shelter and camp security and
management, as well as enhance capabilities for early warning and protection of
civilians.
We fully subscribe to the conviction that operational performance and the safety
and security of peacekeepers are strongly interlinked. It is pivotal that peacekeeping
missions evolve their capabilities and systems to remain agile and effective. In this
spirit, Poland highlights the importance of taking advantage of relevant technology
in order to improve situational awareness, enhance field support and facilitate
mandate implementation. We also stress the need to bridge the capacity gaps among
troop- and police-contributing countries in the use of technology.
We underscore that situational awareness is essential for self-protection, but also
for protecting civilian populations. Digital technologies allow more systematic
capture and processing of large amounts of data, strengthening conflict monitoring
and analysis, and thereby contribute to making faster and more informed decisions.
Problems of peacekeeping missions arising from technological deficits,
especially in the fields of situational awareness, safety and security of peacekeepers
and protection of civilians, will have a growing effect on efficiency of the United
Nations missions and operations across the globe. Therefore, Poland recognizes the
need to provide modern equipment and technology to peacekeepers and, at the same
time, wishes to highlight that many Member States already possess and are ready to
deploy those capabilities.
Unfortunately, in some cases peacekeeping forces are facing resistance from the
host States, which happen to be reluctant to the deployment of certain types of
equipment and technology. That is why it is crucial that the Secretariat, the Security
Council and all the relevant stakeholders work closely with the host States’ authorities
in order to strengthen understanding and acceptance of usage of relevant capabilities.
Ensuring security of the United Nations personnel, peacekeeping forces and civilians
34/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

should remain a priority for all Member States. Bearing in mind that this is a joint
endeavour, Poland highlights the primary responsibility of the host States in this
regard.
Poland believes that application of new technological tools in peacekeeping can
contribute to making a real difference in the field. In this vein, Poland fully supports
the efforts of the Secretariat to develop the strategy for the digital transformation of
United Nations peacekeeping.

21-11710

35/46

S/2021/732

Annex XX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Portugal to the
United Nations
Portugal thanks India for organizing for the first time an open debate on
technology and peacekeeping, which will certainly be conducive to the sharing of
good practices and drawing up guidance on the use of technology in peacekeeping
operations.
We hope that this open debate may be the beginning of structured discussions
on these matters and a way to attain common understanding and to reach consensus.
Setting out a vision for the use of the new technological developments of today and
tomorrow and identifying its limits are a fundamental question that will be at the heart
of our action in the years to come.
Emerging technologies can represent both opportunities and risks to peace and
security. On the one hand, they can instil weaknesses in the security, economic,
political, cultural and social aspects of peacekeeping operations. On the other hand,
they can be real game changers in enhancing peacekeeping performance and the
efficient implementation of the mandates in complex conflict contexts. The use of
modern technology and innovations can also help preserve and sustain life in the field
and reduce missions’ environmental footprint.
Technology can also increase the effectiveness of the peacekeeping operations,
allowing for: better-informed and timelier decision-making; improved monitoring,
evaluation and reporting processes; better security and safety of peacekeeping
personnel; improved training and capacity-building of both troops and civilians; as
well as identifying trends in technology use by parties to conflict.
In counter-terrorism operations, big data and advanced analytics and machine
learning can also improve the capabilities of intelligence and reconnaissance, as well
as the analysis and prediction of terrorist behaviour.
To ensure that technology fosters improved performance in peacekeeping
operations, we need to further develop accountability systems that measure impact
rather than tracking intermediate factors. Many peacekeeping operations have also
begun implementing the Comprehensive Performance Assessment System that aims
to better assess mission impact and feed information on impact into planning
processes.
The added value of the multidimensional character of peacekeeping operations,
with civilian, military and police personnel deployed under one mandate and
structure, requires more integrated planning and cooperation to allow for the full use
of the personnel and technological capabilities that missions have.
Situational awareness is crucial to achieving the mandated tasks, in particular
keeping pace with perpetrators of violence when tactics are directed to committing
violence against civilians. Maintaining situational awareness can be better achieved
through an information and intelligence cycle that includes collecting information
about a threat environment, analysing that information, disseminating analysis to key
personnel and using analysis as the basis for planning and decision-making. Missions
need to improve and streamline their information-sharing and data management
systems to solve operational gaps.
The use of big data and advanced analytics as well as artificial intelligence can
provide peacekeeping missions with better and more robust command, control and
communications systems, as well as advanced planning processes based on situational

36/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

awareness with early warning on risks and opportunities and relevant updated
information about threats.
The United Nations peacekeeping missions must be capable of deploying and
redeploying rapidly within a mission area with minimum delay. To execute their
mandates effectively and efficiently, peacekeeping missions must be able to move fast
to acquire, validate and fuse information from a wide range of openly available
sources to enhance situational awareness, increase security and support decisionmaking to an early response according to United Nations protocol. New technologies
can also play a role here, with unmanned aerial vehicles and signal detection helping
to strengthen the situational awareness and early warning processes of peacekeeping
missions.
It bears, nonetheless, underlining the need to regulate these new technologies
and ensure the respect of human rights. Besides the moral and ethical considerations
that emerge from certain technological developments, the use of emerging
technologies should take into account compliance with obligations under existing
international law, in particular international humanitarian law. In that context, we
underscore the importance of the implementation of guiding principles, such as the
ones recommended by the Group of Governmental Experts related to emerging
technologies in the area of lethal autonomous weapons systems.

21-11710

37/46

S/2021/732

Annex XXI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
I thank the President for convening today’s meeting on such an important and
relevant topic. Indeed, improving the technological capabilities of United Nations
peacekeeping operations has become a pressing priority for all of us. The release of
the strategy for the digital transformation of United Nations peacekeeping is yet
another telling example. Peacekeepers are operating in an increasingly hostile
environment, and it is our shared responsibility to equip them with better technology.
In this regard, we commend the role of the Security Council for drawing greater
attention to this vital issue. Particularly, we welcome the adoption of the resolution
on accountability for crimes against peacekeepers, which the Republic of Korea proudly
co-sponsored. As the host country of the 2021 Seoul United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial, the Republic of Korea has been emphasizing the importance of this issue
and believes that this resolution will contribute to enhancing peacekeeping by reaffirming
our collective commitment to promote accountability for crimes against peacekeepers.
Against this backdrop, I would now like to highlight the following three points.
First of all, digital transformation of the peacekeeping operations is not an
option, but a necessity. Hostile actors are employing advanced technologies in
complex ways. We are also witnessing a concerning trend of misinformation and
disinformation campaigns against peacekeeping operations over social media. At the
same time, technologies have enabled armed groups to launch more lethal, physical
threats that target blue helmets and peacekeeping missions. We have to face this
reality and adapt as quickly as possible. Accordingly, we need better equipment and
facility systems, such as the smart camp, to protect peacekeepers and ensure the
successful delivery of mandates. Therefore, I call upon this Council to consider
incorporating technology deployment when designing peacekeeping missions.
Secondly, implementation is the key. The best strategy is the one that is
implemented. Regarding the digital transformation strategy, we should also start
focusing on political support, funding and resources to carry out the strategy. With
this in mind, the Republic of Korea would like to reassure our steadfast political
support for the implementation stage and remind everyone that the upcoming United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial in Seoul this December can provide an invaluable
platform to show political will and galvanize substantial support.
Thirdly, peacekeeping is essentially a collective effort, and even more so is
incorporating technology into peacekeeping, as it requires shared responsibility and
stronger partnership of Member States and the Secretariat. Technological transformation
in peacekeeping operations requires a multipronged approach, including changing
mindsets and providing necessary equipment. No one can do this alone – whether it
is a troop-contributing country, capacity contributor or the Secretariat. As such, we
need to scale up enduring and strong partnership for all peacekeeping stakeholders.
For our part, Korea is highlighting technology, along with medical capacity-building,
as one of the cross-cutting themes of the upcoming Peacekeeping Ministerial in Seoul
with a view towards encouraging concrete pledges and synergizing partnerships.
I would like to conclude my remarks by re-emphasizing the importance of the
Ministerial, where the Member States will have an invaluable opportunity to explore
ways to collaborate and contribute to advancing the application of technology in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The Republic of Korea cordially invites Member
States to take part in the process with tangible pledges this year. We will individually
reach out to each of you to follow up and discuss your pledges moving forward.
38/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

Annex XXII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Rwanda to the
United Nations
We thank India for organizing today’s ministerial open debate on “Protecting
the protectors: technology and peacekeeping”. We also thank the briefers for their
insightful presentations. Rwanda attaches great importance to the protection of
peacekeepers, which is a crucial component of peacekeeping mandates.
Over the last few decades, the peacekeeping environment has increasingly
become hostile as reflected in increased peacekeeper fatalities. Threats range from
hostile attacks to pandemics, accidents and natural disasters, among others.
As we engage in the fight against all these various threats, we need to leverage
the full potential of digital technology for the protection of peacekeepers and the
civilians they are mandated to protect.
The evolving nature of hostile attacks against peacekeepers and civilians calls
for the use of technologies such as intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
capabilities for expanded situation awareness capabilities to detect and pre -empt
attacks by peace spoilers as well as the ability to analyse warning signs, collect realtime intelligence to make better-informed decisions and take timely preventive
actions to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers, civilians and their mandate.
In several theatres where United Nations peacekeepers are deployed,
technological tools and platforms are increasingly being used by negative forces to
disinform local communities and propagate hate messages including messages
targeting peacekeepers. In a stark contrast, as stakeholders of United Nations
peacekeeping, we have been lagging behind in the use of technological tools and
platforms to counter misinformation and provide local communities with verified
facts. Appropriate use of digital technologies and platforms could cont ribute
significantly to the promotion of peace, culture and dialogue as means of solving
conflict and countering hate messages. Enabling this will call for investment in
providing Internet connectivity, to close the digital divide and provide digital skill s
both to the peacekeepers and key communities where they are deployed, in particular
communities of young people. The Internet, digital skills and platforms are important
enablers in the new peacekeeping operating environment.
All this should aim at paving the way for a smart peacekeeping mission
environment that deals effectively and efficiently with health challenges, natural and
man-made disasters and hostile actions against peacekeepers and civilians.
Lastly, while we all believe that the technology should help the mission to
deliver on its mandate, measure performance and foster accountability for
peacekeeping, Rwanda strongly believes that this should be in full respect of the host
nation’s sovereignty. The use of the technology in United Nations peacekeeping
missions should be well guided by a sense of respect for privacy, ethical boundaries
and the host nation laws.

21-11710

39/46

S/2021/732

Annex XXIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
Foremost my delegation expresses its appreciation to the Permanent Mission of
India for convening this meeting to highlight the critical role of technology in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. As the world’s technological revolution proceeds,
so too must United Nations peacekeeping operations, specifically as war and conflict
evolves into new realities and new challenges emerge with the use of modern
technology.
We also wish to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his informative remarks.
As a troop- and police-contributing country, South Africa acknowledges the
need to advance the use of technology which remains germane to the evolving
security threats and dangerous operational environment for our peacekeepers,
compounded by the ramifications of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
South Africa would like to raise the following:
1.

The imperative need for early warning, peacekeeping intelligence/
information gathering and analysis.

2.

The need for enhanced support to peacekeepers to mitigate attacks through
appropriate training and capacity-building, including from improvised
explosive devices, as well as from threats from new technologies,
including smart technologies.

3.

Advancing technologies in health care.

4.

The necessity of partnerships.

We wish to reiterate that South Africa fully supports the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative in addressing the systemic challenges that peacekeeping
operations face, and we are also fully supportive of the important strategy for the
digital transformation of United Nations peacekeeping that seeks to advance the use
of technology across the Action for Peacekeeping themes, including performance,
safety and security, politics, protection and peacebuilding. The strategy’s action and
goal-oriented approach, with a defined timeline, is an excellent road map to advance
our shared goal of better integrating technologies across peacekeeping, while
mitigating potential risks.
And indeed we must acknowledge, as various speakers have done here today,
that an increase in technological capacity brings with it new risks for misuse of this
technology. This necessitates the development of clear principles, guidelines and
policies that ensure that new technologies are used in strict compliance with
applicable international law, including human rights law.
We acknowledge the benefit of technology in early warning, peacekeeping
intelligence and information gathering and analysis in order to protect the protectors.
South Africa also recognizes the efficacy of peacekeeping intelligence utility in the
protection of civilians and enjoins the United Nations to seek the collaboration and
consent of host States when undertaking such sensitive activities.
We condemn in the strongest terms the continued killing and all acts of violence
against United Nations peacekeeping personnel and we call upon host States to hold
perpetrators of these heinous crimes to account. We also condemn the increased use
of improvised explosive devices in attacks against peacekeepers and call for a unit ed
approach in finding and implementing a technological approach that can be rapidly
deployed, in mitigating against this growing and deadly threat to our peacekeepers.
40/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

The improvement of situational and early warning capabilities has a direct
impact on safety and security in the field. For example, on 25 April 2021, incoming
rockets and mortars were detected in advance of impact on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali camp in Kidal. This
enabled staff to take refuge in bunkers and contributed to lives saved. There are,
however, instances whereby missions are underequipped, with major gaps in both
equipment and training and thus face serious threats from armed groups, criminals
and terrorists, many of whom have access to sophisticated weapons and technology.
It is therefore important that deployed uniformed personnel are well equipped with
appropriate and properly fitting equipment for the threat environment. In this context,
it is imperative that the United Nations forms part of the predeployment training of
contingents, in order to enhance the level of training of troops.
It pleases me to inform the Council that the United Nations sixth Partnership for
Technology in Peacekeeping symposium will be hosted by South Afri ca in the first
half of 2022. Preparations are under way to hold this event in Pretoria. Details
regarding the logistics and dates will be communicated in due course.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is a sobering reminder that
adequate health care is vital in protecting the protectors and in increasing their
operational effectiveness. Technologies in health care are important to ensure that
peacekeepers are able to access clean and high-quality medical care when they are
deployed in remote areas. One of the main problems that troops face is the vast
distances between medical facilities in the regions where peacekeeping operations are
being conducted. Providing every peacekeeping unit with high-quality medical
trauma packs that include the latest in emergency care technologies is important in
mitigating for these vast distances between medical facilities. It is important to
provide highly trained medical personnel in every region that peacekeepers are
operating in, as well as provide training to as many unit personnel as possible so that
they can provide their own care when in a remote location in an emergency.
Our final point is to reinforce the significance of partnerships, particularly
between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations. We see merit
in the sharing of best practices, the pursuit of training and capacity-building between
the United Nations and regional organizations, in particular the African Union, as
well as among the regional groups and training centres.
To conclude, we pay tribute to the men and women who have served in the
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Their commitment and dedication have
saved scores of lives and continue to do so during these most unprecedented times,
and we owe them a great deal of gratitude for their efforts.

21-11710

41/46

S/2021/732

Annex XXIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
I thank India for this debate and the speakers for their contributions.
One peacekeeper lost continues to be one too many. The Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, reminded us of this during the debate
at the end of May. Peacekeepers carry out invaluable work, while being exposed to
the risks inherent in peace missions. The number of casualties remains unacceptable
high. All our efforts to protect those who protect others are necessary.
Switzerland welcomes the launch of the Strategy for the Digital Transformation
of Peacekeeping. We are confident that it will contribute to a more efficient and
effective use of technology and a better implementation of peace mission mandates.
It is therefore important that the Security Council recognizes the contribution of
technology to enhance peacekeeping and considers the following:
1.
The use of technology can improve the safety and security of
peacekeepers. It can help predict and detect threats, improve intelligence coordination
and analysis, help deal with misinformation and make operations more efficient.
However, new technologies can also be used for harmful purposes and pose a risk to
peace missions. For example, if a mini-drone can be a vector for improvised explosive
devices against United Nations forces, it can also be used for rescue. In this regard, a
Swiss company developed the world’s first collision-tolerant search-and-rescue drone
able to look for victims in places difficult to access. The Council should fully consider
the benefits of new technologies while mitigating their risks.
2.
The principle “do no harm” is crucial: technologies must be developed and
used in full compliance with international law. New technologies often rely on
extensive collection of data to function properly. However, this same data can be
misused. In this regard, Switzerland, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs are working
through the Humanitarian Data and Trust Initiative to ensure the responsible use of
technologies, particularly data in the humanitarian field. The development of clear
principles for the responsible use of technologies, as envisaged in the new Strategy,
is therefore essential and should take into account experiences in other areas.
3.
Capacity-building of peacekeepers can greatly benefit from the adequate
use of modern technologies. It is important to raise awareness of troops regarding the
utility and use of new technologies in order to allow their quick and efficient uptake
in the field. To this end, Switzerland contributes to the Secretariat’s work on the
digitization of the core pre-deployment training modules. The Council should
recognize the role of training that meets the requirements of the digital age as well as
the expertise of Member States in this area.
The use of new technologies is essential for the safety and security of
peacekeepers. However, these technologies can only have the desired effect when the
framework conditions for peace missions, such as the normative framework,
infrastructure, logistics and training are ensured. Modern technologies can make a
real difference when used properly. As a candidate for the Security Council,
Switzerland will continue to be committed to the responsible use of new technologies
and to further promote peace through innovation.

42/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

Annex XXV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the
United Nations
I would like to express my gratitude to the Indian Security Council presidency
for the initiative to take up the issue of challenges and opportunities arising from the
application of technology and innovation in peacekeeping.
Ukraine is an active troop contributor and was one of the initiators of the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel of 1994 and
one of the first States that ratified it in July 1995. Hence, for Ukraine the topic of our
discussion has very practical meaning.
That is why we fully support the presidential statement on the topic of the debate
as well as the Council’s resolution on protecting the protectors adopted earlier today.
With armed conflict situations getting more and more volatile, violent and
complex, the use of modern technologies to help peacekeeping missions carry out
their mandates and protect themselves becomes as relevant as ever.
No mission can succeed in today’s complex environments without the ability to
innovate and make effective use of technology, including unmanned, unarmed aerial
systems, radars, sensors, night vision and night flying capabilities, among many
others.
Of course, technology may not supplant the need for human presence but it can
enhance peacekeepers’ abilities to do their job more effectively.
It is vital to ensure effective cooperation between all relevant actors, including
troop-contributing countries, host countries and the Secretariat, to reduce the capacity
gaps and to promote the responsible use of technology in peacekeeping operations.
We would also like to encourage the Council members to engage more actively
and give every support to the Secretariat in securing the use of appropriate modern
technologies in peacekeeping operations while considering the mandates’
establishment or renewal. We believe that all key mandate areas – including
protection of civilians, policing and upholding the rule of law, as well as
border/boundary demarcation and monitoring – would benefit from the deployment
of technologies.
Strengthening the intelligence capacities of operations should also be envisaged.
In this regard Ukraine welcomes the peacekeeping intelligence policy presented by
the Secretariat in 2019 and considers it important to continue practical work on
improving peacekeeping operations’ intelligence, in order to provide them with
advanced information about possible terrorist threats against the mission or civilians.
Ukraine welcomes the decision to make the issue of technology a cross-cutting
theme for the 2021 United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial, scheduled to take place
in Seoul in December. It is important to conduct frank and constructive discussion on
the issue with a view to elaborating specific recommendations on how to ensure more
effective use of technologies in peacekeeping operations.
We also welcome the strategy for the digital transformation of United Nations
peacekeeping. Ukraine fully shares the goals of the strategy and looks forwar d to
further efforts to maximize the potential of the use of current technologies in
peacekeeping operations.
Ukraine’s involvement in United Nations peacekeeping did not halt even at the
height of the ongoing armed aggression against my country. Furthermore, Ukrainian
21-11710

43/46

S/2021/732

blue helmets are deployed in some of the most challenging and perilous environments
and continue playing an instrumental role in reaching peace in conflict zones around
the world.
Ukraine has always been a strong and reliable partner of the Organization in
peacekeeping activities and will remain its steadfast supporter and contributor. We
believe that our collective success in peacekeeping depends on all stakeholders
playing their respective roles with unwavering commitment.
In this context we support the United Nations Partnership for Technology in
Peacekeeping initiative, which offers a unique opportunity to strengthen support to
United Nations peacekeeping, using innovative technological capacities that meet the
needs of United Nations peace operations to ensure that we have well-structured,
equipped and trained forces ready to effectively deliver on their challenging
mandates.
It is important to explore all available cutting-edge technologies and best
practices that can contribute towards the protection of civilians and United Nations
personnel and allow for safer and more successful peacekeeping missions.

44/46

21-11710

S/2021/732

Annex XXVI
Statement of the United Arab Emirates
[Original: Arabic]
Although the world has made tremendous technological progress, we must,
nonetheless, determine how to make the best use possible of technological
innovations in order to address the conflicts and challenges of our time. The United
Arab Emirates firmly believes that new and emerging technologies can revolutionize
United Nations peacekeeping operations and consolidate international peace and
security. Accordingly, it is imperative to make it easier for peacekeeping operations
in the field to have access to the technology that they need in order to carry out their
duties successfully.
The ability of peacekeeping forces to have easy access to new and emerging
technologies will improve their situational awareness and provide early warning of
looming challenges and provide data that are useful for protecting women and
children. New and innovative synthetic materials can be used to protect peacekeeping
forces from threats or menaces, and the use of new energy technologies and batteries
will improve the effectiveness and reduce the carbon footprint of such forces.
The United Arab Emirates has been among the first countries in the world to
adopt new technologies, because we understand their power and the frameworks that
must be put in place in order to realize fully their potential. Innovation will be one of
our priorities during our membership of the Security Council next year, with a
particular focus on the role of technology in mediation, conflict resolution,
humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping.
With that in mind, the United Arab Emirates offers the following
recommendations:
• First, peacekeepers should have the ability use unmanned aircraft systems and
unmanned aircraft for intelligence-gathering and surveillance purposes. In
addition, such aircraft can be used to provide early warning about con flicts and
natural disasters, without posing a risk to any individuals or carrying out a direct
intervention that may endanger lives. In order to do so, the United Nations must
address stakeholders’ legitimate concerns regarding the deployment and use of
unmanned aircraft systems and drones to increase the effectiveness of peace
operations, as the Secretary-General stresses in his strategy on new
technologies.
• Second, the use of renewable energy offers an opportunity to mitigate the
security risks associated with peacekeeping operations. Currently, peacekeeping
missions rely on diesel fuel convoys, which often cross front lines and pass
through unsafe areas. Integrating renewable energy sources into the energy
matrix of peacekeeping operations would reduce that risk. In addition,
renewable energy sources offer important benefits, most notably lower
operating costs and reduced greenhouse gas emissions, as well as enhanced
access to energy. The continued support of the Security Council for that process
is critical to achieving the target established by the United Nations of 80 per
cent renewable energy usage by 2030. My Permanent Mission, in collaboration
with the Permanent Mission of Norway and the Powering Peace organization,
hosted a discussion on how renewable energy can be used in future
peacekeeping operations. We look forward to continuing this important
conversation, particularly in the context of the Security Council, over the
coming year.

21-11710

45/46

S/2021/732

• Finally, technology must be used and developed in a gender-sensitive manner in
order to better protect women and girls against sexual and gender-based
violence, because they are a group that is particularly vulnerable in times of
conflict and in post-conflict situations. Technology and data can be used to
enhance the capacity of peacekeeping forces in that regard. Geospatial
technology can be used to identify risks to vulnerable populations, particularly
in instances of sexual and gender-based violence. In addition, communications
technology can be used for information-sharing, reporting, documenting abuses
and coordinating responses to crises.
The UAE firmly believes that technology, when used properly, will open many
new doors for peace operations. We are committed to working with Member States
and the United Nations system to develop new methods and tools that can help us to
maximize the benefits of using modern technologies in the quest to maintain
international peace and security.

46/46

21-11710
