S/PV.8873

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8873rd meeting

Tuesday, 5 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2021/807)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-27478 (E)
*2127478*

S/PV.8873

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2021/807)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou
Keita, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; and Ms. Nelly Godelieve Madieka Mbangu,
Coordinator of Sauti Ya Mama Mukongomani/Voice of
Congolese Women.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/807, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Keita, Ambassador Abdou Abarry,
Permanent Representative of the Niger, in his capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Ms. Mbangu.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I thank the Security
Council for this new opportunity to address it to
present the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/807)
on the activities of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and to provide an overview of the
current situation in the country.
2/21

05/10/2021

I would like to focus my briefing today on
the overview I presented to the Council in March
(see S/2021/316, annex I) and the challenges and
opportunities that arise on the road that we must travel
together with the Government and the Congolese
people in order to continue consolidating the country’s
democracy, strengthen its institutions and move forward
resolutely towards stabilizing the eastern provinces and
ensuring the protection of civilians.
The first, and arguably the greatest, challenge
concerns security and the protection of civilians in the
eastern part of the country. Since the declaration of a
state of siege by the Government in North Kivu and
Ituri provinces, the Mission has redoubled its efforts
to support the armed forces, the police forces and the
judicial authorities in order to restore the presence
and authority of the State in each of the territories
concerned.
The
force’s
intelligence-gathering
capabilities have been enhanced. Training is provided
to the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) on military tactics and respect for the
principles of human rights and humanitarian law.
The state of siege made it possible to strengthen
the partnership between MONUSCO and the FARDC,
which translates into progress on the planning and
execution of operations. In that regard, all rapid reaction
units should be deployed by the end of October to
strengthen our capacities to protect civilians during joint
operations against armed groups, in accordance with
the human rights due diligence policy. Nevertheless,
much remains to be done, including to ensure that
the human rights of the population are systematically
respected in the fight against armed groups.
The promulgation of the ordinance creating the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme, on 5 July, and the
subsequent appointment of the national coordinator
represent a great opportunity. There is a close link
between the state of siege and the Programme, which
takes complementary approaches to ensure the
sustainable dismantling of armed groups. I assured
the President and the Prime Minister that the United
Nations is fully at the disposal of the Government
to advance those processes, including through the
sub-working group on the Programme between the
Government and MONUSCO.
Finally, the Mission also intensified its political
engagement with actors from the conflict zones so
21-27478

05/10/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

that they support the implementation of the state
of siege and maintain a constructive dialogue with
military governors.
Although joint military operations against the
Allied Democratic Forces resulted in the dismantling
of several of the group’s strongholds, human rights
violations perpetrated by State and non-State
actors — in particularly in Ituri, North Kivu and
South Kivu provinces — remain worrisome. Between
June and August, 367 people were the victims of
arbitrary and extrajudicial killings, and 203 others,
in particular women and children, were subject to
sexual violence. In some regions, in particular in
South Kivu, intercommunal conflicts have been
fuelled by hate speech. I unequivocally condemn all
hate speech, including recent statements encouraging
the “cleansing” of Hauts Plateaux and justifying the
murder of members of the Banyamulenge community.
Such populist, belligerent speech poses a threat to the
country’s stability and should be judicially sanctioned
in a way that sets an example.
The security situation and difficulties in
accessing the east of the country continue to hamper
humanitarian operations in a context in which one in
three people requires assistance. Food insecurity and
cyclical epidemics are major concerns. Attacks against
schools and hospitals have exacerbated humanitarian
challenges in several regions in the east, in particular in
Ituri. With more than 5 million people displaced within
the country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has the highest number of displaced on the African
continent. More than 26 million Congolese people are
suffering from food insecurity, that is, 29 per cent of
the population. I would urge Member States to increase
their contributions to the 2021 humanitarian response
plan, which provides $1.98 billion to meet priority
needs. To date, unfortunately, the plan has received
only slightly more than one quarter of its financing.
I would like to underscore the unwavering
commitment of MONUSCO and the United Nations
country team to a zero-tolerance policy for sexual
exploitation and abuse and to provide comprehensive
assistance to victims. Following recent allegations
regarding the response to Ebola, the humanitarian
country team in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has strengthened its systems to prevent and combat
sexual exploitation and abuse. To do so, $1.5 million has
been made available through the humanitarian fund.

S/PV. 8873

(spoke in English)
The second challenge — which I have already
addressed in my previous exchanges with the
Council — concerns the process of democratic
consolidation. While the formation of a new
Government in April this year provided an opportunity
to advance on critical reforms, the focus of political
actors and civil society alike is increasingly gravitating
towards the 2023 elections. There is still no consensus
on the composition of the National Independent
Electoral Commission, and several members of the
opposition have organized rallies to contest the reform
of the Commission, which has already been adopted
by Parliament. In this context of political suspicion,
I reiterate the need for an inclusive and peaceful
electoral process founded on dialogue, trust and
transparency. To that end, MONUSCO continues to
pursue its good offices with actors across the political
spectrum, including to advocate for increased women’s
participation in this process.
(spoke in French)
Beyond those challenges, the implementation of the
transition plan that was submitted to the Council as an
annex to the current report of the Secretary-General
is a real opportunity for the Congolese Government
and the United Nations system. The operationalization
of the plan is closely linked to the Government’s
programme of action and will hinge to a large extent on
the ability of the authorities to finance their priorities
and to create the conditions necessary for the Mission’s
withdrawal. The Government’s draft law on financing
for 2022, which focuses on security, education and
health care while providing budget lines to speed up
economic growth, is a step in the right direction. The
ongoing resolute support of partners in achieving those
far-reaching programmes will be extremely important.
With a view to the Mission’s withdrawal from
the province of Tanganyika in June 2022, the Mission
is working closely with the agencies, funds and
programmes to ensure the necessary programme
assistance to build on the gains made in the province
to date and to deal with the last remaining pockets
of insecurity. Clearly, that will integrate the lessons
learned from the withdrawal from the Kasai in June of
this year.

21-274783/21

S/PV.8873

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

(spoke in English)
Finally, I would like to highlight President
Tshisekedi’s ongoing efforts to improve the political
climate in the Great Lakes region through active
diplomacy and the conclusion of bilateral agreements
aimed at fostering increased economic cooperation.
As I have previously noted, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s term at the helm of the African
Union offers an opportunity to not only foster peace,
stability and development in the Great Lakes region
but also to consolidate the partnership between that
continental body and the United Nations. Special Envoy
Xia and I will continue to work hand in hand to support
the realization of the Secretary-General’s strategy for
the Great Lakes region, in close consultation with the
Governments of the region.
As we approach the renewal of MONUSCO’s
mandate, I believe that the joint transition plan
constitutes a road map that can help guide the work of
the Mission in the coming years and prepare the ground
for its orderly and responsible withdrawal. That must
not obscure the fact that there is still much to do to
silence the guns in the eastern provinces, foster the
political dialogue necessary to pave the way for credible
and transparent elections in 2023, and support the
long-term strengthening of the country’s institutions. I
therefore call on the Council to continue to provide its
full backing to MONUSCO, including by endorsing the
joint transition plan with adequate financial resources
and playing an active role in its operationalization.
The President: I thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Abarry.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to address the Council in my capacity as Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I intend to give an overview of
the Committee’s work since my most recent briefing to
the Council, on 6 October 2020 (see S/2020/987).
Since my previous briefing, the Committee has
had a total of three in-person meetings, all in 2021.
Because of the coronavirus disease pandemic, it also
met informally by video-teleconference on three
occasions in 2020 and four in 2021. In 2020, during the
informal consultations held by video-teleconference on
20 November, the Committee heard briefings on the
arms embargo presented by the head of the Joint Mission
4/21

05/10/2021

Analysis Centre of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO); several representatives of the
MONUSCO Arms Embargo Working Group; the head
of the Programme Planning and Management Section
of the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS);
and a representative of UNMAS in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Committee also heard a
briefing from the Secretariat.
During the informal consultations held by videoteleconference on 3 December, the Committee heard a
briefing from the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2020/1283) and examined the
conclusions and recommendations appearing therein.
In 2021, during the informal consultations held by
video-teleconference with the States of the region on
22 January, the Coordinator of the Group of Experts
presented the main conclusions and recommendations
contained in the midterm report, following which some
States of the region made comments on the report.
During the informal consultations held by videoteleconference on 20 May, the Committee heard a
briefing by the Coordinator of the Group of Experts on
the final report of the Group (S/2021/560) and examined
the conclusions and recommendations contained
therein. During the same meeting, the Committee
heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for children and armed conflict,
Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, on the situation of
children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Also in 2021, during the briefing for Member
States held on 9 July, the first in-person meeting held
since the start of the pandemic, the Coordinator of the
Group of Experts presented the main conclusions and
recommendations contained in the Group’s final report,
as contained in document S/2021/560, after which some
States in the region shared their comments on the report.
In informal consultations held jointly on 13 July with
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central
African Republic, the Committee heard briefings
by Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic.
During informal consultations on 30 July, at a
meeting on the topic “Gold, tantalum and tungsten mined
21-27478

05/10/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in the Democratic Republic of Congo: the illicit trade
at the national and international levels”, the Committee
heard briefings by the Coordinator and experts on
natural resources and finance of the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of Congo on the Group’s
final report, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region, the Executive Secretary
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and the Head of Due Diligence of the Centre of
Responsible Business Conduct of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development.
The Committee also held three informal consultations
via video-teleconference — on 13 November 2020,
18 May 2021 and 30 June 2021 — with the Head of
the follow-up mechanism for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mr. Robert Petit. I would like to
reiterate that the Committee continues to support the
mechanism, which is assisting the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its investigations
into the murder of two former members of the Group of
Experts, Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp, which took
place in March 2017.
In accordance with paragraph 104 of the annex
to the note by the President of the Security Council
issued as document S/2017/507, the Committee issued
two press releases containing a brief summary of the
informal consultations held, respectively, on 13 and
30 July.
I would also like to recall that, in its resolution 2478
(2019), the Security Council requested the requested the
Group of Experts to circulate to the Committee every
12 months proposed updates to the existing information
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo sanctions
list. In that regard, on 10 August 2020, a number of
proposals for updating the sanctions list submitted by
the Group of Experts were circulated in the Committee.
On 19 August 2020, the Committee accepted the
updates for two individuals and three entities and was
awaiting further responses from Member States on
requests of the Group of Experts regarding the status
of certain individuals on the sanctions list in order to
update the information on those individuals. Having
received additional information, the Committee
accepted, on 2 November, the update proposed by the
Group of Experts regarding one entry on the list.
In conclusion, I am pleased to inform the Security
Council that I intend to accompany a delegation of
Committee members on a visit to the Democratic

S/PV. 8873

Republic of Congo from 5 to 10 November. The purpose
of the visit is to gather first-hand accounts of the effective
implementation of the sanctions imposed by resolution
2360 (2017), as reaffirmed by resolution 2582 (2021).
It will also provide an opportunity, in accordance
with paragraph 30 of resolution 2360 (2017), to hold
consultations with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO and representatives
of civil society to ensure the full implementation of the
measures set out in the resolution.
The President: I thank Ambassador Barry for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mbangu.
Ms. Mbangu (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Security Council for granting me this
opportunity to address it. I would also like to thank
Ms. Bintou Keita, who continues to undertake many
efforts for the stabilization our country.
The east of the Democratic Republic of Congo
has always been the epicentre of the armed conflict
and has seen a lot of trouble for more than 20 years:
the inter-ethnic war in 1993, the arrival of Rwandan
refugees in 1994, the liberation war of the Alliance of
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo-Zaire in
1996, the war of the Rassemblement congolais pour la
démocratie in 1998, as well as the two most recent wars
and the ongoing presence of national armed and foreign
armed groups, which have had a very pernicious impact
on the population, in particular on women and children.
In order to ensure peace and security in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, the Security Council
deployed a peacekeeping mission — the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). MONUSCO has
been in the Democratic Republic of Congo for more
than 20 years and is the largest peacekeeping mission
in Africa.
Yet, despite that mission, the east of the Democratic
Republic of Congo is still facing several challenges
with regard to the numerous wars and intercommunal
conflicts, which are ongoing in North Kivu and Ituri
and have led to mass displacement of people and
sexual violence against women and girls by armed
perpetrators. Sometimes women say that members of
the Forces armées de la République Démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) are committing such acts of violence
and sometimes they say such acts are perpetrated by

21-274785/21

S/PV.8873

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

local or foreign armed groups. Massacres of civilians
have been committed in one part of North Kivu by the
terrorist group Allied Democratic Forces — National
Army for the Liberation of Uganda and in North Kivu
and Ituri by the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda. Natural resources have been looted. People
have been kidnapped. There have been robberies.
Villages and people’s possessions have been set on fire.
There is unemployment, abject poverty and trauma.
Children are not in school. There is juvenile crime.
There has been mass recruitment of children and young
people in armed groups, which is preventing women
and young people from flourishing in the east of the
Democratic Republic of Congo.
We commend the efforts of the Government
to ensure lasting peace and the well-being of the
population. The Head of State of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo declared, by order 21/015 of
3 May, a state of siege in North Kivu. That decision
was welcomed by the population because it resolved the
problem of peace and security, which the State and the
people of eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
have so longed for.
We have recently seen, through the Government’s
efforts, that certain local groups that destabilize some
parts of those two provinces have been disbanded. The
national army has been strengthened and the State’s
authority has been restored in part of the province.
The Head of State has resolutely launched a substantial
campaign to combat corruption in the country. The
Head of State has also sought to promote women’s
political participation through the appointment of
27 per cent of women to key positions within the
national Government.
However, despite its ninth extension, the state of
siege does not seem to be meeting the expectations of
the Head of State — to eradicate all armed groups at the
local and national levels that pose a serious threat to the
integrity of the national territory. The people of North
Kivu and Ituri have made some progress, overall, in the
area of peace and security, but Irumu, Djugu and Beni
have not fared well.
We also see a deterioration of the situation on the
ground in those two provinces, despite the military
operations carried out since the beginning of June.
According to the civil society monitoring report for
Beni and Ituri, 897 civilians have been killed, 580 have
disappeared and 148 have been kidnapped. In addition,
6/21

05/10/2021

the report notes 128 abandoned villages, 904 cases of
burglary, 40 cars and 15 motorcycles set ablaze, not to
mention burned villages and displaced populations.
Ms. Keita provided additional statistics today relating
to sexual violence.
This bleak backdrop shows the ineffectiveness of the
operations carried out by the FARDC and MONUSCO.
In that regard, we call on the Security Council to
strengthen the Force Intervention Brigade in order to
enable it to restore peace to the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo; to support the disarmament,
demobilization
and
community
reintegration
process — a programme that will contribute to both
the surrendering of armed groups and the restoration of
State authority in several areas affected by insecurity;
and to open an international investigation in order to
establish responsibility for the crimes against humanity
and genocide crimes committed against the people of
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We also draw the Security Council’s attention to
the bravery and dynamism of the women of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who continuously
contribute to the peacebuilding process through
local community conflict-resolution mechanisms set
up by women’s networks. They are demonstrating
their resilience and are helping to combat violence.
They are protecting women and girls and promoting
their participation in peace processes through our
partnership with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands, whose projects we have been implementing
since 2017. The Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund also supports us in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
We call on the Security Council to advocate within
the United Nations to bolster support for women’s
organizations, which are on the front lines of looking
after victims of sexual violence and other trauma related
to violent extremism in conflict in order to effectively
meet their needs restore their dignity and rights.
The President: I thank Ms. Mbangu for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative
of the Niger for his briefing and his work as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
21-27478

05/10/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

resolution 1533 (2004). I am also grateful to Ms. Nelly
Mbangu for her briefing.
The Democratic Republic of Congo and the States
of the region are showing determination in the face
of persistent threats. With the support of the United
Nations, it is this path of cooperation and perseverance
that we must follow towards peace. I would like to make
three points.
First, the past few months have seen progress
that the international community must support. With
regard to security, France welcomes the adoption of
the order on disarmament, demobilization, community
reintegration and stabilization. It must be rapidly
implemented and receive appropriate funding to offer
prospects to those who have chosen peace.
France also welcomes the efforts made in the area of
justice and the fight against impunity, as demonstrated
by the conviction of nine Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo fighters for crimes against
humanity in Bunia and the conviction of members of
the armed forces and the national police for serious
human rights violations. Those efforts must continue.
Justice also contributes to peace on the ground. That
is why it is important to spread the model of the Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission established in
Kasaï-Central.
The participation of women in decision-making
processes must also be promoted, like in the recent
appointments to the Central Bank of the Congo and to
the heads of the Lualaba and Bas-Uele provinces.
At the regional level, the signing of bilateral
cooperation agreements and the commitments made at
the Khartoum workshop on natural resources should help
build confidence and promote sustainable development.
Secondly, much remains to be done to stabilize
the east of the country. Our priority must be to focus
efforts on the fight against armed groups in the
Kivus and Ituri. The Congolese armed forces and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
must coordinate better and increase joint operations.
The reconfiguration of the Force Intervention Brigade
should enable the Mission to be more effective and to
deal with an asymmetrical threat, particularly that of
the Allied Democratic Forces. Measures to counter and
prevent improvised explosive devices must continue.

S/PV. 8873

The use of force alone will not be sufficient to
defeat the negative forces. The state of siege will have
lasting effects only if it guarantees respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law, the rule of
law and access to justice for all. Sexual violence must
not go unpunished.
At the regional level, the continuation of exchanges
initiated recently between heads of security services
must contribute to the fight against armed groups.
The Contact and Coordination Group must also
rapidly operationalize non-military measures against
such groups.
Finally, the reconfiguration of the United Nations
presence must continue. The transition plan sets
out a clear road map for the gradual withdrawal of
MONUSCO. A partnership approach is critical. On
the one hand, it is up to the Congolese authorities to
implement the 2021-2023 action plan, particularly in
the area of governance and institution-building. On
the other hand, MONUSCO and the country team will
continue to support the Government’s efforts in the
areas of stabilization and the protection of civilians.
In order for the transition to succeed, international
and regional partners must step up their support. The
improved security situation in Tanganyika will allow
MONUSCO to withdraw in 2022. United Nations
agencies and the country team should take over. In the
Kivus and Ituri, the development of joint programmes
among MONUSCO, the country team and local
actors must create the conditions for a successful and
sustainable transition.
The return to peace and stability will require the
commitment of all. In view of the 2023 elections, all
stakeholders must engage in dialogue. Let us establish
the conditions for a credible, transparent, inclusive and
peaceful process starting now.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. Keita for her briefing. Ireland
commends her dynamism and leadership. We are
encouraged by the progress made in the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). My thanks also go to Ms. Nelly
Mbangu for her briefing and for her work in the
Democratic Republic of Congo.
I also wish to thank my colleague Ambassador
Abarry for his briefing regarding the important work of

21-274787/21

S/PV.8873

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I assure him of the support of
my country, Ireland, for the Committee and its Group
of Experts. I express Ireland’s deep appreciation for
the work of the Group of Experts, which monitors the
implementation of sanctions. Their important work
must be facilitated, and we look forward to the lifting
of any restraints on the appointment of experts to
the Committee.
Regional cooperation is growing, as demonstrated
by the meetings in July among the heads of the
intelligence and security services of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda
and Tanzania. Ireland welcomes the increased political
engagement in the region, and we congratulate
President Tshisekedi Tshilombo on his election as Chair
of the Southern African Development Community from
next year.
The elections scheduled for 2023 will serve as an
extremely significant opportunity for the Democratic
Republic of Congo. MONUSCO’s support will be
crucial to ensure that political and electoral processes
in the country are credible, transparent, inclusive,
peaceful and based on gender equality. We regret the
rising tensions over the Independent National Electoral
Commission. It is essential that any disputes in relation
to the Commission’s reform process be resolved in an
inclusive, transparent and timely manner.
Ireland is very concerned about the growing
insecurity, the humanitarian crisis and the large number
of human rights violations and abuses, particularly in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
high rates of food insecurity, severe malnutrition and
displacement are extremely worrisome.
(spoke in English)
The state of siege has now been extended multiple
times. What was envisaged as a temporary, exceptional
measure now risks becoming the norm. Ireland notes
that the provisions in the state of siege declaration are
impacting timely access to justice and the extension
of pre-trial detentions, as well as contributing to
prison overcrowding.
Ireland is extremely concerned by persistent
reports of pervasive sexual and gender-based violence
and other grave human rights violations and abuses in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including by
8/21

05/10/2021

State actors. We stress that the situation of children
and the protection of civilians in armed conflict
must be prioritized. Furthermore, it is essential that
humanitarian and democratic spaces be respected.
Ireland condemns, in the strongest terms, all threats
and attacks against humanitarian workers, members of
civil society and journalists.
MONUSCO’s ongoing efforts to support the
Congolese authorities in combating impunity and
providing justice to victims and survivors by holding
those accountable for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and other serious human rights violations are
most welcome.
Ireland also welcomes the creation of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Reintegration
and Stabilization Programme, which offers a real
opportunity for the Government, the United Nations
and key partners to work together to make progress
in that critical area for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Progress continues to be made on the women and
peace and security agenda, with positive indications
around the meaningful participation of women in
political processes. I want to say that MONUSCO’s
contribution here is impactful, and Ireland notes in
particular the Special Representative’s work to include
women’s voices and perspectives in the transition plan
and conflict-resolution processes. The inclusion of
young people in the transition plan is also of critical
importance, as they must have a say in their own futures.
Ireland commends the publication of MONUSCO’s
transition plan, which is conditions-based and clearly
linked to the evolving security situation. The 18
identified benchmarks are comprehensive and should
indeed provide a clear and predictable road map for
MONUSCO’s phased withdrawal. The withdrawal
from the Kasai provinces in June and the much-needed
bridging supports show that the goals of the transition
plan are achievable.
We consider it crucial, however, that there be
sufficient flexibility in the plan to allow for setbacks
and unexpected challenges. Timelines and benchmarks
must be closely monitored and adjusted as necessary in
the coming period. It is also essential that civil society
continue to be included in the planning, implementation
and monitoring of the transition.
21-27478

05/10/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

(spoke in French)
In conclusion, for Ireland, the transition is a gradual
process, leading to a reconfiguration of the strategy, the
footprint and the capacity of the United Nations in a
way that enables and supports long-term peacebuilding
efforts. We hope that resolution 2594 (2021), which the
Council adopted unanimously (see S/PV.8852), can
serve as an important contribution to our deliberations
and to our approach to sustainable transitions.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative Keita, Ambassador
Abarry and Ms. Mbangu for their briefings.
I will focus my intervention primarily on two
issues, namely, the state of siege currently in place in the
North Kivu and Ituri provinces and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) transition strategy.
The continued deterioration of the security situation,
the increased frequency of attacks by armed groups,
rising casualties and the harrowing humanitarian
situation amid the state of siege continue to give us
serious cause for concern. Ms. Mbangu’s testimony was
very powerful on that point. We condemn the ongoing
violence and displacement of civilians. The 1.3 million
people newly displaced this year and the nearly 400
civilians killed in the past three months serve once
again to highlight the desperate need for change in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The United Kingdom welcomes the improved
operational collaboration between MONUSCO,
including its reinforced Force Intervention Brigade,
and the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We encourage the relevant stakeholders to
continue that collaboration in strict compliance with
the United Nations human rights due diligence policy
under the state of siege.
We welcome the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s recent evaluation of the state
of siege. We call on the Government to ensure the
delivery of basic services and that the state of siege
remains transparent and time-limited. It must also
be implemented with respect for human rights and
international law.
A further positive development is the signing of the
disarmament, demobilization, community reintegration
and stabilization ordinance. However, it is regrettable
that combatants who had previously surrendered

S/PV. 8873

are reportedly returning to the bush. We strongly
encourage the timely development of the disarmament,
demobilization,
community
reintegration
and
stabilization strategy and mechanisms for its delivery.
Before I come to MONUSCO’s transition, let me
express our concern regarding sexual exploitation and
abuse. We were deeply disappointed to learn of seven
new cases reported to MONSUCO during the latest
reporting period. In the same week as the final report
of the Independent Commission on the review of sexual
abuse and exploitation during the response to the
tenth Ebola virus disease epidemic in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it is timely to reaffirm the
need for robust action to prevent, tackle and ensure
accountability for such incidents. In that regard. we call
on MONUSCO to expedite delivery of its action plan on
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Turning to MONUSCO’s transition, the United
Kingdom welcomes the strategy and the identified
benchmarks, agreed with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and recently
transmitted to the Security Council. Ultimately, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo bears responsibility
for creating the long-term conditions for peace and
MONUSCO’s withdrawal. We are therefore encouraged
by the strategy’s combined focus on United Nations and
Government actions and welcome the establishment of
the joint working group.
Given that many of the current challenges in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo will continue after
MONUSCO’s eventual departure, we also recognize the
utility of dividing the benchmarks into the minimum
conditions required for MONUSCO’s exit and priority
areas for collaboration with the United Nations country
team. We encourage MONUSCO to focus on ensuring
that the minimum conditions for its withdrawal are
met, while simultaneously preparing the handover of
other tasks to the United Nations country team and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
against a clear timeline. The successful delivery of
the benchmarks will also require donor support and
continued engagement after MONUSCO’s departure.
We therefore encourage enhanced coordination, in
particular with the World Bank as well as donors,
humanitarian agencies and the further inclusion of
civil society.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the

21-274789/21

S/PV.8873

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Bintou Keita,
for her substantive briefing. We would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of the Niger, Mr. Abarry,
for his briefing on the work of Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We listened
carefully to the remarks by Ms. Nelly Mbangu.
We are following with concern the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
the situation in the eastern provinces of the country.
Regrettably, Congolese armed forces and MONUSCO
peacekeepers have not yet managed to curb the
activities of the numerous illegal armed groups in the
area, in particular the Allied Democratic Forces.
A source of concern is the ongoing increase in
violence and the number of civilian victims. According
to the tragic statistics of the United Nations from June
to September, fighters killed more than 600 civilians
in the Ituri and North Kivu provinces. We also note
the ongoing problem of the illicit exploitation by armed
groups of natural resources in the Democratic Republic
of Congo.
We believe that, in order to successfully combat
those fighters, there is a need for further coordination
between peacekeepers and Congolese security forces
to help bolster their capacity. We support the Mission’s
plans to set up a joint centre with the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo, as well as
to strengthen the Force Intervention Brigade. We also
commend Ms. Keita’s efforts to establish contacts among
peacekeepers, the authorities and local populations
on the ground, as it creates the much-needed positive
environment. Furthermore, we note that the situation in
the Kasai region and Tanganyika province is gradually
improving.
The humanitarian situation is very complex. We are
concerned about the low level of funding for the United
Nations humanitarian appeal, in particular given the
increase in the number of internally displaced persons.
There is clearly a need for additional efforts to respond
to the common challenge — the coronavirus disease
pandemic. We trust that the Government will be able to
restore control in the area of security and focus efforts
on improving the humanitarian situation. We trust that
the Government will foster socioeconomic development
and resolve border disputes with its neighbours,
10/21

05/10/2021

address intercommunal conflicts and implement the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration strategy
for former combatants.
We have taken note of the transition plan drafted by
the United Nations, in coordination with the Congolese
authorities, for a gradual withdrawal of peacekeepers
from the country. We will study it carefully. It is our
principled position that it will be impossible to bring
about long-term normalization in the Democratic
Republic of Congo through military means alone. It
is important to continue efforts to fully implement
the foundational Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region in eastern provinces and the Great
Lakes region itself.
One of its key areas is to expand cooperation
between countries of the region in the area of security.
We welcome the resolve of regional players to develop
cooperation to normalize the situation in the Great Lakes
region. We note the recent meeting between the heads of
the intelligence and security services of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi Rwanda, Uganda and
Tanzania, as well as the recent Congolese-Burundian
and Congolese-Rwandan summits. Russia, inter alia, as
a member of the Group of friends of the Great Lakes
Region, intends to continue to actively promote the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of Congo and
the region as a whole.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I would like to begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Bintou Keita, for her
briefing on the most recent developments concerning
the implementation of MONUSCO’s mandate. I also
thank Ambassador Abdou Abarry for his briefing on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and civil society briefer Nelly
Mbangu for her insights. I welcome the presence of the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in today’s meeting.
Political developments in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in the past three months have been
reassuring. The reform measures concerning the
Independent National Electoral Commission will
strengthen the electoral process. The Government’s
action to address the security situation in the eastern
21-27478

05/10/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Democratic Republic of the Congo has received the
support of all stakeholders, including the opposition.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has also engaged proactively with neighbouring
countries to address the threat of armed groups, such as
the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and the Coopérative
pour le développement du Congo (CODECO). Those
efforts have resulted in the adoption of a two-year
action plan and the establishment of an operational
cell in Goma. President Tshisekedi Tshilombo has been
elected as the next Chairperson of the Southern African
Development Community. The heightened bilateral
engagements with Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda have
contributed to the regional approach for peace and
development in the region.
The reform measures of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have also received
the support of the international financial institutions.
The participation of women in the political process has
been further advanced, including with the appointment
of the first female Governor of the Central Bank. We
welcome those positive developments. We hope the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and opposition parties will maintain the positive
trajectory in the run-up to the 2023 elections.
On the security front, the situation in Ituri and
Kivu has remained volatile, with increasing activity by
the ADF and CODECO. The attacks against civilians
by armed groups have intensified, despite the state
of siege. The assertion made by the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in his speech to
the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session last
month (see A/76/PV.3) about the presence of terrorists
operating under the cover of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda and the ADF in Ituri, North Kivu,
South Kivu and Maniema needs to be taken seriously.
The interconnected link between the presence of
armed groups and the exploitation of mineral resources
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo has
always been a major factor for instability in the region.
In that regard, my delegation underscores that the
primary responsibility to protect civilians lies with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
MONUSCO’s role is to support the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo in addressing
the threat of armed groups and in disarmament and
demobilization efforts. In that regard, we welcome the
establishment of the Disarmament, Demobilization,

S/PV. 8873

Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme
and look forward to its effective implementation.
We have taken note of the details of the transition
plan, including the 18 benchmarks, agreed between
MONUSCO and the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The assessment of progress on
the benchmarks needs to be realistic. In that regard, the
continued implementation of the security strategy at
the national and provincial levels, as well as a plan of
action for security sector reform, will be crucial. The
stabilization of conflict-affected provinces will depend
on curbing the illegal exploitation of mineral resources.
The transition plan also needs to be in line with
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. Every
effort needs to be made to ensure that the transition and
exit of MONUSCO is gradual, responsible and orderly.
We have also taken note of the assessment of
the performance of the force and police components
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/807). We also expect a similar assessment
of the civilian component of the Mission in future
reports. The Comprehensive Planning and Performance
Assessment System should be applied uniformly
to all components of the Mission. Resolution 2589
(2021), adopted by the Council in August, requests
the Secretary-General to report on certain key tasks,
as reflected in paragraphs 4 (a) and 4 (b), concerning
crimes against peacekeepers. We look forward to such
reporting in the upcoming MONUSCO reports. We
also request the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
take measures to ease restrictions that are currently
hampering the peacekeeper turnovers.
In conclusion, I would like to recall India’s long
association with the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its people since the 1960s. A peaceful and stable
Democratic Republic of the Congo will contribute
immensely to the peace and development of the region.
The progress made by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in recent years has been impressive.
The international community needs to support the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
this journey. On its part, India will continue to support
and assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the
path towards lasting peace, stability and prosperity.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank you, Sir, for convening
this meeting. I also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Keita, for her very

21-2747811/21

S/PV.8873

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

informative briefing. My thanks also go to Ambassador
Abarry, Permanent Representative of the Niger, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), and
Ms. Nelly Mbangu for their contributions.
Let me start by highlighting some recent positive
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Norway is pleased to see that the political tensions
surrounding the composition of the coalition have
stabilized, that women are well represented in the
Cabinet and that there has been progress on regional
cooperation. Those efforts, as well as the adoption of
the Government’s plan of action, have paved the way for
finalizing the transition plan, as presented by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Keita today.
Nevertheless, tensions have increased between political
and civil society actors regarding the electoral reforms.
Norway calls on the Congolese authorities to ensure an
inclusive and transparent processes in the build-up to
the 2023 elections.
Despite the five-month state of siege in Ituri and
North Kivu by the Government, the security situation
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is
deteriorating. The threat posed by armed groups,
such as the Coopérative pour le développement du
Congo and the Allied Democratic Forces, to civilians
is particularly concerning. The continual security
challenges have led to more than 5 million people being
internally displaced and has further deepened the
severe humanitarian crisis.
Norway remains deeply troubled by the continued
high number of human rights violations and abuses,
including sexual and gender-based violence. We urge
both the Congolese authorities and the United Nations
system to do their utmost to fight impunity and ensure
justice for the victims and survivors. And, as a final
note on the state of siege, it must not be used as an
excuse to limit democratic space. The detrimental
effects on the justice system, as outlined in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2021/807), are also of
great concern.
The high level of activity by armed groups
illustrates the need for sustainable livelihoods and a
well-functioning disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. We therefore welcomed the
establishment of the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme.
Focus must now be on the timely elaboration of the
12/21

05/10/2021

new integrated strategy and its implementation. It is
also important to keep sustained focus, not only on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, but
also stabilization efforts, including security sector
reform, transitional justice, the fight against impunity
and democratic dialogue and reconciliation efforts.
In conclusion, we welcome the transition plan of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for the phased and gradual drawdown of the Mission. It
provides a solid basis for a reconfigured MONUSCO.
But the success of the transition hinges on constructive
and effective cooperation and dialogue among a range
of stakeholders, including the Congolese authorities
and different parts of the United Nations system. It
also depends on strategic partnerships involving civil
society and the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women. We expect that all will play their part in
those efforts, and Norway will work with all relevant
stakeholders to that end.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Keita, for her briefing
today. I also thank Ambassador Abarry, Permanent
Representative of the Niger, for his leadership in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004). In
addition, I commend Ms. Mbangu on her work, thank
her for her briefing and welcome the presence of the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
here today.
Today I would like to discuss three aspects of the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: first,
our serious security concerns; secondly, the role that
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
can play; and thirdly, our concerns about exploitation
and abuse by United Nations personnel.
First, while we have seen some improvements
elsewhere, the United States remains deeply concerned
about the security situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Civilians there are being killed
by armed groups every day. We remain particularly
troubled by the number of lethal attacks by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, also known as the Allied Democratic
Forces, and the increasing threats posed by improvised
explosive devices. The military of the Democratic
21-27478

05/10/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Republic of the Congo and United Nations peacekeepers
must coordinate better on joint operations under the
state of siege to protect civilians using the full authority
of MONUSCO’s robust mandate.
Security conditions have improved in the Kasaïs,
which allowed MONUSCO to exit from those provinces
earlier this year, while continuing to provide bridging
support for key stabilization and peacekeeping efforts.
Transitional justice measures are also paving the way
for a smooth drawdown. Similarly, we hope conditions
continue to improve in Tanganyika so that MONUSCO
can draw down from that province next year. Beyond
those immediate steps, we need more progress to allow
for a responsible drawdown in North and South Kivu
and Ituri. We welcome the joint transition plan of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and MONUSCO to guide those conversations moving
forward and hope all indicators and benchmarks will be
realistic and attainable.
Secondly, given the terrible violence in the east, the
United States is committed to ensuring that MONUSCO
has every tool it needs for its mission. MONUSCO has a
valuable role to play in protecting civilians, and it must
take that role seriously. It also has a valuable role to
play in stabilizing State institutions and promoting key
governance and security sector reform. Each of those
objectives is particularly important as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo approaches elections in 2023
and as security conditions in the east grow more dire.
The Mission must also continue to coordinate with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on a phased, conditions-based drawdown in the
coming years.
As the regional diplomatic dynamic improves
and more armed groups pursue options for civilian
reintegration in the years to come, we will need to
discuss how peacekeeping success is contextualized
and defined. We also need to consider ways to help the
Congolese security forces address armed groups that
are no longer a threat to international peace and security
but continue to pose a limited threat to civilians. The
United States looks forward to such conversations.
Lastly, we must end sexual exploitation and abuse
at the hands of United Nations personnel. MONUSCO
alone has seen 17 new allegations so far this year. Those
allegations are horrifying, and they are unacceptable.
Most have been levelled at MONUSCO troops and

S/PV. 8873

police, but a significant portion concerns the actions of
civilian staff.
The United States has been, and will continue
to be, unequivocal in its call for an end to predatory
behaviour across the entire United Nations system, no
matter the setting or the nationality of the accused. We
demand accountability for parties guilty of criminal
acts and for assistance for victims and survivors. I join
my British colleague in calling for an immediate review
of MONUSCO. We will work through the Office of the
Victims Rights Advocate and the United Nations trust
fund in support of victims of sexual exploitation and
abuse to achieve justice. The Congolese people deserve
an effective, efficient and accountable United Nations.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Special Representative Keita,
Ambassador Abarry and Ms. Mbangu for their very
important briefings. I of course also welcome the
presence of the Ambassador of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo here among us at this meeting.
In the past three months, there have been major
achievements for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the work of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). Of note is the departure of
the Mission from the Kasaï provinces, as well as the
presentation of the transition plan, both of which are in
compliance with resolution 2556 (2020), with a view to
reducing MONUSCO’s presence.
At the political level, we welcome the legislative
progress in electoral matters. Mexico looks forward
to the prompt appointment of the leadership of the
Independent National Electoral Commission. The 2023
elections will be a very important step in consolidating
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We also commend the ongoing bilateral diplomatic
efforts under way with Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi
to promote good-neighbourliness, cooperation and
stability in the region.
However, with regard to the security situation, we
express our concern about the violence that has taken
place in Ituri and North and South Kivu in recent
months. The constant attacks perpetrated by armed
groups, such as the Coalition des démocrates Congolais
and the Allied Democratic Forces, continue to be the
main threat to the civilian population.

21-2747813/21

S/PV.8873

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In that regard, we express our concern about the
increasing use of improvised explosives. We also
emphatically call for all actors on the ground to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
It is necessary to address the causes that give rise
to and fuel violence, apart from the special measures,
such as the imposition of a state of siege, which has
been renewed for the seventh time and which must
not result in violations of fundamental rights. The
fight against impunity through the strengthening of
institutions, including the justice system, is part of the
eventual solution. However, we must also combat hate
speech, which fosters divisions and intercommunal
conflicts. Attacks and other acts of violence against the
civilian population exacerbate the humanitarian needs
and displacement within and outside the country.
Mexico welcomes the implementation of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme. Among other aspects, the
effectiveness of such programmes also depends on the
opportunities offered to former combatants, which will
prevent them from seeing the return to armed groups as
an option. We will monitor the implementation of that
programme. In parallel, we believe that it is extremely
important to develop weapons and ammunition
management policies and programmes that complement
the broader disarmament and demobilization strategy.
At this point, it is an entire war economy that must
be dismantled.
We acknowledge the recent actions in the area of
transitional justice, particularly the establishment of
the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission in
Kasaï Central, as well as the establishment of a joint
committee at the national level in that regard. Such
actions pave the way for a new phase of reconciliation
with a view to building lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
With regard to the activities of MONUSCO, we
applaud its ongoing efforts during a difficult period of
adjustment after the eruption of Mount Nyiragongo and
the resulting impact on its work.
Mexico wishes to emphasize the crucial conditions
for the success of the transition plan. We believe that,
without doubt, it reflects the coordination between the
United Nations teams and the national Government,
especially taking into account that transitions are
complex processes that require the full involvement
14/21

05/10/2021

of national and local stakeholders. In that regard,
we acknowledge the active participation of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in the development of that plan. It will be crucial that
the Mission’s withdrawal not lead to the emergence of
gaps that, in turn, escalate into violence.
We emphasize the importance that the decisions
on transition be informed by the progress on the
ground. To that end, the 18 benchmarks and indicators
identified will be a guide that will enable the progress
to be monitored. We particularly welcome the inclusion
of parameters on the participation of civil society,
particularly women and young people, as well as
on accountability.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Bintou Keita and Ambassador
Abarry for their briefings. I also listened carefully
to the statement made by Ms. Mbangu. I welcome
the presence of the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at today’s meeting.
Since the formation of the new Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a number of
positive steps have been taken in the political, security,
economic and other fields. Meanwhile, the security
and humanitarian situations in the eastern part of the
country are still grim. There remain serious challenges
to achieving long-term peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In connection with the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/807), I would like to make the
following points.
First, every effort should continue to be made to
maintain political stability. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo developed and
launched a three-year programme of action that serves as
a road map for lasting peace and sustainable development
in the country. China appreciates those efforts, and we
hope that the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will focus on promoting reforms in key
areas with regard to improving governance capabilities.
Electoral reform is essential to the national unity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. China encourages
all parties to engage in inclusive dialogue to properly
resolve differences under the constitutional framework.
President Tshisekedi Tshilombo and the leaders
of the countries of the region reached a series of
important agreements on maintaining the security of
21-27478

05/10/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the region, combating the threat of armed groups and
strengthening economic and trade ties. China hopes
that countries of the region will continue to improve
their relations, strengthen exchanges and enhance
cooperation in order to lay a solid foundation for lasting
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region. China welcomes the
new strategy and action plan for the Great Lakes region
developed by the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region. We believe that the
efforts that I mentioned will provide new momentum
for regional cooperation.
Secondly, the security issues in the eastern part of
the country should be addressed in a comprehensive
manner. In response to the unstable situation in the
east, the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo took a series of measures, including
imposing a state of siege, promulgating disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and
stabilization
programmes and appointing a coordinator. President
Tshisekedi Tshilombo also presented a relevant
development in his address to the General Assembly
(see A/76/PV.3). China recognizes the determination
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to combat the violence by armed groups
and hopes that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo will continue their
coordination and cooperation in order to strengthen the
protection of civilians.
MONUSCO and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have jointly formulated 18
benchmarks and risk mitigation measures for the
Mission’s withdrawal and added more details to
MONUSCO’s drawdown and withdrawal plan, which
will help all parties to follow the progress and clariy
their responsibilities. In the areas where MONUSCO
has withdrawn the United Nations development and
humanitarian agencies should quickly follow up in
order to assist the local government with post-conflict
peacebuilding and ensure that the progress made with
regard to peace will not be reversed.
Thirdly, development and humanitarian assistance
should be increased. At present, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo faces multiple health challenges,
such as the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), malaria
and cholera, as well as a large number of refugees
and displaced persons in the country. Its national

S/PV. 8873

development reform needs urgent financial support.
Meanwhile, the United Nations humanitarian response
plans severely lacks funding, limiting its ability to
respond to the current serious humanitarian situation.
China calls on the international community, in
particular international financial institutions, to honour
their commitments of assistance to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by increasing investment to help
the country tackle the current challenges.
The global development initiative proposed by
China’s President Xi Jinping during the general debate
of the General Assembly (see A/76/PV.3) will help the
international community form synergy in assisting
developing countries, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and help
eliminate the development gap and the root causes
of conflicts.
China has always emphasized that sanctions are only
a means, not an end. As the drawdown of MONUSCO
continues, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will gradually assume the
main responsibility for maintaining national security
and stability. The Security Council should actively
respond to the concerns of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo Government regarding the adjustment of
sanctions measures to avoid their negative impact on
the country’s capacity-building in the area of security.
China has always been committed to helping the
Democratic Republic of the Congo achieve peace,
stability and development. The twenty-fifth deployment
of Chinese peacekeepers to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo recently arrived in the mission area. Since
2003, China has sent more than 3,000 peacekeepers
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to carry out
thousands of security and support missions.
In addition, 400,000 doses of COVID-19 vaccine
provided by China recently arrived in the country.
China will continue to work with the international
community to support the efforts of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to achieve longterm national peace and stability.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bintou Keita,
Ambassador Abdou Abarry and Ms. Mbangu for their
comprehensive briefings. We welcome the participation

21-2747815/21

S/PV.8873

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in our meeting today.
On the political front, my delegation takes note
of the efforts of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in promoting sustainable peace,
stability and development, as set out in its programme
of action for the period of 2021-2023.
In the run-up to the 2023 elections, we note the
ongoing tension among political and civil society
actors. In that regard, we call on all parties to exert
every effort to settle differences through dialogue,
taking into account the aspirations for stability and
development of the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
It is also of critical importance to ensure women’s
participation in the political process. My delegation
commends the efforts of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and countries of the region with a view to
further strengthening friendly relations and deepening
their cooperation in the fight against common security
threats. Undoubtedly, stability in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the region as a whole
requires effective regional cooperation and support.
Viet Nam is still troubled by the continued
deterioration of the security situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in
Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu, despite the state
of siege in two of those provinces. We reiterate our
strong condemnation of attacks against civilians
and peacekeepers, as well as humanitarian workers.
The reported incident in Ofai, Ituri, on 1 September,
resulting in four civilians killed and around 20 others
abducted or missing, is extremely concerning.
The humanitarian situation continues to be alarming
as a result of the volatile security situation, the impact
the socioeconomic hardship, displacement, coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and so on. We therefore call for
generous assistance from donor Governments and
international aid organizations to help the more than
19 million people in need of humanitarian assistance
and to assist the resettlement of more than 5 million
internally displaced persons, as well as to alleviate the
predicaments of over 500,000 refugees. It is also pivotal
to provide financial and technical assistance to help the
Democratic Republic of the Congo overcome economic
and health challenges relating to COVID-19 and ensure
vaccine access for its people.
16/21

05/10/2021

Given the current dire situation, coordinated efforts
to address the root causes of instability continue to be
of the utmost importance to bringing about stability for
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Viet Nam supports further collaboration by regional
countries in combating hostile armed groups.
We welcome the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s establishment and implementation
of the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme, which maps
out a comprehensive strategy in that regard. At the
same time, further efforts are also necessary to address
the issue of illegal exploitation of, and trade in, natural
resources, promote reconciliation among communities
and address hate speech.
Let me once again highlight our strong support for
the important role of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) on the ground. We are pleased to
see the close cooperation among the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO, other
relevant United Nations entities and stakeholders with
respect to the formulation of the transition plan for the
progressive and phased drawdown of the Mission. The
plan clearly outlines benchmarks and indicators, sets
out minimum conditions and assesses risk factors for
the implementation of the exit strategy. We hope that
fruitful cooperation and indispensable international
support will be continued during the implementation
process in order to preserve the hard-won achievements
and attain desirable outcomes.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special
Representative Keita, Ambassador Abarry and
Ms. Mbangu for their presentations.
First, I would like to commend the Congolese
Government for maintaining political stability in the
country and making further progress in relations with
the neighbouring countries.
Furthermore, we take note of the commitments of
the Congolese Government to facilitate electoral reforms
ahead of the 2023 elections. We particularly support the
commitments of the Government to further advance
equitable representation of women in public life. At the
same time, the importance of the implementation of
other key reforms under the Government´s programme
of action should not be underestimated. Taking note of
the complexities with respect to the electoral reforms, we
encourage the Government to make efforts in tackling
21-27478

05/10/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

hate speech and incitement to violence. Accordingly, I
take this opportunity to join the Special Representative
in underlining the important role of timely, inclusive
and peaceful elections.
Secondly, we continue to be concerned by the
unabated violence in the Kivu and Ituri provinces. We
regret that, in spite of the state of siege and military
operations against negative forces, the circle of
violence continues.
Incidents in conflict-affected provinces involving
armed groups and State agents have recently resulted
in the killing of at least 600 civilians, while almost 300
people, mostly women, were victims of sexual violence.
It is equally concerning to learn that several journalists
have been threatened by both armed groups and State
agents, which fuels the existing insecurity even more.
In our view, that has a spillover effect on the dire
humanitarian situation. The country ranks high with
regard to the number of internally displaced persons in
Africa. We also remain concerned about the ongoing
threat posed by the coronavirus disease and other
endemic diseases, such as malaria, that affect the health
and economic situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
In those circumstances, we encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in partnership with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and other stakeholders, to do its utmost to
address human rights violations and abuses committed
against civilians, as well as the phenomenon of conflictrelated sexual violence. It is crucial that measures to
curb the violence and restore safety for its population
go hand in hand with the principles of the rule of law.
In that connection, we welcome the step to establish
the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission,
which will be tasked with investigating human rights
violations and abuses, as well as supporting justice and
the rule of law. We likewise encourage the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to pursue
its commitments and efforts to curb the high number
of grave violations committed against women and
children. We believe that the way out of this circle of
violence is to address the root causes of the conflict and
further advance the fight against impunity.
Lastly, I would like to thank the Special
Representative for her leadership and joint efforts — in
partnership with the Government of the Democratic

S/PV. 8873

Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations country
team — to develop a transition plan for the gradual,
responsible and sustainable withdrawal of MONUSCO
by 2024. We welcome the proposed benchmarks to
empower the Government and affirm its role in ensuring
a sustainable transition process. We are of the view
that continued engagement among the Government,
MONUSCO and international stakeholders, as well as
greater national Government ownership of the transition
process, is key to the successful implementation
of the plan. We are confident that initial steps taken
by the Government towards the new Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Reintegration and
Stabilization Programme already demonstrate the
positive prospects for the transition process.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kenya.
I have the honour to make this statement on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well as
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
The A3+1 thanks Ambassador Abdou Abarry for
his work as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The A3+1 thanks Ms. Bintou Keita for her briefing
and commends her for her commitment to peace and
security efforts in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We also thank Ms. Nelly Mbangu, Coordinator
of Sauti Ya Mama Mukongomani, for her briefing.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation in
conflict-affected areas in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo is alarming. More than 1.3 million
people have been displaced this year, bringing the total
number of internally displaced persons across the
country to more than 5 million, excluding the 536,000
refugees from neighbouring countries hosted by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. While we thank
international partners for their support in addressing
the humanitarian needs, we urge them to scale up their
assistance by contributing to the 2021 humanitarian
response plan for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The A3+1 is encouraged by the positive regional
dynamic during the reporting period, thanks to the
commendable efforts led by President Tshisekedi
Tshilombo and leaders of neighbouring countries in

21-2747817/21

S/PV.8873

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

05/10/2021

view of further consolidating their bilateral ties and
mutual cooperation, which, we believe, will reinforce
regional peace and stability.

violence. To that end, we call on international partners
to provide capacity-building support for the relevant
State institutions and agencies.

The A3+1 condemns all forms of human rights
abuses and violence against civilians, including sexual
exploitation against women and girls, as well as the
recruitment and use of children by foreign and domestic
armed groups. We demand that all armed groups cease
such despicable atrocities. Furthermore, we emphasize
that those violations must not be allowed to persist
with impunity.

Armed groups, militias and other hostile forces
are highly motivated by access to the abundant natural
resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
has turned the country’s natural wealth into a driver of
conflict and instability, rather than development and
prosperity. It is time that the role of natural resources
be transformed to sources of legitimate socioeconomic
opportunities that lead to expanded revenue streams for
the Government to provide basic services.

In that regard, the A3+1 commends the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the
progress made in reducing armed group activities,
particularly through the declaration of a state of
siege in conflict-affected eastern provinces. The joint
offensive operations carried out by the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in combating those armed groups is commendable and
should be intensified.
However, the A3+1 underscores the need to
undertake non-military approaches to address armed
groups. We therefore welcome the establishment of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its programme of
action for the period 2021-2023. We also acknowledge
the establishment of a Contact and Coordination Group
and the adoption of a two-year action plan by heads of
intelligence and security services of the States of the
region mandated to oversee non-military approaches
for the eradication of negative forces in the Great
Lakes region.
We urge the international community and
financial and technical partners to continue to support
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in strengthening the capacities of its national
institutions responsible for governance, the rule of
law and security and development, including support
for the Government’s programme of action for the
period 2021-2023, which are key tools for creating
safe environments conducive to advancing lasting and
sustainable peace, stability and development.
We further call on the Government to continue
strengthening its justice sector to defend human rights,
in line with its zero-tolerance policy on gender-based
18/21

In that regard, we recognize the important role of
regional cooperation in promoting the implementation
of the provisions of the Addis Ababa Framework
Agreement and other regional tools to fight the illegal
exploitation of, and trade in, natural resources in the
Great Lakes region.
We commend Government efforts, with the support
of MONUSCO, to improve and strengthen its weapons
and ammunitions-management systems. In that regard,
the Security Council should give due consideration to the
request for the removal of the notification requirement
for the Government to acquire weapons. Meanwhile,
we encourage continued regional approaches such as
the Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention, Control and
Reduction of Small Arms and Light Weapons in the
Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa.
The A3+1 takes note of the joint transition plan
for MONUSCO, including the benchmarks and
indicators for determining the level of preparedness
for a responsible and sustainable drawdown and exit
of the Mission. It is important that the transition
plan be implemented following a clear evaluation
and assessment of the benchmarks achieved, which
should include, inter alia, an efficient transfer of
important tasks such as early-warning networks to the
host Government and enhanced peacebuilding efforts
focusing on socioeconomic development initiatives that
promote post-conflict reconstruction.
The A3+1 reiterates its commitment to the
principle of subsidiarity as enshrined in the letter and
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. In that
regard, we recognize the significant role of regional
organizations, in particular the Economic Community
of Central African States, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the African Union, in
21-27478

05/10/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

supporting mediation and dialogue and promoting
sustainable peace, security and development.
In conclusion, we reiterate our steadfast support
for MONUSCO in its efforts to provide security for
the civilian population and support the strengthening
of key State institutions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We stand in solidarity with the Government
and the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in their quest for sustainable peace and
socioeconomic prosperity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to extend
my warmest congratulations to you, Sir, and your
brotherly country, the Republic of Kenya, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October.
At the same time, I welcome your initiative to
convene this meeting on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
for his commitment to, and support for, my country’s
cause. In addition, I extend my thanks to all members
of the Security Council for the special attention they
have always given to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
(S/2021/807), which has just been presented by his
Special Representative and the Head of MONUSCO,
Ms. Bintou Keita. I welcome her presence and commend
her sustained efforts to promote peace and security in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Allow me to add my delegation’s voice to this
discussion in order to give my Government’s point of
view on the concerns raised in the report and to make
several remarks, mainly concerning the security,
political and humanitarian situation, as well as human
rights issues and MONUSCO’s exit strategy.
Before that, however, allow me to thank
Ambassador Abdou Abarry, Chair of the Security

S/PV. 8873

Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for his briefing on the Committee’s
activities. I also welcome the presence of the civil
society representative from North Kivu, Ms. Mbangu.
As the Council is aware, the major challenge that
my country has been facing for just over two decades
is related to the security situation, particularly in the
east, where a number of rebel armed groups continue
to spread terror and desolation among the population,
affecting women and children in particular. To put an
end to that, the President of the Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo, is relying on
both internal solutions and partnerships at the bilateral
and multilateral levels, as well as on both military and
non-military solutions.
In order to strengthen the fight at the national level,
eradicate those negative forces once and for all and
put an end to that vicious circle of violence, the Head
of State took the decision, in accordance with article
85 of my country’s Constitution, to declare a state of
siege in two eastern provinces in which the security
and terrorist threat level is very high. Thanks to that
decision, significant progress has been made in the fight
against rebel armed groups and in reducing tensions in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The measures taken under the state of siege continue
to be reinforced by my Government, with the support
of its bilateral and multilateral partners, in order to
maintain the pressure on those negative forces and their
accomplices, in particular by increasing the number of
troops and the military presence in those provinces and
through the resumption of joint military operations by
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO.
Given the results obtained to date thanks to my
Government’s implementation of that exceptional
measure, the state of siege will be lifted only when
the circumstances that caused it to be declared have
disappeared. At the regional level, the Head of State is
continuing his efforts to effectively normalize relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours and advance both the promotion of peace
and security and economic integration in the region.
The Democratic Republic of Congo has signed a
number of memoranda of understanding, notably with
Uganda on tracking down Ugandan Allied Democratic
Forces terrorist rebels, on cross-border trade and on

21-2747819/21

S/PV.8873

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the construction of a road through the town of Beni
in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Similarly, three
cooperation agreements were signed with Rwanda on
investments, the prevention of tax evasion and gold
mining cooperation. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo has also signed several memorandums of
understanding with Burundi on politics, diplomacy,
security and infrastructure, including on the
development of a railway that will connect the city of
Kindu, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
Gitega, in Burundi.
The implementation of the state of siege has led to
the voluntary laying down of arms by many combatants
and warlords from both national and foreign armed
groups, thereby increasing the number of demobilized
persons that must be taken care of. That is why there
is an urgent need for an operational disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration strategy that is
adapted to that reality.
To that end, on 4 July and 7 August, the Head of
State signed two ordinances creating the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Recovery and Stabilization
Programme and appointing its members. The
implementation of the Programme will accelerate
the processing of several hundred combatants who
surrendered since the declaration of the state of siege
and beyond. The new Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme
promotes an integrated, community-based approach
that harnesses local resources, with the overarching
goal of ensuring the stability and security of local
communities in order to promote development for all.
It is true that certain challenges, in particular with
respect to security and financing, will complicate
the realization of the programme. It will therefore be
necessary to mobilize the donation of resources. In that
regard, the contributions of donors and other partners,
notably MONUSCO, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the World Bank, inter alia, is very important.
As part of the implementation of resolution
2556 (2020) and its recommendations on the gradual
withdrawal of MONUSCO, a working group has been
established between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO. That joint
working group, which has been expanded to include
other United Nations agencies and civil society, has
produced a transition plan (see S/2021/807, annex),
which will ultimately allow for the gradual transfer of
20/21

05/10/2021

responsibility and the orderly and definitive withdrawal
of MONUSCO by 2024.
Therefore, it is time to unite and mobilize in order
to implement that joint transition plan, which requires
financial, logistical and technical support. Furthermore,
during the transitional period, the Democratic Republic
of Congo expects the United Nations and the Security
Council to assist and provide all the necessary means to
MONUSCO and its Force Intervention Brigade so that
it can fulfil its mission and mandate in accordance with
resolution 2556 (2020).
We would like to stress the need to ensure that the
troops deployed on the ground have the necessary means
and capabilities, including the necessary training, to
meet the requirements of the reality on the ground
and to deal with the asymmetrical warfare currently
being waged by the armed groups and Islamist terrorist
groups operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It is also vital to ensure that the deployment
of the expected units and forces, particularly of
quick-reaction forces, be carried out in accordance
with resolution 2556 (2020) and within the stipulated
time frame.
It is also important to strengthen the joint operations
planned by the FARDC and MONUSCO, particularly
in the provinces under the state of siege, where the
security threat remains high, in order to maintain
pressure on the rebel armed groups and force them to
lay down their arms.
It is important to note that, politically, the
Democratic Republic of Congo has resolutely set its
sights on the organization of democratic, free and
transparent national elections to be held in 2023. The
Government of my country is preparing for those
elections, and a schedule has been drawn up, covering
everything that needs to be done and all the conditions
that need to be met by that time.
In that connection, on 3 July the President of
the Republic promulgated the law amending and
supplementing the organic law on the organization
and functioning of the Independent National
Electoral Commission. That law aims to strengthen
the independence, neutrality and impartiality of the
Commission, as well as to combat all attempts to use
it for inappropriate purposes. A process to select the
leaders of that institution to support democracy is also
under way.
21-27478

05/10/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The issue of human rights violations and restrictions
on democratic space has been at the heart of the
President’s efforts since his accession to power. Indeed,
the Head of State made a commitment to work for the
promotion of the rule of law in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and combat corruption and impunity.
The fight against impunity therefore remains a major
priority for the Government. Significant measures
have been taken to ensure that flagrant human rights
violations do not go unpunished and to support the
creation of a transitional justice mechanism.
With regard to the fight against corruption
in particular, the Head of State established an
anti-corruption agency, attached to his Cabinet, with
the goal of detecting and discouraging all illegal
operations, but also ensuring respect for the proper
management of public affairs, without which it is
challenging to achieve social well-being. In addition,
to promote and protect human rights during the state of
siege in the two provinces concerned, my Government
and the army have established disciplinary mechanisms
to severely punish soldiers who violate those rights.
The humanitarian situation, which was already
worrisome in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo with the large number of refugees and internally
displaced persons following a spate of armed violence,
was exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic
and by the volcanic eruption of Mount Nyiragongo
in May. With regard to the eruption in particular,
my delegation would like to thank the international
community for the spontaneous outpouring of support
for the Congolese people and the efforts of the
Government to assist them.
Allow me to commend the briefing by Ambassador
Abarry and to assure him of the readiness of my
country’s authorities to continue working with the
members of the 1533 Committee. Furthermore, I would
like to take this opportunity to recall the two requests
made of United Nations bodies, in general, and of the
1533 Committee, in particular, by the President of the

S/PV. 8873

Democratic Republic of the Congo on 21 September
during the general debate of the seventy-sixth session
of the General Assembly.
The first request was to lift the measures imposed
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo in paragraph
5 of resolution 1807 (2008), concerning advance
notification to the Committee of any shipment of arms
and related materiel for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, or any provision of assistance, advice or training
related to the military activities of the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo, in particular
as the Government is mandated by the Constitution to
ensure the safety of people and goods throughout the
national territory.
The second request was to impose harsh and
exemplary sanctions on all mafia networks, be they in
transit or destination countries, and on multinationals
that engage in the illegal exploitation of my country’s
mines and provide armed groups with weapons and
ammunition, thereby perpetuating the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Great
Lakes region.
And, if I may, here is my third request. My country
would like the Committee to make greater efforts
to ensure that discussions between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Arab Emirates on
the regular trade of gold from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which are currently at a standstill, can
resume as quickly as possible.
In conclusion, on behalf of my Government, I
would like to thank all MONUSCO personnel, as well
as troop- and police-contributing countries, for their
tireless support to bring about peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

21-2747821/21
