TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
st

MEETING: 3 MAY 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

..,..,. .,.... ..... ...,... .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , , . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8146) , . . . . . . . . , , . . , . . . . . , . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l421)

S/PV.1421

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents ofthe Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
1

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

!

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTY-FIRST

MEETING

Weld in New York on Friday, 3 May 1968, at 3 p.m.
President: Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/llZl)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8560);
Report of the Secretary-General under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/S 146).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8560);
(bl Report of the Secretary-General under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem
(S/8146)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I shall now invite the
representatives of Jordan and Israel to take places at the
Council table in order to participate, without the right to
vote, in the discussion.
At the invitation of the Resident, Mr. M. H El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Security Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
consideration of the question before it.
3. Yesterday evening the representative of Jordan spoke to
US on the question of an invitation to Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib
to speakto the Council. Members of the Councilhave seqn
the letter of 2 May 1968 [S/8570], which the representa;
tive of Jordan addressedto me asPresidentof this COUWAI.
I have been able to consult all membersof the Council. I

find that there is agreementamong the membersof the
Council that Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib should be heard by the
Security Council under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure,which readsasfollows:
“The Security Council may invite members of the
Secretariat or other persons, whom it considerscompetent for the purpose,to supply it with information or
to give other assistancein examining matters within its
competence.”
If I hear no objection, I shallaccordingly invite Mr. Rouhi
El-Khatib to take a place at the Council table and to
addressthe Council.
4. I call on the representative of Algeria on a point of
order.
5. Mr. BOUATTOURA (Algeria) (translated from
French): In a communicationdated 2 May 1968[S/8.570/
from the Jordanian representative addressedto the President of the Security Council-a communication which was
in fact read out at the Council’s last meeting-the Pemlanent Representativeof Jordan requested that Mr. Rouhi
El-Khatib, the elected Mayor of Jerusalem, should be
invited to makea statementto the Council under rule 39 of
the provisionalrulesof procedure.You indicated, Mr. President, that there was no objection to inviting Mr. Rouhi
El-Khatib to speakunder rule 39 of the Security Council’s
provisionalrules of procedure. If we are to apply the rules,
and particularly rule 39, in full and without any mental
reservations,it shouldbe clearly understoodby the Council
that Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib is being invited in his capacity as
the elected Mayor of Jerusalem. This, I repeat, is in
accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure,which clearly states: “The Security Councilmay
invite membersof the Secretariator other persons,whom it
considerscompetent . , .“. In my delegation’s view, the
word “competent” is extremely important and that iswhy
we wantedto expressour opinion on this matter.
6. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representativeof Algeria
for what he has said, but sincehe raisesthe matter on a
point of order, I think perhapsI should reply to him. I
myself do not considerthat it is necessaryor desirablefor
the Council to pronounce on this. The agreementwhich I
secured,after consultation with all membersof the Council,
was that Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib should be invited in accordance with rule 39; that is to say, as a person whom the
Council “considerscompetent for the purpose,to supplyit
with information or to give other assistance
in examining
matters within its competence”. The rule, it seemsto me,
with all respect,is blear,sinceit refers to inviting “members
of the Secretariat or other persons”.

ual, the question of his invitation would not have arisen,
but he has come here in his capacity as Mayor of the City
of Jerusalem, and the consultations between the members
of the Security Council were based on the assumption that
he was to be invited in that capacity. Therefore, whether
you say so or not, it is our understanding that he will speak
to the Council in his capacity as $1: Mayor of the City of
Jerusalem.

7. It was in accordance with that rule that I consulted the
Council and obtained the approval-so I had imagined-of
all members. Consequently, I would propose to proceed
accordingly. IJnless there is objection, I shall invite
Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib to appear and speak before us.
8. I give the floor to the representative of Algeria.
(Algeria) (translated from
9. Mr. DOUATTOURA
French): I apologize for speaking again on such a minor
point and for delaying the long awaited appearance of
Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib, the elected Mayor of Jerusalem, to
make his statement. However, my delegation has not quite
grasped the full import of the statement you have just
made, Mr. President. The Council has decided, in accord.
ante with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, to
invite Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib, whom it considers competent
on the question of Jerusalem, to provide it with information about Jerusalem. His competence is based solely upon
the fact of which we are aware and which is mentioned in
document S/8570, namely, that Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib is
Jerusalem’s elected Mayor. I do not see that there is any
objection to inviting him under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure in his capacity as the elected Mayor of
Jerusalem. I am convinced that all members of the Security
Council, in the light of their vast experience and the
objective manner in which they have approached such
questions in the past, will recognize, as my delegation does,
that when Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib is invited to speak under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, it is in his
capacity as the elected Mayor of Jerusalem.

14. The PRESIDENT: Two points of order have been
raised in this Council: first of all, by the representative of
Algeria, and now by the representative of the Soviet Union.
Therefore, I am doubly required to give a ruling. I shall read
the rule again and I shall state my ruling, and I shall
proceed accordingly unless challenge is made. The rule in
question is rule 39 which I have already quoted to the
Council, It reads as follows:
“The Security Council may invite members of the
Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers cornpetent for the purpose, to supply it with information or
to give other assistance in examining matters within its
competence.”
15. Following on the application made and the consultations which I undertook, my ruling is that I should now
proceed to invite Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib, in accordance with
rule 39, to appear before us and speak to us. I call on the
representative of Pakistan.
16. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Since the question has been
raised about the competence of Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib, it is
necessary for my delegation to state that there can be no
question that the reason why the Council will consider
Mr. El-Khatib as “a competent person” in the sense of rule
39 is that he is the elected Mayor of Jerusalem.

10. The PRESIDENT: I always listen with great respect to
the interventions of the representative of Algeria, particularly on matters of Council procedure. He has spoken,
however, on a point of order and I am required under the
rules, when a point of order is raised, to give a ruling. The
ruling I give is that I propose to call on Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib
to address us, as I had stated, in accordance with the
consultations ivhich I have undertaken under rule 39 of our
provisional rules of procedure, and I would propose to call
on Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib to appear before us unless my
ruling is challenged.

17. Reference has been made by the representative of the
Soviet Union to the two resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly at its fifth emergency special session concerning
Jerusalem which declared that all measures already taken to
alter the status of Jerusalem should be rescinded and that
no further action should be taken which would alter its
status [resolutions 2253 (ES-V) arzd 2254 (ES-V)] .

11. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): Your last statement, Mr. President, was quite
clear. You quite obviously implied that Mr. Rouhi
El-Khatib is being invited to speak in his capacity as
Jerusalem’s elected Mayor.

18. In accordance with these resolutions, and by reason of
the fact that Mr. El-Khatib is the elected Mayor of
Jerusalem, I do not see why there should bc any difficulty
in stating that the Council has agreed to invite and to hear
Mr. El-Khatib as the Mayor of Jerusalem.

12. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union on a point of order.

19. The PRESIDENT: I take it that the representative of
Pakistan is also raising a point of order and, therefore, it
will be necessary for me to repeat the ruling which I have
already given, and I would proceed accordingly to carry out
the ruling which it is my duty to give when points of order
are raised in this Council.

13. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(Wanslated fro??? Russian): I should like to make the
follow@ observations. When your representative consulted
our delegation the question was raised as to whether
Mr. El-Khatib would be invited in his capacity as Mayor of
Jerusalem. He holds no other post. We issued this invitation
on the understanding that ‘Mr. El-aatib would make a
~~~~e~ent in the SeCUrity Council in his capacity
asMayor
of Jerusalem, particularly since, as is well known, the
pertinent General Assembly resolutions [2253 (ES-V) and
22.54 (Bs-V)J state that there shall be no change in the
status of Jerusalem. If Mr. El-Khatib were a private
individ.

20. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): We have waited for
quite a long time to be able to discuss the problem of
Jerwalemin detail, and my delegation wishes to express its
gratitude to the delegation of Jordan for having requested
the Mayor of Jerusalem, Mr. Rouhi El-fiatib, to come to
Present the case before the Council. I think that the
examination of this question in an objective manner will be
2

/
I

greatly enhanced and our discussion only more authorita”
tive if the venerable Mayor of Jerusalem is heard before our
Council in his official capacity as such.

28. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Algeria for the way in which he has spoken and the desire
he has expressed that we should proceed in harmony and,
indeed, with respect for anyone invited to appear before
this Council as competent to give us information which we
wish to hear from him. I would suggest that there could be
no one better qualified and more competent to speak than
the gentleman whom we propose to invite I therefore
propose, in accordance with the ruling which I have been
required to give by the points of orders raised, to proceed
now to invite Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib to appear before us and
to speak to us and explain to us, as he no doubt will, the
reasons for his coming and the competence for his giving us
the information we require.

21, Thus my delegation wishes to underline the importance of this development in the work of our Council and
to support fully the opinions expressed by the representatives of Algeria, the Soviet Union and Pakistan.
22. The PRESIDENT: I would say again, in answer to the
point of order that has been raised, that when a point of
order is raised it is necessary for me to give my ruling. The
opinions expressed by members of the Council are their
own, and every member of the Council is entitled to his
own view. Question may well be raised about substance in
the discussion of points of order which 1 do not think we
have the right or, indeed, the duty to pursue at this stage.

29. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
Frerzch~: I very much regret that so much valuable time
should be spent during this meeting of the Security Council
in considering a procedural question which we had not
thought in the least controversial or liabie to be misunderstood. You yourself said a few moments ago, Mr. President,
that there is not, and could not be, a person more
competent in this matter thw Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib. And
why is he competent? Some things are beyond the
understanding of the Algerian representative in the Security
Council. We have always believed that a person was
competent by reason of his experience in a given field, by
reason of his qualities, or because of his office or
occupation.

23, We are not dealing with questions of substance; we are
d-ealing solely with a question of procedure and the points
of order which have been raised. I believe it would be in the
best interests of our work and of the respect we have for
those whom we invite to appear before us if we might now
proceed in accordance with my ruling to invite Mr. Rouhi
El-Khatib to appear before us and to speak to us.
24. That is the ruling I have given, and I believe it is in
accordance with both our practice in the past and the clear
provisions of the rule under: which we act. I propose to
proceed accordingly.,

30. We are inviting Mr, Rouhi El-Khatib to speak because
the Security Council considers him competent with regard
to the question of Jerusalem that is before us, There is no
argument about that, If he is competent, it is because he is
Jerusrdem’s elected Mayor. There may, of course, be other
reasons; if so, my delegation would like to be enlightened
on the matter.

BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated porn
French): Mr. President, I shall comply with the statement
YOU have just made and your appeal to the members of the
Council not to continue to pursue this point of orderwhich, incidentally, was not one, for my delegation had had
no intention whatsoever of raising a point of order.
25.

Mr.

26. In view of the respect which, as you yourself have
pointed out, we owe to a person “competent” with regard
to the Jerusalem question which is before the Council; in
view of the fact that this competent person can supply us
with extremely valuable information and can, we know,
assist us in our consideration of a question which comes
within our competence; in view also of the fact that the
ruling which you intended to make could have established
what some might regard as dangerous precedent, thereby
challenging the wisdom of a presidential ruling; and in view
of the very fact that we are acting in accordance with rule
39 in inviting someone whom the Council regards as
competent-and
in what way could Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib be
regarded as competent, except as the elected Mayor of
Jerusalem? -1 do not understand why, Mr. President, on
the one hand, you desire to give a ruling and on the other
hand, the supplementary
suggestions put forward by
various delegations, including mine, could not, for the sake
of the harmony we all seek, be combined in a singIe
decision.

32. With all due respect to you, Mr. President, my
delegation would insist that it should be stated clearly,
without misunderstanding or controversy, and in full
agreement, that the Council, in accordance with rule 39, is
inviting Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib, in his capacity’ as Mayor of
Jerusalem, to supply it with information and assist it in its
consideration of the question of, Jerusalem, which lies
within the competence of the Security Council. You will
observe Mr. President, that I have followed rule 39 to the
letter.

27, I am convinced, Mr, President, that the desire to be
objective by which you have always been guided and the
desire to avoid a presidential ruling which could be wrongly
used in t$e future, will lead you and the other members of
the Council to ensure that rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure is applied properly and without any reservation.

33. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): In the view of my
delegation, Mr. President, my earlier statement did not refer
to the substance of the matter; it was rather a procedural
statement aimed at promoting understanding in order to
facilitate the work of the Council. While we are dealing
with procedural matters it is very difficult to avoid
mentioning words relating to the substance of those

31. In my last statement I tried to make it clear that my
delegation did not raise a point of order; it merely
expressed an opinion. It did so in the hope that you,
Mr. President, in your wisdom would either accept it or
submit it to the kindly consideration of the Council. Our
suggestion was merely designed to complement the fair and
appropriate decision which the President felt it his duty to
take.

3

endeavour to reach a conclusion and to proceed, I wouId,
unless there are further objections or challenges, proceed to
issue the invitation accordingly.

matters. in fact, rule 39 contains several words which relate
to the substance of problems under discussion. It raises the
question of competence, it raises the question Of information, and it raises the question of the examination of
matters by this Council. I was referring to the matter we are
now discussing, to the way we can gather information, and
to the competence of the Mayor of Jerusalem, who can
supply us with the best kind of information, thus facilitating the work of the Council. Since rule 39 expressly
mentions the competence of the person who is to appear
before the Council, I think that competence can be
described and clearly expressed, and that it is indeed proper
to do SO, by mentioning that the person appearing before
the Council today is Mayor El-Khatib of Jerusalem.

38, Hearing no objection, I therefore, in the name of the
Council, invite Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib to take a place at the
i
Council table and to speak to us.
At the invitution of the President, Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib
t&Jr a place at the Council id-de.

39. Mr. EL-KHATIB: I convey and extend to you,
Mr. President, to your colleaguesmembersof the Security
Council, to the people and the Governmentswhich all of
you represent,and through the courtesy of your Council,
to all lovers of the Holy City, greetings.

34. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): It seems to me, Mr. President, that you, in your patience, have stated the invitation
to the very distinguished gentleman who has come to visit
us in a manner which, as far as I can see, does not prejudice
the position of any delegation or of anyone around this
Council table. The proposal that you put to us was that he
be forthwith invited to address the Council on the matter
on which we would like to hear him and concerning which
we wish to receive information. I would hope, Sir, that we
could proceed to do that in accordance with the way in
which you very wisely and tactfully put the matter to the
Council, and that we could do so without further delay.

40. In the name of Jerusalemand its residentswhom 1
representasMayor by election, I thank you, Mr. President,
and the Council for the opportunity you are offering me
today to speakbefore you and to give first-hand factual
information about the tragic picture of the Arabs in
Jerusalemandthe city itself sincethe Israelioccupation.
41. Before I begin, allow me to state right away that I
have never been a politician in my life, nor do I claim
experiencein the political field. In making this admission,
it
is essentialfor me to explain that my former activitieshave
been centred arouhd public service. particularly that of
Jerusalem:first as a member of its Municipal Council,
starting on 1 January 1949, and then, during the lastten
yearsasMayor of the city.

35. The PRESIDENT: I regret that we have been unable
so far in this Council to proceed with the business before
us. I had been anxious, by consulting all members of the
Council, to avoid any delay or disrespect to our distinguished visitor. If, in speaking to members of the Council, I
failed to make clear the question I was putting to them,
then I can only apologize to them. But I was quite clear in
putting the question to all members of the Council that we
should invite Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib to address us today, and
I understood that the reply of all concerned was that they
agreed with the proposal that I had put. It was on that basis
that I came to the Council and expected that we could
proceed at once to hear Mr. El-Khatib, and I hoped that we
might immediately do so.

42. It wasthis latter function that wasthe direct causeof
my expulsionfrom the city where I have spentthe 54 years
of my life, and where my family haslived continuouslyfor
the past 800 years. It is this expulsion that haspermitted
meto appearbeforeyou today.
43. The information I am presentingtoday isquotedfrom
my own notes, which I tried to put on record duringmy
presencein the city for the nine months following the
Israeli occupation. Newsof last month wascollectedby me
from various reliable neutral sourcesarriving from Jerusalemin Amman, whereI am temporarily living.

36. I would most respectfully put it to my fellow
members of the Council that it is neither necessary nor
desirable that we should attempt to reach conclusions on
matters of substance or rnatters of representation. We know
very well why the proposal was put to us that Mr. Rouhi
ElKhatib should appear before us. We were of one mind in
agreeing that we should hear him, We know very well the
competence that he brings; otherwise it would not have
been the universal opinion that we should welcome him and
hear what he had to say to us.

44. TO begin with I have to go back to the first weekof
the occupation and summarize as follows. The Israeli
authoritiesstarted by spreadinghorror in all comersof the
city, outside the walls and inside, in the mosques
aswellas
in the churches, occupying large buildings and hotels,
raiding houses,shopsand garages,looting whatevercame
into their hands,treating cruelly anyone who showedthe
slightest sign of dissatisfaction, gathering the inhabitants
from their homes under severe and arrogant measures,
keepingthem standingfor hours, irrespectiveof ageor sex,
and gaoling hundredsand up to thousandsfor unlimited
periods and for no reasonwhatsoever. ln a nutshell,the
Israelis were creating waves of fear and terror to force
peopleto leave.

37. I would put it to the Council that it would be in the
best interests of all concerned, and indeed would show
respect to the person whom we are today inviting to speak
to US, that we should proceed without further delay to
invite Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib to sit with us and to speak to us.
Each member of the Council will listen to him respectfully
this afternoon and each member of the Council will have
his own views on the matters which he raises and on the
explanations which he gives and on the justification for his
coming. It is on that basis that I hope that we can agree and
go forward, and since I have no alternative -bu t tc?

45. By the end of a week of their occupationthe Israeli
authorities started a new campaign directed this time
against the buildings and the residentsof the Maghrabi
quarter. That quarter belonged to the North African
4

/

Moslem

communities including those from Morocco,
Tunisiaand Libya. Here the Israelisbulldozed 135
houses belongingto the Moslem Waqf-Moslem Trustnamed after a very respectedNorth African pious Moslem
and religiousleader called “Abu Madyan el-Gouth”. The
houseswere demolishedand razed within two days, at a
time when the curfew extended eighteenhoursa day giving
the poor residentsa warning of only two to three hours.
The poor bewilderedpeople were lost and many of them
were unableto savemore than what they could carry-and
that only if it happenedthat they had no children to look
after. No response
cameto my quick appealand that of the
Municipal Council through the Army liaison officer who
was attached to us. The bewildered inhabitants were
scattered in the adjacent lanesand streetsand someat a
later stagefound refuge in the neighbouringvillages.The
total numberof personsaffected by this campaignwas650.
Two smallmosqueswere amongstthe demolishedbuildings.
A few days later, a modern plasticsfactory, ownedby an
Arab and quite near to the former buildings,wasburnt and
destroyed by the Israeli armed forces. Two hundred
labourers, maintaining 200 families, becameunemployed.
Until I wasforced to leave the city, and to my knowledge,
no compensationwas paid to the owner. Similarly, the
Israeli authoritiescontinued to occupy many large buildings, including tourist hotels, looting articles therein and
adding to the increasingnumbersof unemployedArabs.
Algeria,

46. In the secondweek, the Israeli authorities andJewish
religious bodies directed a third campaignagainst the
inhabitants of the neighbouringareaof the WesternWall of
the Al AqsaMosque, popularly known asthe WailingWall
and legally proved to be Moslem property. That campaign
was later extended to cover wider areasin the heart of the
Moslem quartersand, to someextent, the standinghouses
in the old Jewish quarter, 80 per cent of which is Arab
property. Inhabitants of that area, comprisingsome650
families, constituting around 3,000 inhabitants,were given
a warning by Israelireligiousbodies-later confirmedby the
army authorities-to evacuate within three days at the
maximum. That poor group was forced to leave, adding
more sorrows to the atmosphere of the city and its
embittered residents.Appealswere againsubmittedby the
Arab Municipal Council, which wasstill operating,but with
no responsefrom the Israelis. The destiny of the second
group wasno lesstragic than the former.

Municipal Council and dismissing
the Mayor and members
of the Council. This order was conveyed to a few of usin
an urgent and dramatic way-by bringing us from our
homesand gatheringus in a hotel room occupiedby the
Israeliforces, wherethe Israeli AssistantMilitary Governor
of the areathen readthe contentsof that order in Hebrew,
with a simultaneous
interpretation by their Military Liaison
Officer. A copy of the Arabic translation was preparedon
the spot and giv.ento us upon our demand by the same
LiaisonOfficer. I still havethat document in my possession;
a photostatic copy, marked Exhibit I, is presentedto the
Council. It readsin translation:1
“In the name of the Israeli Defence Army, I have the
honour to declareto Mr. Kouhi El-Khatib and to the
Membersof Jerusalem
Municipal Council, that the Municipal Council is hereupon dissolved.The Municipality
employees,of all departmentsincluding administrative
and technical, are, hereupon, considered as temporary
employeesin Jerusalem
Municipality until their employment is decidedby the JerusalemMunicipality after they
submitwritten applicationsfor employment.
“In the nameof the Israeli DefenceArmy, I call upon
the Municipality employeesto continue their necessary
servicesto the inhabitantsof the City.
“I thank Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib and the membersof the
Municipality for their servicesrenderedduring the transitional period commencingupon the entry of the Israeli
DefenceArmy up to today.”
49. The documentwasdated 29 June 1967; it wasread by
the Assistant Military Governor of Jerusalem, Yacoub
Salman and translated by Army Liaison Officer David
Farhi.
50. We were subjectedto intimidation, and could not
show at that time any resistanceagainst such Israeli
measures.The .only thing left to us was to advise our
employeesto continue their servicesfor the welfare of the
populationand the upkeepof the city.

51. In this respectI am bound to explain that the Arab
Council and myself have spared no effort in quickly
resumingour responsibilitiesand duties right from the
secondday of the Israeli occupation. We managedto see
4’7. At the end of the third week the most effective blow
that servicesin the fields of sanitation, water supply and
was directed at the entity of the Arab statusin Jerusalem.
electricity were put in order andthat shopswerereopened,
On 27 June 1967, the Israeli Parliamentissueda decreeof
and particularly that food-stuffs were within reach of all
death to the Arab status of Jerusalemby passingan illegal residents. We did this in spite of all the difficulties
act through which it announced the annexation of Arab
encountered.
Jerusalem to Israel. That act continued the defiance of
General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 52. The Arab Municipal Council, the various Arab unions
2254 (ES-V) of 4 and 14 July 1967 respectively. A day and religiousrepresentatives
in Jerusalemand the west bank
later-that is, on 28 June 1967-the Israeli Minister of
of the Jordanhaveobjectedandprotestedin writing against
Internal Affairs, relying on the former act of the Israeli the Israeli destructivemeasures.Originals of their memoParliament, issuedan order by which he mergedthe town
randawere presentedto the Israelimilitary authorities, and
planning area of the two sectorsof Jerusalem,irrespective copies were, handed over to Mr. Ernest A. Thalmann,
of the legalpresenceof the Arab Municipal Council and Special Representativeof the Secretary-General of the
againstthe will of the Arab residents.
United Nations, when meeting our representativesin
Jerusalemin August 1967. Texts of thesememorandaare
48. On the following day-that is, 29 June’ 1967-the
to be found in Mr. Thalrnann’sreport to the SecretaryIsraeli forces completed their plan and issueda Militav
1 See document S/PV.1421/Add.l
Defence Order calling for the dissolution of the Arab

General [S/8146/ of 12 September 1967. Full texts of
those memoranda are also included in Arabic basic docu
ments under the title: “The Resistance of the Western Bank
of Jordan to Israeli Occupation 1967.” A copy of this
booklet in English, marked Exhibit II,2 is hereby presented
for the information of the Council.

58. A girls’ school building belonging to Moslem Waqf was
confiscated by the Chief Rabbi and turned into the High
Court of Appeals for Jewish Religious Affairs;inside the
city walls. Again, those in charge of Moslem Waqf protested, but in vain, and again what is Moslem and Arab
becomes Jewish and Israeli.

53. Since the taking of those destructive measures, the
situation in Arab Jerusalem has been deteriorating Day
after day the Israeli authorities are taking one measure after
another, carefully planned and quickly executed. It is
greatly feared that the Israeli acts will create more
bitterness in the hearts of the Arab population, Christians
and Moslems, and will incite the feelings of the Moslem and
Christian worlds against such measures; it is feared that
these may obstruct the mission of Mr. Jarring and may add
fuel to the fire in the Middle East.

59. Following the annexation of the Arab sector of
Jerusalem by Israel, the Israeli Municipality and various
Israeli ministerial offices started to apply Israeli laws and
regulations and instruct the Arabs of Jerusalem to observe
and abide by those laws and regulations. Israeli currency,
customs duties, excises and income taxes, traffic, telephone
rates, municipal taxes and by-laws were imposed. Hebrew
school curricula were applied for Arab schools and students, The worst of all laws applied was the one called the
“Absentees’ Property Law”. This law entitled the Israeli
authorities to lay full hands on all movable and immovable
properties of absentee Arabs. The so-called “absentee
Arabs” included those working in one of the Arab countries
or deserting after 5 June 1967. That illegal practice
swallows a great deal of the Arab property in the area and is
one of the means intended to be used to liquidate the
Palestinians and the Palestine case.

54. The Israeli authorities have by their inaction authorized the desecration of Christian and Moslem Holy Places
and have permitted access by Jews to these Holy Places
during hours of prayer. This complete lack of respect has
grossly offended the religious sensitivities of the believers of
both religions.

60. The Israeli Cabinet has recently taken a decision to
turn a newly built Arab hospital which was to accommodate patients from Jerusalem and the neighbouring
villages into an Israeli police headquarters.

55. The Holy Places, Christian and Moslem alike, were
subjected to repeated desecration not familiar to us. An
example was the infamous burglary of one of the largest
and holiest of churches in the world, the Church of the
Holy Sepulchre. The priceless diamond-studded crown of
the statue of the Virgin, Our Lady of Sorrows, on Calvary
was stolen. Priests have been victims of aggression, offences
and maltreatment by the Jews of Israel. These and similar
acts would not happen under Jordanian rule.

61. The Arabs of Jerusalem were mostly dependent on the
tourist trade. In the past twenty years they succeeded in
establishing over fifty hotels and developed a number of
tourist agencies, souvenir industries and hundreds of tourist
cars and pullman buses, employing over 2,000 employees in
those trades. The building industry, with all its branches,
was also progressing, recruiting into it about 6,000
employees. Other trades and industries employed about
4,000. The effects of the war, the closing of Arab banks
and the confiscation of their cash money, the unbearable
conditions imposed by the Israeli authorities for restoring
their operations, the stoppage of the flood of cash
investments and deposits sent ‘by Palestinians working
abroad, the continuous drop in the tourist industry and the
closing down of Jerusalem Airport-all
those factors have
reduced Arab employment by more than 50 per cent. Both
Arab investors and employees are suffering heavily and the
result is serious and dangerous. As a result of all these
economic and political pressures, over 8,000 persons have
had to leave their city-Jerusalem-and
cross the Jordan
River.

56. The Chief Rabbi of the Israeli Army, Brigadier Goren,
with his escort and other Jews, on 15 August 1967
mounted to the Dome of the Rock area with rabbinical
vestments and prayer-books. They conducted a prayer
lasting two hours within the confines of the Mosque of
Omar area, thus infringing the inviolability of a most Holy
Place venerated by Moslems. The ‘Israeli Minister of
Religion announced at another time that that Moslem
Mosque was Jewish property and that sooner or later they
would rebuild their Jewish temple thereon, paving the way
to creating the opportunity for laying hands on and
destroying the Dome of the Rock, the second holiest place
after Mecca for Moslems. Buildings belonging to Islamic
Waqf, an Islamic religious institution, adjacent to the
Mosque area have been demolished, as stated earlier, with
the idea of setting up a Jewish praying centre thereon, What
has been Moslem Arab becomes Jewish and Israeli.

62. What is more, merchants of the city sold their goods
within almost the first month after the occupation. Israeli
trade regulations force them to limit new purchases to
articles and goods produced and manufactured mostly in
Israel. They are finding themselves dragged under the Israeli
national economy umbrella and automatically bound up
with the expansionist policy of Israel. Arab wealth and
capital are being absorbed and are vanishing in the ocean of
Israeli rules and regulations, It is because of such’measures
and others that the Arabafeel insecure that their lives and
property are in danger, that more signs of danger and
expansion are to come and that what is Arab becomes
Jewish and Israeli.

57. In August 1967 the Israeli army confiscated the keys
to one of the gates of the Al Aqsa Mosque. They opened
the door to Jewish visitors, or, to be more accurate, Jewish
vandalism and desecration. The Israelis made it a point,
when visiting the Aqsa, not to miss the Moslem prayer and
SO disturb those who prayed. The Israeli authorities did not
even care to reply to a protest submitted by Moslem
religious authorities against such Israeli behaviour. The keys
to that gate are still in Israeli hands.
2 Seedocument S/PV.l421/Add

2.

6

63. I am taking the liberty of delivering two photostatic
copies of two new Israeli plans which were disclosed and
distributed in Jerusalem early last March.3

Jordan Government owns lessthan 50 dunumsand this is
far lessthan 1 per cent, the remainingarea,exceeding3,000
dunums-or roughly 91 per cent-belongsto Arab individuals,familiesand companies
in Jerusalem.

64. The first plan, marked Exhibit III, is a survey plan of
the northern part of Jerusalem. In the centre of the plan
there is a dark patch which represents the first area of land
which the Israelis have selected for the construction of the
first Israeli quarter to be established on the recently seized
Arab lands.

69. Israelseizedtheselandsin order to build up a Jewish
housing area; the initial project covers 600 dunums for
about 2,500 housingunits. It is reported that construction
will be startingvery soon.
70. The present Israeliproject is obviously a part of an
Israeli expansionistplan designedto build up a belt of
Jewishhouses,extending from the perimeter of the Jewish
quarterin westernJerusalem
andheadingnortheastthrough
the heart of Arab landsand housingareas,with the clear
purposeof setting up a fence or rather a dam to separate
the Arabs of Jerusalemfrom their Arab brethren in
adjoiningvillages and other Arab towns to the north of
Jerusalem.This project will annul the Arab development
plan, which the Arabs havebeenpreparingfor anumber of
years.

65. The second plan, marked Exhibit IV, is, as you can
readily discern, a town planning scheme of the site on
which the first Israeli quarter will be constructed. The plan
defines the roads, open spaces and building units. Those
two plans have been extracted from an official Israeli
pamphlet in Hebrew. I am not aware if the same document
is available in Arabic or English for the benefit of the Arabs
or others in the occupied territories. It is certain that the
publication was originally issued in Hebrew on purpose for
the benefit of the Israelis and nobody else. The document
contains details of the housing project and methods of
appropriating housing sites and building the housing units
with long-term and low-interest loans. It is clearly stated
that the price of each site is only nominal. Elsewhere in the
document are examples of the application forms and advice
about the possibility of completing the necessary transactions before the end of March 1968.

71. The mapshowingthe plan and the land expropriated
is alsopresented,asExhibit VI.
72. The Israeli project will also contain the Arabs of
Jerusalemin a limited space,which will ultimately reduce
their numbersand afford Israelthe opportunity to bring in
new immigrants and make Jews the majority of the
populationin Arab Jerusalem
in a few years.

66. The lands concerned are part and parcel of Arab lands
and properties in Arab Jerusalem. The Israelis seized these
lands under the stress of military occupation. These lands
were “seized” because the lands involved were pillaged and
confiscated from their rightful and established owners as far
back as 11 January 1968, in accordance with a so-called
Expropriation Bill issued by the Israeli authorities. I present
to you a copy of this Bill as an addition to the plans; it is
marked Exhibit V.

73. The construction of the new Israeli quarter, and the
other similar quarters which are intended to follow it,
confirms andprovesthe anxiety and fearsof the Arabs that
Israeli leadersare planningandworking for expansion,and
that showsclearly and glaringly that their plea for peace,
which they so frequently repeat, is nothing more than a
cover for their real expansionistintentions. It is indeed, as
time andeventshaveproved, a hypocritical plea,

67. The area of the land seized is 3,345 dunums-a dunum
is equal to 1,000 square metres-and is roughly equal to
848 acres. During the Security Council meeting of 27 April
1968, the Israeli representative claimed that:

74. This Israeli project, like their other projects and
designs,is most oppressive.It suffocatesthe attemptsand
endeavoursbeing made by a number of peace-loving
quarters to achieve peacefor the area. It in fact impedes
and destroys the mission of Mr. Gunnar Jarring the
representativeof the UnitedNations.

“Most of the land involved in the reconstruction
projects is not Arab-, but Jewish-owned and public
domain. (1416th meeting, para. 88.J

75. The Israeli project further showsbeyond any doubt
that Israelaimsat defeatingany just solution,in spite Of
the repeatedallegationsof its leadersthat they co-operate
with Mr. Jarringandsupporthismission.

He further claimed that:
“The land records happen to be in Jerusalem, not in
Amman.” [Ibid.]
On the other hand, the Israeli authorities in Jerusalem told
another story. They said: “One third of the area belongs to
Jewish individuals, one third to the Jordan Government and
the last third to Arab individuals and corporations.”

76. The Arabs of Jerusalem
haveraisedtheir voicesagainst
the seizureof theselandsand brandedthe Israelimeasures
as a violation of the United Nations resolutions, of
international law and of the GenevaConventions.4They
confronted the Israeli authoritieswith a memorandumon
14 January 1968 protesting against this seizure and
demandingits annulment,They also forwarded copiesof
this memorandumto the representativesof the foreign
Governments residing in Jerusalem,to the SecretaryGeneralof the United Nationsandto hispersonalrepresen-

68. Both Israeli claims are unfounded and certainly
untrue. Official records in the Department of Land Registry
in Jerusalem, identical copies of which are available in
Amman and London, show beyond any doubt .that Jewish
organizations and individuals do not own more than 250
dunums, or less than 8 per cent of the total area seized. The

4 Geneva
Conventions
of 12 August 1949 for the protectionof
warvictims.

3 See document S/PV.1421/Add.l.

7

continues. The so-called “Land of Israel Movement” calls
for the establishment of Jewish settlements, in what they
call the “liberated area”, as first priority. The motto of this
movement is: “The land is ours if WF will occupy it and
build it up”. That is exactly what the Israeli Government is
engaging in, without saying it out loud.

tative, Mr. Jarring. A copy of this memorandum is now
being presented to you as Exbibit VII.
77. In addition, the proprietors of the lands concerned
have made a similar protest, They totally rejected the
seizure of the lands; and a copy of their protest is also
presented to you as Exhibit VIII.

84. The inhabitants of the Arab sector of Jerusalem and
those of the west bank resolutely proclaim their opposition
to all measures which the Israeli occupation authorities
have taken and which those authorities regard as constituting a fait accompli not subject to appeal or reversal,
namely, the “unification” of the two sectors of the City of
Jerusalem under Israeli sovereignty. They proclaim to the
whole world that this annexation, sometimescamouflaged
under the cloak of administrativemeasures,wascarriedout
againsttheir will and againsttheir wishes.

78. We consider the Israeli housing project and the Israeli
insistence on carrying it out as fast as possible to be an act
of extreme arrogance, calculated, as indeed it is, to
disregard and show disdain for the resolutions of the United
Nations and strongly infringe the rights of civilian Arab
inhabitants. It is an act of aggression against the rights of a
sovereign nation, Member of the United Nations.
79. We also see clearly in this project Israel’s deliberate
and determined policy to change the outlook and character
of Jerusalem and consolidate Israel’s territorial expansionist
gains, which were brought about by aggression, as the
Council is already aware.

85. We considerthe Israeli acts of annexation, confiscation and Jewish settlementin Arab land asactsof extreme
aggression,calculated,asindeed they are, to disregardand
stronglyinfringe the rights of Arab civilian inhabitants.

80. Yesterday’s military parade is another dagger directed
at the core of our hearts and at the prestige of the United
Nations. Every Arab in Jerusalem is threatened with being
the next victim and every resident in Arab Jerusalem has
but one choice: stay and live in misery and oppression, or
leave,

86. The Arabs still have faith in the United Nations,but
for how long this will continue is another question.
87. Mr. President,membersof the Council, thank you.

Mr. El-Khatib withdrew.
81. The Arabs of Jerusalem raised their voices and
protested against the parade. A copy of their protest is
hereby presented to the Council as Exhibit IX. The Arab
ladies of Jersualem protested and demonstrated on 25 April
1968. Their demonstration was broken up by Israeli police
forces. A copy of their protest, together with a set of nine
photographs showing the mistreatment by the Israeli
policemen, was presented to the Council by the Permanent
Representative of Jordan, Mr. El-Farra, on 1 May 1968
[S/8568/.

88. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): Before commencingmy
statement on the subjectnow under discussion,allow me,
Mr. President, to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
your predecessor,Mr. Malik of the Soviet Union. Muchhas
already been said about the exemplary manner in which
Mr. Malik conducted our proceedingsduring his term as
President of the Council, It is difficult indeed to add
anything to the words of praise of my colleaguesexcept
perhapsto say that in displayinghis competence,patience
and fairness,he hasset a high mark for future Presidents
of
the Council.

82. Last but not least, the Israeli authorities refused to
implement the Council’s resolution 237 (1967), unanimously adopted on 14 June 1967, calling upon the
Government of Israel to ensure the safety, welfare and
security of the inhabitants of the areas where military
operations have taken place and to facilitate the return of
those inhabitants who have fled the areas since the
outbreak of hostilities.

89. Having said that, I wish to express a few words of
welcome to you, Sir, on your assumptionof this high
office. Your high qualities of statesmanship,your frequently displayed eloquence and ability as a debater,
coupled with an excellent senseof humour, will certainly
help us, we trust, in achievingsuccessin the arduoustasks
facing us.

83. All the above-mentioned Israeli measures of desecration of Holy Places, of expropriation and annexation of
Arab property and land, of confiscation of the so-called
absentee property, of refusal to permit Arabs to go back to
their houses in Jerusalem, of arresting and arbitrarily
detaining thousands of Arabs, of expulsion of many
dignitaries of Jerusalem against their will, of dynamiting
and bulldozing Arab houses, of building new Jewish
settlements within and around Jerusalem, and imposing
harsh economic pressures-all these acts and measures are
most oppressive; they are designed to change the identity
and character of Jerusalem, to turn what is Arab into
Jewish and Israeli, and to ensure that the Arab majority
there becomes a minority. These unlawful Israeli procedures will continue and will gain momentum as long as the
Israeli occupation of our Holy City and Arab territories

90. I wish to expressmy delegation’ssatisfactionthat, in
the very difficult conditions prevailing, Mr, El-Khatib,
Mayor of Jerusalem,could find it possibleto cometo the
United Nations to give us a first-hand account of the
situation in Jerusalem, thus making a highly valuable
contribution to our discussion.We have indeed been
gratified by his important and lucid statementand wewere
deeply impressedby his personalserenity.
91. The Hungarian delegation has already set forth its
views on various occasionson the problem of Jerusalem.
The latest of these statements was made at the 1417th
meeting of the Council. We have stated clearly that the
status of Jerusalem was regulated by an international
instrument, the General Armistice Agreement, which re8

mains valid until modified or suspended by the two
signatories, Jordan and Israel. We have also pointed out that
no unilateral renunciation is provided for in the text of the
Agreement.

97. He is obviously hoping that others, unlike him, will
respect the Charter and abstain from quoting the numerous
cases of discrimination, oppression and murderous assaults
on political figures which are so well known in Israel’s
political life.

92. Israel, which has embarked on the road of a unilateral
renunciation of the Armistice Agreement, is thus not acting
in good faith and is violating the letter and the spirit of that
instrument. It is to be regretted that in so doing it enjoys
the support of a great Power, the leaders of which not long
ago openly declared their support in maintaining the
territorial integrity of all Middle Eastern States.

98. But let us examine this so-called argument. Is it the
contention of the Israeli Government that a Member of the
United Nations which is critical of the conditions prevailing
in another Member State is entitled to annex that territory
to improve those conditions‘? Does Israel recognize the
right of others to invade other countries for similar reasons,
or is this a privilege that is app!uently reserved to Israel
alone? I do not think that these questions need any
answer.

93. To effect the changes that it desires in the status of
Jerusalem, Israel has used force. It is by means of war that
Israel has tried to bring about the annexation of Arab
Jerusalem. This is not ,the approach of the Charter of the
United Nations; it is the approakh of what a widely read
American publication called “a Modern Sparta”; it is the
approach of a militaristic regime which is bent on dictating
territorial changes to its neighbours by the use of naked
force. It is an approach with which membership of our
Organization is incompatible.

99. Finally, Israel contends that Jerusalem belongs to it
because, as the representative of Israel said at the Council
meeting on 27 April last, “For 3,000 years Jerusalem has
been the focal point of Jewish history, civilization and
religion.” [3416th meeting, para. 91.1
100. In reply, I wish to quote the representative of France
who, speaking on Jerusalem, correctly said: “The main
point is still the question of sovereignty.” [I41 7th meeting,
para. 51.1

94. When asked to explain its anachronistic approach to
the territorial integrity of its neighbours, and thus to Arab
Jerusalem, the Government of Israel puts forward at least
three sets of arguments. First, it says that Jordan has no
right to Arab Jerusalem because Jordan, so it says, has
acquired control over it through military conquest. One
marvels at the lack of consistency in this statement when
one recalls that Israel claims rights to Arab Jerusalem on
the very same basis.

101. In this connexion I feel compelled to say a few words
on the attempts of the representative of Israel to transform
this Council into a forum of religions, Time and again, we
have heard the Israeli representative say he is speaking on
behalf of the Jewish people, refer to Jewish blood, and so
on. I find these references absolutely out of place in this
Council. We represent no religions in this Organization. We
represent States in which people with various religious or
other convictions live. No one has the right here to speak
on behalf of religions, especially if the members of certain
religious communities have, as in fact they do have,
different nationalities.

95. In denying Jordan’s rights in Jerusalem, Israel is in
effect trying to invalidate an abiding international agreement, namely, the General Armistice Agreement. Israel, its
argumentation continues, had acquired rights to Jerusalem
on historic grounds by the fact that Jerusalem was the
capital of a State which existed 2,000 years ago. Israel
apparently expects us to take this argument seriously. But
one is bound to ask: is it an argument at all? How about
fhe other peoples who controlled Jerusalem before or after
the Jewish State? What are the criteria for choosing Israel
as the allegedly rightful owner of the city? Is Israel
prepared to apply this test to determine the status of other
territories?
What would happen to all-and I repeat
all-frontiers
were such standards to be applied to determine the territory of modern States? Or is it the
contention of Israel that one set of rules applies to Israel,
and another to all other sovereign States? It is sufficient to
raise these questions to see the whole burden of the Israeli
assertions.

102. We thus categorically reject the attempt of the
representative of Israel to speak here on behalf of what he
calls “the Jewish People”. It is, to take only one example,
for the Hungarian delegation, and the Hungarian delegation
alone, to speak here on behalf of the Hungarian citizens of
Jewish faith, and no one is entitled to arrogate this right of
ours. I would add that my delegation has no knowledge
whatsoever of any other Government having given authorization to the representative of Israel to represent their
citizens of the Jewish religion.
103. The representative of Israel speaks here on behalf of
the State of Israel, and not a religion. Instead of approaching the issues of war and peace from a position of mediaeval
religious exclusiveness, we have to apply, in our quest for
peace, the general guidelines of international life, international law, treaties and agreements, including, first of all,
the United Nations Charter, the resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, and, in this specific
case, the Armistice Agreement, the Covenant on Human
Bights, and so on.

96. A second argument which Israel feels militates in
favour of its contention is the criticism which it levels
against the conditions which, allegedly, characterized the
conditions ‘in Arab Jerusalem before the June aggression.
Apart from the unfounded allegations advanced in its
favour, this line of argumentation is first of all a clear-cut
case of interference in the domestic affairs of another
Member State-a practice to which the representative of
Israel has resorted increasingly in the course of our
discussions.

104. Now that I have dealt with the transparent arguments
put forward by Israel to justify its policy of conquest in
Jerusalem and elsewhere, the question naturally emerges:
what kind of approach is needed to find a political solution
9

policy of Israel in Jerusalem. We have just heard the very
informative statement by the venerable Mayor of Jerusalem, Mr. El-Khatib, on this subject. My delegation has
already had occasion to point out how all United Nations
resolutions on this matter are being flouted by Israel. The
systematic demolition of entire quarters, the blowing-up of
houses, the forced settlement of Israeli citizens in the
Jordanian part of the city, the deportation of leading
Jordanian citizens, and, in fact, of masses of the Jordanian
population-all
these testify to the fact that Israel is
actively engaged in the illegal annexation of east Jerusalem.

to the Middle East crisis? In his statement before the
Council on 1 May 1968 the representative of the United
States said that what we need is:
I‘

. not the one-sided recalling of certain resolutions of
the’ Security Council and the General Assembly and the
ignoring of others; conciliation, impartiality and magnanimity are the needs” (1418th meeting, para, 921.
105. I feel bound to ask: Did the United States Government feel that conciliation, impartiality and magnanimity
were the orders of the day when in 1941 it was the United
States of America-and not the Arab States-which was the
victim of sneak attacks? Did the United States practise
impartiality ‘and magnanimity when the Japanese invaders
occupied its territories and instituted a reign of terror
against its populations? Everyone knows that the United
States did nothing of the kind. Instead, it resisted the
aggressors. In this connexion one feels compelled to ask:
Where does the Charter of the United Nations ask for
impartiality and magnanimity when a Member State has
been attacked and its territories occupied? Is it the duty of
other Members to call for surrender in the face of the
aggressor, or is it rather to give support to the victims of
aggression? Does it help if we try to equate the aggressor
with the victim, in a false spirit of impartiality?

110. The provocative parade which, by all available
accounts, was intended to be a massive show of military
might, was part and parcel of this policy. All freedomloving persons, recalling the tragic spectacle of similar
parades of intimidation in occupied lands, know how to
assess the significance of this challenge thrown in the face
of the United Nations and of all civilized mankind.
111. The policy of Israel in Jerusalem and elsewhere is one
of substituting military might and terror for the Charter of
the United Nations. This is an anachronistic approach, as
Israel may still learn to the regret of its people.
112. The delegation of Hungary is convinced that the clue
to a political settlement of the problems of the Middle East
is to be found in resolution 242 (1967) of the Security
Council. That resolution, in line with the two resolutions of
the fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly
on Jerusalem (22.53 (Es-V] and 22% (Es-l’)],
excludes
territorial aggrandizement. Compliance by Israel with those
resolutions and the withdrawal of the Israeli occupation
forces from Jerusalem are the only possible.way to find a
satisfactory solution to the problem of Jerusalem and of
peace in the Middle East.

106. We would expect the United States, a permanent
member of this Council, to abide by the resolutions of the
Council. The United States voted for this Council’s resolu
tion 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, which, inter alia,
demanded the withdrawal of Israeli occupation forces from
territories occupied during the conflict.
107. The United States Government would do a great
favour to peace and security in the Middle East if, instead
of providing excuses for the Israeli invaders, it would put its
considerable influence behind the principle of the independence and territorial integrity of all Middle Eastern States.
Instead of supporting Israel in its continuation of the
occupation of other peoples’ lands and its violation of the
human rights of the peoples of the occupied territories, the
United States should impress upon Israel the need to
comply with our resolutions, including those relating to
Jerusalem.

113. The PRESIDENT: I wish to say a word of gratitude
to the representativeof Hungary for his personalreference
to me. I hope only that I can justify that generous
reference,and I hope, asI am surehe hopes,that I shalldo
better asI go on.
114. I now call on the next speaker, the representativeof
Israel.

108. During the past days the Council has been kept busy
with the issues raised by the provocative military parade
organized by Israel in Jerusalem in violation of the
Armistice
Agreement, General Assembly resolutions
2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) and Security Council resolution 250 (1968) of 27 April 1968. Yesterday the Security
Council took a decision which in fact amounted to the
condemnation of Israel for holding a military parade on
2 May 1968 in disregard of the decision unanimously
adopted by the Council on 27 April 1968. The parade was
only the last in a chain of Israeli defiances of our
Organization, and this underlines once more Israel’s consistent policy of placing itself above the law of all nations.
Israel continues to profit from its membership of this
Organization, without recognizing any obligation deriving
from it.

Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, ever sincethe
d
Roman conquest in the first century of this era, history
seemsto have reserveda distinct destiny for the Hebrew
people, my people: oppression, denial of rights, martyrdom. The Prophet Jeremiahsaid:
‘L. . .
the children of Israel shall come, they and the
childrenof Judahtogether. . . .
“All that found them devoured them; all their adversariessaid,Wearenot guilty , . .“.5
116. We have survived through defeat and enslavement
by
Imperial Rome, through the rebellions againstthe foreign
conquerors, through the centuries of dispersionof the
people and occupation of the land by a succession
of
invaders, through the massacresof the Crusaders,through

109. The Israeli policy of non-compliance with United
Nations resolutions is perhaps most clearly seen in the

5 Jeremiah,
Chapter50:4and7.
10

the autos-da-fe of the Inquisition, the pogroms, the
blood-libels, the holocausts. We have survived and regained
our national freedom and re-established our sovereignty in
OUI
land. Yet, Jeremiah’s prophecy is not of the past; some
still try to devour us and then say, “We are not guilty”. In
certain parts of Europe the Dark Ages are not over for the
Jewish people. In the Arab States the spirit of the
Damascus blood-libel is still alive. This is the spirit that
shapes and guides Arab policy toward Israel. This is the
spirit that dominates the Arab attitude in the United
Nations. Today they have chosen Jerusalem as the object of
their blood-libel-Jerusalem, sanctified and revered as Rome
and Mecca are.

the British ruled in it. Arab annals record the Arab
conquest of Jerusalem. Jewish history is permeated with
the memories of Jerusalem’s defence, the desperate attempts to preserve its Jewishness, the destruction of the
Temple, the fast and mourning that the Jewish people have
observed ever since on the ninth day of the month of Ab.
124. Jerusalem’s name is Hebrew. “Yerushalem”, the City
of Peace. One cannot separate Jerusalem from Hebrew
history, martyrdom and redemption. However, it is with
profound respect that we recognize the universal interests
in Jerusalem. Jerusalem is venerated by three great religions
and all three share in the city’s glory. The people are the
city, and the Jews have never left Jerusalem. Even after the
most sanguinary of massacres they came back to it-the
heart of Judaism-again and again, to heal the city’s wounds
and rebuild its ruins.

117. There is an old Hebrew saying: “Ten measures of
beauty came into the world; Jerusalem received nine
measures, and the rest of the world one. Ten measures of
suffering came into the world; Jerusalem received nine, and
the rest of the world one.”

125. Jerusalem repaid the love and loyalty of its people. It
remained for ever faithful to it. It served as the capital of
one nation, and one nation alone-the capital of the Jewish
people.

118. However, whether in bliss and beauty or in suffering,
Jerusalem has always remained Israel’s eternal capital.
119. By the time it was conquered in the year 70 of the
present era by the legions of Rome, Jerusalem had served as
Israel’s capital for more than a thousand years. Though
defeated, the people of Israel refused to be subdued, and in
the year 132 rose in revolt against the Roman invader.
Jerusalem was freed and the nation’s leader, Bar-Kochba,
set his government up in the capital. He struck coins
inscribed “Jerusalem” and “Year 1 of the liberty of Israel”.
He succeeded in holding out for three years until the weight
of the Roman cohorts overcame the Jewish people again.

126. Since statistics of Jerusalem’s population have become available it has been evident that Jews have for
generations constituted a majority in the city. In 1844, of a
total population of 15,510, there were in Jerusalem 7,120
Jews, 5,000 Moslems, and 3,390 Christians. In 1876 there
were 12,000 Jews, 7,560 Moslems, and 5,470 Christians. In
1896 the Jewish population rose to 28,112, the Moslems
numbered 8,560, the ‘Christians 8,748. The number of Jews
in Jerusalem reached 40,000 by 1905, in a total population
of 60,000; the number of Moslems declined to 7,000. In
1910 there were 47,400 Jews, 9,800 Moslems, 16,400
Christians. By 1931 the Jewish inhabitants of Jerusalem
numbered 51,222; there were 19,894 Moslems, and 19,335
Christians. In 1948 Jerusalem was a city of 100,000 Jews,
40,000 Moslems and 25,000 Christians. On the eve of last
June’s hostilities, 200,000 Jews, 54,903 Moslems, 12,646
Christians resided in Jerusalem. Today Jerusalem, a living
city again in its freedom and unity, is the hearth of more
than 200,000 Jews, about 60,000 Arabs, and 6,000 of
other nationalities.

120. Then followed a long period of Roman and Byzantine rule. In 614 the Jewish population helped Persia to
dislodge Byzantium, and for a while Jews governed Jerusalem again. Then, in the year 638, Jerusalem was captured
by the Arabs who had come from Arabia. Jerusalem was
under Arab domination till the year 1077, but the Arab
conquerors never made it a seat of government, not even of
provincial administration. They ruled the area from Damascus, from Baghadad, from Ramle. In 1077 the Seljuk Turks
conquered the land and the city of Jerusalem. It never
returned to Arab rule again except for the nineteen years of
grim Jordanian reign in part of the city.

127. What precept of law, what tenet of justice, what
principle of morality would deprive Jerusalem’s citizensJews and Arabs alike-of their rights to the happiness and
beauty and inspiration of their city as a whole? Why
should those who have treasured Jerusalem for 3,000 years
as their chiefest joy be shorn of the fullness of it? Why
should Jerusalem’s Jewish and Arab inhabitants be despoiled of their heritage in the city’s unity? Does a conquest
in defiance of the United Nations, a nineteen-year occupation unrecognized by the nations of the world including the
Arab States themselves, give Jordan the right to oppose
Jerusalem’s revival in integrity and radiance? Does the
presence of 54,000 Moslems and 12,000 Christians, in
addition to the more than 200,000 Jews necessitate a
bisection of the city’s body?

121. In 1099 the Crusaders succeeded in wresting Jerusalem from the Turks. They put the entire Jewish and
Moslem population to the sword. They maintained their
power, except for a brief interval during the time of Salah
ed-Din, until 1244, when they lost out to the Tatars. These
were followed by the Mamelukes, who, in turn, were
conquered by the Ottoman Turks in 1.516.
122. Like the Arabs, neither the Mamelukes nor the Turks
ruled from Jerusalem. Under the Mamelukes the seat of
provincial government was Gaza; under the Turks-Acre. In
1917 the Turks were ousted from the land of Israel and
from Jerusalem by the allied forces which included a Jewish
legion fighting under Israel’s colours.

128. King Solomon’s biblical judgement between the two
contesting women cries out to us through the ages. Could a
real mother ever agree to have her baby cut in two? Could
a people ever accept that its eternal capital be divided?
There are many cities in the world with large national or

123. Jerusalem has never ceased to be part of the Jewish
saga. It was no more Arab by virtue of the Arab conquest
than Turkish when the Turks occupied it or British when
11

“i

135. The situation soon after the cease-firewasdescribed
in the report submitted by the Secretary-Generalon 12
September 1967. The findings of the Secretary-General’s
SpecialRepresentative,Mr. Ernest0 Thalmann, basedon a
visit to the area as far back as last August, include the
following:

religious minorities. Have such communities ever claimed
that their cities should be artificially divided and separate
public services set up for them?
129. Jerusalem has existed for thousands of years, and it
was only during the brief nightmare of Jordanian occupation that part of it was carved out and wrested away from
the city and its people. A crime that the world witnessed in
silence, a transgression that brought death and destruction,
terror and desecration to Jerusalem-how can Jordan now
come and demand approval of it? History, justice and faith
will never pardon the nineteen years of darkness, profanation and ruin in eastern Jerusalem.

“ . . . the Personal Representative was struck by the
great activity in the streetsof the city. . . .
“Uniforms were few and weapons fewer. . . . The
picture of the crowd in the Old City was dominatedby
the tourists. Arabs and Jewswere mingling. . . .

130. In preceding meetings of the Security Council I have
described fully the Jordanian reign of vandalism. The ruins
of the Jewish quarter, the tombstones torn up on the
Mount of Olives, the grim tragedy of the humanitarian
institutions on Mount Scopus, the hundreds of dead and
wounded in 1948, in 1967 and in the intervening years-all
these will not allow us to forget. Nor can Jordanian
distortions, born in hate and bloodthirst, distort the reality
of today. The entire world knows what the Jordanians were
preparing to bring down upon the Jews of Jerusalem had
the fortunes of war gone differently. The orders to the
Jordanian army, such as those to the Reserve Batallion of
the 27th Brigade, to kill all Jews in captured areas, are a
matter of public record,

“Most of the hotels had reopened. Before dawn and
during the day the muezzin could beheard, aswell asthe
church bells.
“The Arab personnelof the Old City wasabsorbedin
the equivalent departmentsin the Israelmunicipality. . . .
“It was reported that from the time that accessfrom
Israelto eastJerusalemhad becomefree, the shopkeepers
there had been unusually active, selling at the rate of
2 million Israel poundsa day in the first month and at a
steady rate of 1 million Israel pounds a day at present. . . . Service establishmentswere reported to have
greatly increasedtheir activities. The workshops,after an
initial period of dislocation,were saidto have all reverted
to routine and normality and to be going through a
process of adjustment to the new marketing conditions. . . .

131. The textbooks teaching Arab children that it is a
virtue to hate and kill Jews; the school posters, the
newspaper cartoons showing how to do it; the bloodchilling cries broadcast over the radio, “Kill! Kill! Kill!
Butcher! Butcher the Jew! “-all this will for ever be
remembered, not only by my people but by humanity as a
whole.

“The PersonalRepresentativewas told that the policy
will be to pay Arabs employed in Israel enterprises
salariesequal to those received by their Israel counterparts. As regards Arab enterprises, salarieswould be
calculated according to the economic solvency of the
enterprise.Salarieswould be raisedgradually soasnot to
disrupt the Arab economy and to allow it to adjustto the
conditionsprevailingin Israel. . . .

132. Let not the Jordanians come now and speak of Israeli
behaviour in terms of the sanguinary bloodbath they were
preparing for us. The facts are there for all to see. Let
others bear witness.

“At present over 2,000 workers from east Jerusalem,
including some400 municipal employees,are employed
in the Jewish.sectorof the economy. ,, . .“6

133. In the January 1968 issue of the Franciscan Order’s
publication “La Terre Sainte” we read:
“We must voice our opinion on the taking of Jerusalem... It is not true that a massacre of innocents was the
price for the safety of the Holy Places. In Paris, too,
during the Liberation on 25 August 1944, there were
people killed-women,
children, unfortunate civiliansbut no one dared say that spilt blood has saved Notre
Dame or Montmartre. . . . Every war has its horrors, its
victims-and on both sides. . .I’.

136. I should like to add that an invitation wasextended
to Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib and membersof his councilto join
the JerusalemMunicipal Council. Mr. El-Khatib, for reasons
which will becomeobviousin the course of my statement,
refused.
137. Since then the situation has improved. The public
servicesare operating normally, In all of eastJerusalem,
school studiesare running smoothly, In all private schools
and those of Mosleminstitutions there hasbeenno change
in curriculum. In municipal schoolsthe curriculumcurrent
in Israel’s Arab schools, which include studiesin Arab
history and Islam,is followed. The mindsof childrenareno
longerpoisonedby hatred of their neighboursashad been
the caseunder Jordanianrule. All Mosleminstitutions, such
as the Sharia courts, the Waqf administration, the Red

134. The Mayor of Hebron, Sheikh Muhammed Ali Jabari,
a former Minister of Education of Jordan, proclaimed on
30 July 1967:
“I swearby Allah that no Israelsoldiersharmedany of
our residents. . . Before the war began we expected a
mutual slaughterbetweenour peopleandthe Israelarmy.
You can imaginehow pleasantwas our surpriseon the
8th of June when we discoveredthat the victorious army
was a well-organized,disciplinedbody like the armiesof
the West.”

6 official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second Year>
for July, August and September 1967, document

SuPPlement

s/8146,paras.19-21,29,61, 92 and93.
12

worship in our churches, practically without
since last June.”

Crescent, charitable organizations, and hospitals are pursuing their activities without hindrance, under the same
leadership, with the exception of one person. This applies,
of course, to Christian institutions as well.

141. An abusive reference was made here to the Church of
the Holy Sepulchre. A reference was made to the burglary
of the jewelled crown from the church shortly after the
hostilities. Mention however was conveniently omitted of
the fact that the crown was recovered from the thieves and
restored to the church in a ceremony of reverence joined by
many. I believe the Koran says: “He shall not prosper who
deviseth lies.” That applies not only to the distortion
concerning the burglary mentioned.

138. This how Bishop Dom Jose Gonqalves da Costa of
Brazil paints the situation in Jerusalem in the Jornal do
Brasil of 30 September 1967:
“For many hours I walked through the streets of Old
Jerusalem and watched the faces of the merchants and
peddlars; I went into bars and into shops. They all looked
lively and very much satisfied with the excellent business
they were doing. I felt no signs of anxiety or hate on the
part of the Arabs in Jerusalem, Jericho and Bethlehem.

I

any break

142. At the 1417th meeting I brought before the Security
Council the testimony of the Greek Orthodox Patriarch,
the Armenian Patriarch, Protestant theologians and others,
all confirming that the situation in the city is peaceful, the
conditions of the Holy Places satisfactory, the relations
between the various communities harmonious.

“The Government of Israel immediately put the municipal services of the great City of Jerusalem on a joint
basis. There is no doubt that the ridiculous situation of
before the war must not recur, where a street dividing
two countries passes through a single city, and soldiers
armed to their teeth faced each other from the rooftops,
looking at each other with hate. The Mandelbaum Gate,
of which little is left now, was a serious obstacle for
Christian pilgrims.”

143. A manifesto on a united Jerusalem by America’s
leading Christian theologians, published in The New York
Times on 12 July, stated inter alia:
“During the past twenty years the City of David has
experienced an artificial division. This has resulted in a
denial of access to their Holy Places for all Jews and for
Israeli Arabs of the Moslem faith. It has also severely
limited accessibility to Christian shrines for Israeli Christians. This injustice, we must confess, did not elicit
significant protests on the part of the religious leaders of
the world.

139. The atmosphere of the city was best reflected when
the Christian communities, joined by thousands of tourists
from abroad, including visitors from the Arab States,
celebrated recently the Easter festival. The Moslem community
celebrated the holidays of Id el-Fitr and Id
el-Adkha in accordance with its own traditions.

“We see no justification in proposals which seek once
again to destroy the unity which has been restored to
Jerusalem. This unity is the natural condition of the Holy
City, and now once again assures the world’s religious
peoples the freedom of worship at the shrines which
remain the spiritual centers of their faith;”

140. On 27 April 1968 the Latin Custos of the Holy Land
wrote:
“Thanks be to God, pilgrimages to the Christian Shrines
are increasing in number from day to day, and pilgrims
make their visits as they did a year ago. Only occasionally
they are advised, though not prevented by force, to omit
the visit to the River Jordan, on account of some danger
of shooting in that zone.

This manifesto was signed by theologians representing the
entire spectrum of American churches.
144. The Moslem Kadi of Jaffa, Sheikh Toufiq Assliya,
summarized his impressions of united Jerusalem as follows:

“All the services (I mean religious services) are going on
as usual in the Christian Churches. It would be enough to
mention how orderly everything was during the recent
celebrations of Holy Week and Easter.

“We prayed today with our Moslem brethren of
Jerusalem in the blessed 41 Aqsa Mosque. This is a great
day for us to be able to pray at the site for which we were
yearning for many years. I pray to the Almighty that He
may bestow peace upon our region.

“As I had the occasion to state on previous occasions,
practically none of our Holy Places and churches were
damaged or destroyed during the Six Day War, In one or
two places minor damage was caused, because the fight
went on in the immediate vicinity of the church or
monastery. One place which suffered quite a bit was our
monastery on Mount Zion.

“We are convinced”, he went on to say, ‘(that these
Holy Places continue to be closely guarded, as they were
before. From here we send our blessings to all our
Moslem brethren and request of them that they be
reassured in the knowledge that the Holy Places are in
faithful hands. Let it be known to every Moslem in the
world that religious’ freedom, which we have enjoyed
since the establishment of the State of Israel, will
continue forever.”

“What I have stated so far are facts that everybody can
check. Of course a tiar is a war; yet in general we must be
grateful to Almighty God that the Holy Places were
preserved from destruction, and almost in all cases from
damage, even small. I suppose that all can see for
themselves in what conditions are our churches. And
again I should say ‘Thanks be to God! ’ that Christians
and pilgrims have been able to continue their divine

145. These are significant testimonies of non-Jewish leaders. They leave little doubt as to the true situation in
Jerusalem.
13

146. I should like, however, to emphasize again Israel’s
policy as elaborated in Mr, Abba Eban’s letter to the
Secretary-General:

tolerate within their midst elements which are intent on
pursuing their goals of aggression and hostility instead of
working for understanding and peace.

“ . . * while I have spoken of Jerusalem’s special and
unique place in Israel’s history, we are deeply aware of
the universal interests which are concentrated in the city:
the equal protection of the Holy Places and houses of
worship; the assurance of free access to them; the daily
intermingling of Jerusalem’s population in peaceful contact; the removal of the old military barriers; the care of
ancient sites; the reverent desire to replace the old squalor
and turmoil by a harmonious beauty-all these changes
enable Jerusalem to awaken from the nightmare of the
past two decades and to move towards a destiny worthy
of its lineage. I reaffirm Israel’s willingness, in addition to
the steps already taken for the immunity of the Holy
Places, to work for formal settlements which will give
satisfaction to Christian, Moslem and Jewish spiritual
concerns. Israel, unlike previous governments in the city,
does not wish to exercise exclusive and unilateral control
over the Holy Places of other faiths. Accordingly, we are
willing, as I stated to you on 10 July 1967 (S/8052), to
work out arrangements with those traditionally concerned, which will ensure the universal character of the
Christian and Moslem Holy Places and thus enable this
ancient and historic metropolis to thrive in peace, unity
‘and spiritual elevation.” [S/8565./

149. Then there are the Jordanian allegations regarding
urban development, slum removal, clearance of ruins and
new construction. This applies to three particular projects.
The first one is the plan to develop the area of the Jewish
quarter from its western edge to the Western Wall. This is
the area destroyed by the Jordanians during their 1948
onslaught on Jerusalem and immediately thereafter and
includes the houses in the Maghrabi quarter adjacent to the
Wall, a district which the Jordan authorities allowed to
deteriorate into a slum.
150. A delegation of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization visited this area in
1960. The qnnual report of the Director-General of
UNESCO for that year emphasized the danger of leaving
the area in such a condition. The report stated inter nlia:
“There should be no deception about the necessity of
large-scale future improvements to prevent parts of the
Old City becoming ever-increasing slums.”
151. In 1963 the Brown Engineering International submitted a report to the Jordanian authorities stressing the
need for urban development.

147. What are the basic complaints of the Jordan Government? First of all, it apparently takes exception to Israel’s
efforts to ensure not only the welfare of the population of
the entire city but also its security. There is, for instance,
the case of Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib. Mr. El-Khatib was an
appointee of the Jordanian Government to the post of
Mayor of eastern Jerusalem, not an elected mayor. He was a
member of the Preparatory Committee of the Palestine
Liberation Organization led by the notorious Ahmed
Shukairy, the man who last May declared that not a single,
Jew would remain alive after the Arab attack against Israel,
Mr. El-Khatib remains a member of that organization’s
National Council. As an agent of the Jordanian Government, which on 5 June 1967 rejected Israel’s call for peace
and launched the attack against Israel and in particular west
Jerusalem, Mr. El-Khatib continued to promote tension and
public unrest after the establishment of the cease-fire, He
maintained contact with the Jordanian Government and
acted as an intermedialy for the transmission of directives
and instructions from Amman and for the transfer and
distribution of funds for the purpose of promoting breaches
of public order. Realizing that he failed to enjoy public
support, he increasingly tried to revert to illicit pressure and
threats against local inhabitants. We understand the displeasure of the Jordan Government that such activities have
been terminated and Mr. El-Khatib was ordered to cross the
cease-fire line.
148. The same measure had to be taken in respect of three
other persons who had been pursuing similBr activities. If
one recalls the number of demonstrations, the suppression
of riots by force, the arrests of hundreds and the
banishment of scores of persons from east Jerusalem during
Jordanian rule, one realizes how limited the steps taken by
Israel are in comparison. In any event, the Jewish as well as
the Arab inhabitants of Jerusalem cannot be expected to

152. For example, recommendation No. 5 of the report
of shell public housing units to
reads: “Construction
facilitate the clearance and reconstruction of deteriorated
houses in the Old City.” Recommendation No. 6 reads:
“Reconstruction of destroyed areas along lines similar to
the original.” Recommendation No. 2 reads: “Removal of
temporary structures in the courtyards of the Old City,
after a rehousing programme has provided living space for
the inhabitants of these structures in public housing units.”
All-l repeat ‘call”-the inhabitants affected by this project
have been provided with alternative housing by the Israel
authorities.
153. A second area is a complex of about 3,345 dunums
-or about 800 acres-in and around the Hadassah Medical
Center and the Hebrew University compound on Mount
Scopus stretching from there through vacant land westward. Here, in addition to the rehabilitation of the
humanitarian institutions on Mount Scopus and the construction of the Truman Centre for the Advancement of
Peace, new housing construction is planned on empty land
for Jews and Arabs. The development of this area is based
on a master plan prepared by a British engineer, Mr. Kendall, in 1946, who was engaged for that purpose by the
Mandatory authorities well before the Jordanian occupation. Moreover the Brown Engineering International recommended specifically housing developments in this very area.
154. The third urban development project concerns the
area of the Jewish village of Neveh Ya’acov in the northern
part of east Jerusalem. This village was razed to the ground
by the Jordanian Army in 1948.
155. I reiterate: most of the land in question is Jewish
property and public domain. No photo-montage charts, no

14

allegations made here away from the records can change
this fact. All private claimants would receive compensation.
Indeed, this is the fact that necessitated the announcement
concerning acquisition of the land and the intent to
compensate private owners.

that casethe Presidenthad no right to consult on anything
but my request,which wasindivisible. I am surethat this
was the subject of the consultation,becausethe fourteen
membersof the Council-which were among the ninetynine Merhbersof the Assemblythat voted for the resolutions calling for no changein the status of Jerusalemcertainly would accept my requestasbeingin conformity
with the decisionof the Assembly.I say that, Mr. President,
becauseyour statementwasnot very clear to me, but at a
later stageI sawthat it wasmy requestthat had beenthe
basisof your consultation.

156. The Jordanian Government is apparently not satisfied with the destruction it has brought upon the City.
According to Jordan the destruction, the desecration, the
humiliation must not be touched by anyone, it must remain
Amman’s forever. The Book of Kings in the Bible states:
“Thus saith the Lord: Hast Thou killed, and also taken
posse&ion? ”
157. This is what we ask of Jordan today. Is it not enough
that you have shattered, killed and destroyed? DO you also
want to take possession?Should our synagoguesremain
ruined and defiled? Shquld the tombstonesof our forefathers continue to serve as stepping stones and pavements? Must the Hebrew Univeisity and Hadassah
hospital
on Mount Scopus remain paralhed in squalor? Should
construction stop in the City? Should slums remain
uncleared and gardensnot planted’? All this only because
the lust of war and bloodshed and annihilation still hovers
over the region?
158. Is there any juridical technicality, any private claim
that would be allowed anywhere in the world to standin
the way of urban reconstruction and improvement? Why
should we allow this to be the casein efforts to heal the
wounds inflicted on Jerusalem?
159. Israel’s aim remains peace with its neighbours.Israel
shall continue to pursue it steadfastly. It is convinced that
this aim can be attained, It is certain that it will bring vital
benefits to all nations of the Middle East.
160. If there is to be progress toward understandingand
agreement, active warfare must cease.If the nations of the
Middle East are to move toward a peaceful settlement,
warfare by terror, warfare by threat and warfare in the
international organsmust stop. We have faced acrimony in
the Security Council, in the General Assemblyand in other
organs of the United Nations for twenty years. For the
good of our peopleswe must not continue on this course.
Their interest lies on the road to peaceful agreement.

163. Having saidthis, I now turn to the many distortions
we heard this afternoonfrom Mr. Tekoah.It is not the first
time that Mr. Tekoah has taken the floor to inject
somethingirrelevant. In fact, for a while I thought I was
‘sitting in a synagoguelistening to the preaching of
Mr. Tekoah. Of course,on the questionof a synagogueor
church or mosque,I can answerin the sameterms,bringing
in the Old and the New Testament,the Bible and the
Koran, but I do not think that thisforum, this augustbody,
is meetingto hearpreaching.
164. This forum is meetingnot to considerhistory but to
determinerights. No matter how Mr. Tek’oahattempts to
distort it, the issueis very clear. Can the Israelisacquire
territory by force? Is force the criteria or is the Charterthe
criteria? That is the issueand the only issuebefore the
Security Council. The Cou’ncilhasbeforeit a complaintby
Jordan basedon GeneralAssemblyresolutions2253 (ES-V)
and 2254 (ES-V). They were adoptedby 99 votesto none,
with only 2 abstentions-thoseof the United States of
America and Israel.Now, the Security Councilis meetingto
considerviolations of those two resolutionsand is called
upon to take action vis-l-vis the continuedviolations. That
is the only issuebefore the Council, and I beg the Council
not to permit, and I hope that you, Mr. President,will not
permit-I know that you are very careful about procedure-any foreign substanceto be injectedinto our deliberations.
165. What is before you is a clear and simplequestion.
And let me remind you, Sir, that you have answeredthis
question-by “you” I mean the fifteen membersof the
Security Council-when, on 22 November1967, in resolution 242 (1967), you decidedunanimouslythat the Council

161. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Jordan.
162. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): The Security Council
started its meeting this afternoon with a proceduraldebate.
Of course as a non-member of the Security Council I had
no right to discussprocedure. But now that I have taken
the floor to sp’eakon my complaint, I am certainly entitled
to refer to a question which at this stageis a question of
substance. When I formally requested the issue of an
invitation to the elected Mayor of Jerusalem,Mr. Rouhi
El-Khatib, to be heard by the Council, I madeit very clear
that I was requesting an invitation to the Mayor of
Jerusalem. Certainly it followed that the consultation,
unless the request-which was indivisible-were amended,
would be basedsolely on my request.My delegationknows
of no amendment to or change in my request-and I take it
that the United Kingdom did not amend my request. In
15

‘flffirms that the fulfilment of Charter principles
requiresthe establishmentof a just and lastingpeace, . .
which shouldincludethe applicationof +. . the following
principles: (i) Withdrawal of Israel armed forces from
territories occupiedin the recent conflict”.
166. Why did the Councildecidethat? The Councilstated
the following in the preambleof that resolution:
“Emphasizingthe inadmissibilityof the acquisitionof
territory by war and the need to work for a just and
lastingpeace. . .““The inadmissibilityof the acquisitionof territory by war’ .
That is before the Council, and that is the problemI am
bringingto the Council.
167. The Council has heard the electedMayor of Jerusalem. I will have more to say about the fabrications of

country. And if the price is the Security Council, pressure
groups do not mind.

Mr. Tekoah on Monday, but I want to assure the Council
that when Mr. Tekoah said that Mr. El-Khatib was an
appointee he was not stating a fact. All members of the
Municipal Council were elected. Of course, according to our
laws, the Government then appoints one of them as the
Mayor. But he was elected by the people.

171. I say this because I have in mind the League of
Nations. The League of Nations died because of a similar
act of aggression, and the victim was Ethiopia. The failure
of the Council brought about the end of the Council.

168. We have heard a great deal about this campaign Of
hate, which is repeated time and time again. I know what is
behind it. It is not meant for the Council. The Council has
the facts, has the proof, has the documents; it has the
documents submitted this afternoon by the Mayor of
Jerusalem, I hope that these will also be made part of the
documents-I do not know in what form-of the Security
Council. They are going to be of great guidance and help to
the Council. They are authentic. They rebut the charges
and fabrications of Mr. Tekoah. The Council will find them
helpful.

172. Now the Security Council is facing a challenge and it
has one single issue before it. I beg members to confine
their consideration and discussion to this one issue. There
should be no room for publicity, no room for cheap
propaganda.
173. The PRESIDENT:
list for this evening--

I have no further speakers on my

174. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
Rerzck): I apologize for interrupting you, Mr. President. In
the course of his noteworthy and duly noted statement,
Mr. El-Khatib, the Mayor of Jerusalem, referred to certain
documents. The Jordanian representative said that those
documents should be brought to the notice of members of
the Council. Therefore, in accordance with established
practice, my delegation would ask you to make the
necessary arrangements for the documents to be annexed to
the verbatim records of this Council meeting.

169. Why is it that we are hearing of this campaign of
hate? It is simply because Mr. Tekoah is aiming at
achieving two purposes: first, to confuse the issue, and
secondly, to use this forum for fund-raising in the United
States of America. I have already stated what the issues are,
and no fabrication should be permitted to waste the time of
the Council.
170. The approach of Mr. Tekoah to the question is not
unique in the history of aggressions. The memory of
Europe and nazism is still fresh in the minds of members
around this table. Then the Nazis used to follow and adopt
the very same line, saying that everything was nice and
peaceful and that life was very happy there. Also the idea
of unity was used-before Mr. Tekoah-by the Nazis. When
Hitler occupied Czechoslovakia and Poland, what did he
say? He also said: “Now our unity has been accomplished.” This is not something new. Mr. Tekoah is simply
adopting a policy used by a similar-identical, I would
say-ideology. I say “identical” because let us look at the
facts. Do not both of them, nazism and Zionism, hold to
the concept of race? That is factor number one. Secondly,
do they not both hold to the concept of supremacy: Nazis
supreme, Zionists the chosen people? Is not this second
factor identical between the two ideologies’? Thirdly, do
they not both work for Lebensraum?: Zionism wants a part
of the Arab world as an accommodation for the in-gathering of the exiles. Fourthly, do they not both have a fifth
column-pressure
groups and a fifth column? Pressure
groups are performing miracles. They are using every means
under the sun, especially in election years, to bring about
something that is threatening the very existence of this
great body of the United Nations, the Security Council.
Pressure groups are working not in the interest of the State
of which they are supposed to be citizens, but for a foreign

175. The PRESIDENT: I had asked to see copies of the
documents referred to in the statement we heard today.
They are extensive and include a book which I think it
would be difficult to circulate with the verbatim record.
But if it is the wish of the Council, I shall consult the
Secretary-General as to how we can arrange for the
distribution of the documents by the most convenient and
rapid means available.7
176. Does any other representative wish to express his
views?
177. Since no one else wishes to speak, I take it that the
Council has no objection and indeed wishes me to go
forward in consultation with the Secretary General as I
suggested. I shall proceed accordingly.
178. I have consulted members of the Council about our
next meeting, and it is the wish of those who have
expressed an opinion as to date and time that we should
resume our debate on Monday morning, 6 May, at 11
o’clock. Since I hear no objection, it is so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.
7 See documents S/PV.l421/Add.l

16

and 2.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Ler publications
des Notions
Unies
rant
en vents
dans
les libroiricr
et ler ogenter
dCporitaires
du monde entier.
Informer-vous
auprbr
de votrs librairie
ou odrerrez-vour
6:
Nations
Unier, Section
der ventes, New York ou GenCve.

KAK IlOllYllllTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Los publicociones

M3~AHllfl

OPrAH#3AUHH

PUELICACIONES
de lar Nocioner

en lodor
portes del mundo.
Consulta
Ventor,
Nuevo
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

N&ions,

New York

06bE&lHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidos

crtdn

en venta

a su librero

o dirijore

Price: $U:S. 0.50 (or equivnlent

HAuHfi

UNIDAS
en librcrlos

in other

y cosos

a: N&ones

currencies)

Unidor,

distribuidoror
Seccicin

de

35629-September

1972-2,100
