A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/189
4 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 97 (d)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/52/628/Add.4)]
52/189. International migration and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development
adopted at Cairo, in particular chapter X on international migration,1 and the relevant provisions contained
in the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development2 and the Programme of Action of the World Summit
for Social Development3 and in the Platform for Action4 adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women,
Reaffirming the continuing validity of the principles set forth in the instruments regarding the
international protection of human rights, in particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,5 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,6 the Convention on the

1

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
2

Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
3

Ibid., annex II.

4

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
5

Resolution 217 A (III).

6

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

98-76591

/...

A/RES/52/189
Page 2

Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women7 and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child,8
Aware that, in spite of the existence of an already established body of principles, there is a need to make
further efforts to ensure the human rights and dignity of all migrants and their families and that it is desirable
to improve the situation of all documented migrants and their families,
Recalling its resolutions 49/127 of 19 December 1994 and 50/123 of 20 December 1995 on international
migration and development, as well as Economic and Social Council decision 1995/313 of 27 July 1995,
Recalling also that the Economic and Social Council, in the context of its role under the Charter of the
United Nations vis-à-vis the General Assembly and in accordance with Assembly resolutions 45/264 of
13 May 1991, 46/235 of 13 April 1992, 48/162 of 20 December 1994 and 50/227 of 24 May 1996, should
assist the Assembly in promoting an integrated approach to the implementation of the Programme of Action
in providing system-wide coordination and guidance in monitoring the implementation,
Recalling further that the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council should carry out their
respective responsibilities, as entrusted to them in the Charter, in the formulation of policies and the provision
of guidance to and coordination of United Nations activities in the field of population and development,
Recognizing the importance from an analytical and operational point of view of identifying the existing
linkages among the social, economic, political and cultural factors related to international migration and
development and of taking appropriate steps to intensify the analysis of issues involved,
Noting in particular the need for more migration data, a coherent theory to explain international
migration and a better understanding of the complex interrelationships between migration and development,9
Noting the role of relevant United Nations organizations in delivering adequate support to developing
countries to ensure that migration contributes to development,
Noting also the critical role of the existing forums within the United Nations system in addressing the
issues of international migration and development, including through the Commission on Population and
Development,10 the Commission on Human Rights,10 the Committee for Development Planning,10 the
International Labour Organization, and other relevant key organizations,
Taking note of the recent regional and subregional conferences on international migration as an example
of a Government-driven process of consultation and cooperation to address particular problems associated
with international migration,
Noting that a technical symposium on international migration and development will be convened in 1998
by the Administrative Committee on Coordination at the request of the Commission on Population and
Development,10 pursuant to resolution 50/123,
Recalling its resolution 51/148 of 13 December 1996 on cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Organization for Migration, in particular its request therein to the Secretary-General, in

7

Resolution 34/180, annex.

8

Resolution 44/25, annex.

9

See E/CN.9/1997/2, para. 11.

10

Recognizing, without prejudice, the Economic and Social Council review of its subsidiary bodies, as
initiated under General Assembly resolution 50/227, bearing in mind the other relevant Assembly resolutions.
98-76591

/...

A/RES/52/189
Page 3

consultation with the Director-General of the International Organization for Migration, to foster systematic
consultations on matters of common interest,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;11

2. Urges Member States and the United Nations system to strengthen international cooperation in the
area of international migration and development in order to address the root causes of migration, especially
those related to poverty, and to maximize the benefits of international migration to those concerned;
3. Encourages, where relevant, interregional, regional and subregional mechanisms to continue to
address the question of migration and development;
4. Calls upon the international community to seek to make the option of remaining in one's country
viable for all people; to that end, efforts to achieve sustainable economic and social development, ensuring
a better economic balance between developed and developing countries, should be strengthened;
5. Calls upon all relevant organs, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system and
other intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations, within their continuing mandated activities,
to address the issue of international migration and development and to provide appropriate support for
interregional, regional and subregional processes and activities on international migration and development;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session a report
on international migration and development, taking into account:
(a) The views of Member States, the International Organization for Migration, the International Labour
Organization and other relevant organizations, both within and outside the United Nations system, bearing
in mind various regional processes, and recommending ways and means to address the problems related to
migration and development, including the possibility of convening an international conference on international
migration and development;
(b) The report of the technical symposium on international migration and development which will be
convened in 1998;
(c) The report of the Committee for Development Planning10 on its examination of the issue of
migration and development;
(d) The work of the Administrative Committee on Coordination which addresses the issue of
international migration and development from cross-sectoral, interregional, regional and subregional points
of view;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session a sub-item entitled
"International migration and development, including the question of the convening of a United Nations
conference on international migration and development to address migration issues".
77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997

11

A/52/314.
/...
