A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/189
12 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 94 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/53/609/Add.3)]
53/189. Implementation of the outcome of the Global Conference on the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/183 of 16 December 1996 and 52/202 of 18 December 1997,
Reaffirming the outcome of its nineteenth special session, held from 23 to 28 June 1997, specifically
the adoption of the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,1 and the relevant resolutions
and decisions of the Commission on Sustainable Development adopted at its fifth2 and sixth3 sessions,
held from 7 to 25 April 1997, and on 22 December 1997 and from 20 April to 1 May 1998, respectively,
Noting the importance of the decision taken at its nineteenth special session4 to convene a two-day
special session, in New York in September 1999, for a full and comprehensive review and appraisal of

1

Resolution S–19/2, annex.

2

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1997, Supplement No. 9 (E/1997/29).

3

Ibid., 1998, Supplement No. 9 (E/1998/29).

4

Resolution S–19/2, annex, para. 71.

99-76831

/...

A/RES/53/189
Page 2

the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States,5
Reaffirming its decision to invite States members of the specialized agencies that are not members
of the United Nations to participate in the special session and in the preparatory meetings therefor, in the
capacity of observers,
Recognizing that small island developing States are vulnerable and face constraints in their efforts
to achieve sustainable development,
Noting that implementation of the Programme of Action has been carried out primarily at the national
and regional levels, and commending efforts by small island developing States in this regard,
Noting also that the considerable efforts being made at the national and regional levels need to be
supplemented by effective financial support from the international community,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General6 on plans and projects for the sustainable
development of small island developing States implemented, under implementation or envisaged for the
period 1999–2003 by bilateral donors, United Nations organizations and regional and non-United Nations
international organizations, and welcomes the action taken by small island developing States and the
international donor community in implementing plans and projects for the sustainable development of
small island developing States;
2. Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General7 on the development of a vulnerability
index for small island developing States, urges that the progress made in the development and compilation
of a vulnerability index for small island developing States be continued, and encourages all the relevant
organizations engaged in the process of refining the vulnerability index to work collaboratively;
3. Welcomes the action taken by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat,
in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme, with respect to the donors conference
to be held from 24 to 26 February 1999 between representatives of small island developing States and
prospective bilateral and multilateral donors, and urges the parties concerned to facilitate project
preparation and development;
4. Encourages all small island developing States and prospective bilateral and multilateral donors
to participate in the donors conference as a means of pursuing the development objectives of small island
developing States;
5. Welcomes the actions taken by Governments, regional commissions and organizations,
organizations of the United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
5

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
6

A/53/358.

7

A/53/65–E/1998/5.
/...

A/RES/53/189
Page 3

organizations in support of activities relating to the outcome of the Global Conference on the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States;
6. Urges small island developing States to continue preparations for the seventh session of the
Commission on Sustainable Development and the special session of the General Assembly in September
1999 for the review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, and urges the international community, organizations of
the United Nations system and intergovernmental bodies to continue to assist in this regard;
7. Calls for the participation of associate members of regional economic commissions in the special
session, subject to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, and in the preparatory process thereof,
in the same capacity of observer that held for their participation in the 1994 Global Conference;
8. Stresses the need for the effective participation of actors of civil society, particularly nongovernmental organizations, in preparation for the special session, as well as the need to ensure appropriate
arrangements, taking into account the practice and experience gained at the Global Conference, for their
substantive contributions to and active involvement in the preparatory meetings and the special session,
and in that context invites the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with Member States, to
propose to Member States appropriate modalities for their effective involvement in the special session;
9. Also stresses the importance of the full and effective participation of small island developing
States in the special session and in the seventh session of the Commission on Sustainable Development
as the preparatory body for the special session, invites Governments to make timely and voluntary
contributions for that purpose to the Trust Fund for Support of the Work of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, and in this context requests the Secretary-General to assist small island
developing States by applying the modalities for such assistance used for their participation in the Global
Conference;
10. Reiterates the urgency of international community support of adaptation efforts by small island
developing States to cope with the threat of sea-level rise experienced as a consequence of climate change;
11. Welcomes the activities undertaken by the Global Environment Facility, and invites it, in
accordance with the relevant decisions of its Council and the relevant provisions of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change8 and the Convention on Biological Diversity,9 to support
further the objectives of the Programme of Action;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Commission on Sustainable Development at its
seventh session, through the existing mechanism, and to the General Assembly at its special session for
the review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, a report on the donors conference;

8

A/AC.237/18 (Part II)/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex I.

9

See United Nations Environment Programme, Convention on Biological Diversity (Environmental Law
and Institution Programme Activity Centre), June 1992.
/...

A/RES/53/189
Page 4

13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session, under the item entitled
“Environment and sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the
Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States”;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session a
report on actions taken to implement the present resolution and the recommendations emanating from the
special session for the review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States.
91st plenary meeting
15 December 1998
