United Nations

S/PV.6670

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6670th meeting
Tuesday, 29 November 2011, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moraes Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2011/675)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-60960 (E)

*1160960*

S/PV.6670

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2011/675)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Enver Hoxhaj to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/675, the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. Farid Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: The report before the Council
(S/2011/675) details the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 16 July to 15 October 2011. Since my
last briefing to the Council, on 30 August (see
S/PV.6604), the Council has met twice, on
15 September (S/PV.6616 and S/PV.6617) and
28 September, and has been briefed on the situation in
the north of Kosovo, which remains precarious and
warrants the attention and leadership of the Council.
Since mid-October, the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
has consolidated perimeters at Gates 1 and 31 and has
attempted to remove some of the Kosovo Serb
roadblocks. Those attempts have resulted in occasional

2

clashes with the Serb protesters. The gates have
remained closed to traffic owing to the barricades
erected by Kosovo Serb residents in the north, who
have continued to object to the presence, albeit
symbolic at the moment, of customs and police
officials from the Pristina institutions. The European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX)
continues to transport Pristina officials to the gates by
helicopter. In response, the northern Kosovo Serbs
refuse EULEX the freedom of movement throughout
the north. Meanwhile, KFOR’s ability to conduct
patrols and access its bases in the north is
unpredictable, as convoys are sporadically blocked at
the barricades when accompanied by EULEX or when
carrying heavy engineering equipment.
On the night of 23 to 24 November, KFOR
attempted to dismantle an unmanned barricade at
Dudin krš, close to the northern Mitrovica bypass. That
attempt sparked a violent clash with local Serb
residents, who attacked KFOR soldiers with rocks and
vehicles. According to KFOR, 21 of its soldiers,
personnel from Germany, Hungary and Portugal, were
injured in the incident.
In the morning of 28 November, KFOR soldiers
took over and removed the Kosovo Serb roadblock at a
village west of Zubin Potok. KFOR said that, during
the operation, it used water cannons, tear gas, pepper
spray and rubber bullets. KFOR also reported that two
of its soldiers were wounded by small arms fire. The
situation calmed down for a few hours, but the
violence resumed late in the afternoon, with Kosovo
Serb demonstrators throwing Molotov cocktails at
KFOR troops, injuring an additional 23 soldiers. Some
15 Serb demonstrators reportedly received treatment
for the injuries they sustained during the clashes. The
situation today has been peaceful, although local
Kosovo Serb protesters are still present at the site.
Those incidents marked a clear escalation in the
level of tension and violence in the north. UNMIK has
expressed serious concern at those acts of violence and
has condemned the shootings targeting KFOR soldiers.
President Jahjaga issued a statement condemning the
attacks on KFOR, while President Tadić of Serbia this
morning called on KFOR to avoid the use of force and
asked the Kosovo Serbs to remove the barricades.
Regrettably, the situation in the north has become
intertwined with the politics of the Serbian elections to

11-60960

S/PV.6670

be held next spring and with the current political
dynamics in Pristina.
UNMIK and its international partners have taken
several initiatives to contain the current situation and
to help to bring into focus its underlying causes, which
deserve the attention and careful examination of this
Council. We are working hard to help to dispel tensions
and create an atmosphere in which durable solutions
will be possible. Accordingly, we have actively sought
out interlocutors from across the political spectrum —
in Pristina, northern Kosovo and Belgrade — to
promote efforts to find common ground and engage in
constructive dialogue. We have urged all sides to
explore ways and opportunities to communicate more
effectively with one another. Our core messages have
been to show patience, refrain from the use of force,
avoid violence and support the Security Councilmandated international presences in the fulfilment of
their responsibilities by not impeding their freedom of
movement in the north.
One element of our strategy of engagement has
already borne some fruit. The various sides have toned
down their rhetoric, through which they tended to
speak to their respective constituencies with inadequate
regard for the misunderstandings that their remarks
could create. I am pleased to report to the Council that
that advice has been heeded and is being positively
implemented in Pristina and Belgrade.
It should be noted that, without progress at the
political level, EULEX and KFOR will continue to face
difficulties in fulfilling their mandates north of the Ibar
River, and that previous relative successes in building a
functional and multi-ethnic Kosovo police presence
there will be jeopardized. Recent attacks targeting
Kosovo police officers in Zubin Potok, notably the
attack on the residence of the Chief of the Investigation
Unit and a hand grenade attack directed at the police
station, which appear to be related to the local political
situation, seem to reflect the currently tense situation in
the north and may cause further impediments to
effective policing.
Despite KFOR’s general posture to avoid forceful
action in the north, the situation continues to be
extremely volatile, and the combined factors of
frustration, fear and mistrust could easily and quickly
provide the spark that could ignite violence, as was
demonstrated by the recent clashes. At the same time,
other incidents, such as the killing of a Kosovo Serb

11-60960

and the wounding of three others in the Kroi i
Vitakut/Brdjani neighbourhood in northern Mitrovica
on 9 November only serve to exacerbate the ethnic
tensions. Consequently, the situation calls for strong,
united leadership from the international community.
In light of all this, the resumption of the
European Union (EU)-facilitated dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade on 21 November, after a hiatus
that followed Pristina’s attempt to take control of the
gates on 25 July, should be welcomed by all. The
dialogue provides an appropriate forum for the
discussion of a way forward that would represent a
European solution for the two crossing points. We
should encourage the sides to maintain their
engagement in good faith, and to work closely with the
EU facilitator, whose leadership is key to the process,
to reach agreement on such a solution.
At the same dialogue meeting, and following on
an earlier agreement in July, it was agreed that the
European University Association will be asked to
certify diplomas issued by universities of each party
for use by the other in connection with further
education and/or public employment. Regional
cooperation was also discussed, with the parties
agreeing that they would return to the issue at their
next meeting, scheduled for tomorrow, with a view to
reaching a final agreement. The parties also reviewed
the process of implementation of previously reached
agreements on cadastre, civil registry and freedom of
movement, and committed themselves to making rapid
progress in this process. It is important to ensure that
the momentum of this dialogue, in terms of both
reaching agreements and of their implementation, be
maintained.
This period has seen an increase of incidents
affecting minority communities elsewhere in Kosovo,
including the killing of a Kosovo Croat and the
wounding of another in southern Kosovo on 2 October,
and the killing of a Kosovo Serb and injuring of two
others in western Kosovo on 20 October. While it is
unclear whether these cases were ethnically motivated,
it is a fact that criminal incidents affecting members of
minority communities weaken these communities’
perception of their safety and security. It is important
to note that the number of criminal incidents affecting
minorities has also increased compared to the same
period one year ago, which, considering the present
situation, has a greater negative impact upon these
communities’ perception of their safety and security.

3

S/PV.6670

UNMIK is carefully and closely following the
trend of such incidents and is engaging both with local
police and community leaders, as well as with EULEX,
to intensify efforts to resolve all inter-ethnic criminal
cases, which are particularly damaging to the prospects
for peace and reconciliation. More importantly,
UNMIK is adding its voice to that of others in the
international community calling for more active and
effective efforts on the part of political leaders to make
use of their leadership positions in order to help change
the atmosphere in which inter-ethnic crime is tacitly
tolerated.
Perceptions of safety and security are one of the
key elements affecting minority returns. We continue to
observe with concern the recent decline in the rate of
such returns to Kosovo. While vocal opposition to
returns has diminished, in early November a public
protest by some 200 members of the receiving KosovoAlbanian community in a formerly mixed village in
Ferizaj/Uroševac municipality prevented a visit by
Serb internally displaced persons, who were escorted
away by the Kosovo police after one of their minivans
was stoned outside the meeting venue. We are
concerned by the incident, but note that the municipal
leadership has publicly denounced the receiving
community’s opposition, and has taken action to
reschedule the visit to the community.
There is better news regarding the preservation of
Serbian Orthodox heritage sites. I am pleased to report
that since spring 2009, when the Kosovo Police
gradually started to assume responsibility for security
arrangements at protected sites, there has been a
decrease of incidents at these sites. Currently,
ethnically mixed teams of Kosovo Police are in charge
of security arrangements at 21 sites, mostly churches
and monasteries. Although the Serbian Orthodox
Church assesses the situation around the church sites to
be fragile and has undertaken some physical protection
measures of its own, the best guarantee for the longterm security of these sites is the development of
positive relations between the Church and local
representatives of the Kosovo-Albanian community, in
which some senior clerics are actively engaged. The
continued support of the Kosovo authorities for the
established mechanisms for the special protection and
reconstruction of Orthodox sites, including the
Reconstruction and Implementation Commission,
would contribute to this process.

4

There has been only modest progress in the
clarification of the fates and location of missing
persons. In this regard, I wish to reiterate the call on all
those who have information on the fates and locations
of the missing to come forward and pass that
information on to the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
Finally, I wish briefly to update the Council on
the steps taken by EULEX to investigate the
allegations contained in the Council of Europe
Parliamentary Assembly’s resolution 1782 (2011),
“Investigation of allegations of inhuman treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo”. A Special Investigative Task Force has been
set up and has taken over the preliminary investigation
launched by EULEX into the allegations. The lead
prosecutor announced that he had secured Albania’s
commitment to cooperating in the investigation, and
declared his commitment to following the trail of
evidence wherever it may lead. He recently met with
the Presidents of Kosovo, Albania and Serbia, as well
as with war crimes prosecutors in the three capitals. As
noted in the Secretary-General’s report,
“Belgrade remains of the view that an
independent body, with investigative powers in
Albania and beyond, should be established by the
Security Council to lead the investigation.”
(S/2011/675, para. 29)
In closing, I would like to thank the members of
the Council for their support for UNMIK, and in
particular for continuing efforts to contribute to
solutions that not only accord with the values and
purposes of the United Nations, but contribute towards
the fulfilment of the aspirations of the people of the
region to a more peaceful and more prosperous future
as part of Europe. We count upon the Council’s
continued support for our efforts to tackle the
immediate and delicate problems described in the
present report of the Secretary-General. Moreover, we
hope that the Council will assist us by putting the full
weight of its authority behind the messages we are
sending to the parties, in particular concerning their
respective leaderships.
While some speak of Kosovo as a frozen conflict,
I believe that the situation is fluid and dynamic. This
potentially entails greater dangers, but there also exist
genuine opportunities to pursue a viable, sustainable
resolution that could overcome the long-standing

11-60960

S/PV.6670

tensions. It is my belief that this can best be achieved
through the stewardship of this Council. Above all, I
believe that what is needed at the moment is for sides
to master the goodwill, pragmatism, boldness, courage
and resolve necessary to achieve genuine progress. No
less than the taking of full statesman-like responsibility
is demanded, if the present opportunities for moving
forward towards peaceful, durable solutions are not to
be missed.

optimistic, as certain aspects of the situation in Kosovo
seemed to be improving. The fifth round of dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina had just taken place, on
2 July, and had produced status-neutral agreements in
some important areas. Rather than trying to build on
the positive momentum, however, a choice was made
in Pristina to attempt to unilaterally alter the reality on
the ground, clearly outside of the framework provided
by the dialogue.

The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.

That happened twice during the reporting period.
The first time was on 25 July, when the territory’s
ethnic-Albanian authorities ordered the deployment to
North Kosovo of the so-called paramilitary Regional
Operational Support Unit (ROSU), with the aim of
seizing the administrative checkpoints known as Gates
1 and 31. According to the report, this was “not
coordinated with the international presences or the
communities on the ground” (S/2011/675, para. 3). As
a consequence, dynamics changed overnight — “a
significant deterioration in the security situation”
(ibid., para. 10) in North Kosovo. The report also
states that “In reaction to the actions of Pristina, local
Kosovo Serbs, who continue to reject the authority of
the Kosovo institutions, erected roadblocks” (ibid.,
para. 4). Thanks in part to the swift, yet measured,
response by Belgrade, the situation was contained and
did not spin dangerously out of control. The overall
state of affairs in North Kosovo had ceased to worsen
by the end of August, although tensions remained high.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting of the Security Council
pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).
I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Farid Zarif. I congratulate him on his recent
appointment and thank him for his remarks. The United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
remains a crucial pillar of peace and stability in the
province.
At the beginning of my statement, I would like to
once again express our deep gratitude to the substantial
majority of the world’s nations that respect Serbia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. By continuing to
support the principle of the inviolability of borders of
United Nations States Members, they are preventing a
dangerous precedent that could be repeated in any part
of the world, with devastating consequences for
international peace and stability.
The security situation in our southern province of
Kosovo has been greatly aggravated since the end of
the previous reporting period. Serbia’s repeated
warnings that unilateral forceful action would
adversely affect stability kept being ignored by some
key actors. Despite considerable diplomatic efforts, it
has not been possible to reach consensus in the
Chamber that unilateralism and the use of force are
unacceptable. As a result, today everything is much
more difficult, as positions harden in the light of
deteriorating conditions on the ground. It is truly
frustrating that all of this was eminently avoidable, had
everyone had enough patience to seek solutions by
exclusively peaceful means and through dialogue.
At the beginning of the three-month period
covered by the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/675), it was possible to be cautiously

11-60960

It is against that backdrop that the sixth round of
dialogue took place in Brussels, on 2 September.
Another status-neutral solution was reached, that time
on customs stamps. We were led to believe that, in the
period ahead, implementation would be discussed in
good faith so that underlying procedures could be
agreed and put into practice. Instead, for the second
time in as many months, an attempt was made to
impose an outcome that was clearly outside of the
dialogue framework on the very same issue, namely,
Gates 1 and 31.
On 7 September, Hashim Thaçi, the so-called
Prime Minister of Kosovo, explicitly stated his
purpose, that is, to “preserve and assume control over
the territorial integrity of the Republic of Kosovo”. He
also said that “Kosovo customs officials, appointed by
the Kosovo Customs, will be present; Kosovo border
police, appointed by the Kosovo Police, will be
present”. A document entitled “Kosovo Police
Operational Plan” confirmed that intention. It reads:

5

S/PV.6670

“All operations will be conducted under Kosovo
sovereignty and in accordance with Kosovo laws and
regulations”.
That is manifestly incompatible with resolution
1244 (1999), and drastically deviates from the statusneutral framework of the United Nations. It also
ignores the terms of the Secretary-General’s six-point
agreement, which was welcomed by the Council in
November 2008 and which states very precisely that
“international
customs
officers
appointed
in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) will be reinstated at gates 1 and 31”.
Nevertheless, both the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) chose to support the operation, which began
on 16 September. Explicit warnings were voiced in the
Chamber on the eve of the announced action that this
would effectively mean stepping beyond the limits of
KFOR’s and EULEX’s respective mandates, in
violation of resolution 1244 (1999). Not only would
that undermine the centrality of the dialogue process,
but it was also blatantly obvious that it would heighten
tensions in North Kosovo, and would surely result in
the loss of the international missions’ legitimacy in the
eyes of the local population.
Unfortunately, the inevitable happened. Residents
of North Kosovo responded by reinforcing existing
roadblocks and erecting new ones. Their resolute
determination to resist the imposition of a decisively
unwanted regime has become one of the most
conspicuous elements of the reality on the ground.
Regretfully, some of the occasional clashes turned
violent and resulted in injuries on both sides of the
divide. Serbia’s strong condemnation of the use of
force by any party has always been swift and
unequivocal.
At this particularly delicate moment, it is critical
that we send the right messages and draw the
appropriate lessons from the recent incident at Dudin
krš, near Zveçan, and yesterday’s at Jagnjenica. Both
began in similar fashion. Unprovoked, KFOR troops
rapidly approached the barricades and immediately
started to dismantle them with heavy equipment. That
caused the situation to escalate. Villagers from
neighbouring areas began to arrive to defend their
positions. In both cases, scores of civilians and dozens
of soldiers were injured.

6

We call upon all stakeholders on the ground in
North Kosovo — KFOR and EULEX officials, as well
as local community leaders — to engage in dialogue
and work together to restore calm immediately. The
removal of barricades is clearly in the interest of peace
and stability, but it should be achieved exclusively
through peaceful means. We must find the way out of
the vicious circle of violence, in which only extremism
thrives. It is indicative, however, that almost every
time a new round of dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina is due to take place — in the present case,
tomorrow — unilateralism suddenly comes back to the
fore.
Negotiations conducted in good faith are
predicated on abstaining from the use of instruments of
compulsion. Those are mutually exclusive concepts.
Either one negotiates in good faith or tries to resolve
the issue through forceful imposition. The choice could
not be clearer: peaceful dialogue or unilateral action.
Serbia is ready for the former, and categorically rejects
the latter. We therefore echo the report’s conclusion
that “sensitive issues relating to northern Kosovo can
be resolved only through peaceful means, taking into
account the views of the communities on the ground”
(ibid., para. 56).
While we have rightfully focused our attention on
events taking place in the North, we must not ignore
the fact that the situation in the South has gotten worse,
as well. The report underlines that, in comparison to
the same period last year, “the number of violent
incidents affecting the Serb population [south of the
Ibёr/Ibar] increased following the July events” (ibid.,
para. 20). In addition to the brutal murder of a Kosovo
Serb returnee, the report also lists numerous acts of
desecration and vandalism against Serbian Orthodox
Church holy sites and cemeteries, vehicle stonings,
arson attacks, burglaries, theft of farm equipment and
drinking well contaminations. The report does not
indicate that any of those hate crimes have been
solved, or even that anyone has been charged with
committing them.
Unfortunately, the report omits a number of other
incidents that further darken the overall picture of the
situation on the ground in the province. I will limit
myself to mentioning just one of them, but it is typical.
On 28 July, on the outskirts of the village of
Doganović, on the Vitina-Štrpce road, two ethnic Serbs
from Klokot were stopped by a ROSU contingent.
They were on their way to sell vegetables at the Štrpce

11-60960

S/PV.6670

farmers market. They were forced out of their vehicle
and their Serbian papers — acceptable under the terms
of the dialogue — were torn up. Their license plates —
also acceptable under the terms of the dialogue — were
taken away from them. The ROSU officers then
proceeded to beat them mercilessly. Many similar
incidents have been taking place, but I believe this one
is illustrative enough.
Under such shocking circumstances, it is no
wonder that, for Kosovo Serb internally displaced
persons, the “pace of the returns remains markedly
slow” (ibid., para. 32). In that quarter, only 96 ethnic
Serbs went back to the province, less than half of the
number who returned in the same period last year. The
future looks even bleaker. According to a document of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees entitled “UNHCR Global Appeal 20122013 — Serbia (and Kosovo: SC Res, 1244)”, “the
potential for returns is almost exhausted”.
Almost a year ago, the Council of Europe
released a deeply disturbing report entitled “Inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo”. Since that time, excruciatingly
little has been done to uncover the truth about those
allegations, especially considering the uniquely
heinous nature of the charges. In that regard, the recent
appointment of Clint Williamson as lead prosecutor for
the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force is a
welcome development. We will assist him and his team
in any way that we can, for we believe they can make
an invaluable contribution to uncovering what occurred
inside Kosovo itself.
That, however, remains manifestly insufficient,
for the alleged harvesting and smuggling of organs of
innocent Serbian civilians took place beyond that
territory. Despite all protestations to the contrary, it is
indisputable that EULEX cannot operate at full
capacity anywhere outside Kosovo. In other words, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo has
neither an adequate mandate nor sufficient temporal
and territorial jurisdiction to carry out an investigation
that would be comprehensive in scope. The EULEX
Special Investigative Task Force has no ability to
enforce the cooperation of all concerned. Only this
body can do that.
We are not opposed to the centrality of EULEX in
an investigation mechanism. But it must be both
empowered by, and accountable to, the Security

11-60960

Council. That has been the standard applied in each
previous instance involving serious war crimes and
crimes against humanity in the Balkans, whichever side
the perpetrators belonged to and irrespective of their
political roles. There is no compelling reason not to
make a comprehensive, independent investigation
accountable to the whole world in this case as well.
That is the only way to guarantee fairness and
transparency and to prevent doubts about anyone’s full
commitment. A few days ago, however, the Task Force
spokesman said that details of the investigation it is
conducting would remain confidential until it has come
to an end. That might take years, he added. That is
outrageous and unacceptable. If senior officials of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia brief the Security Council every six
months, why should those tasked with the organs
trafficking case not do so as well? We have already
presented some proposals on the investigation
mechanism, and we urge the Council to act upon them.
Come what may, the truth cannot possibly rise to
the surface without ironclad witness protection
guarantees. At this point, they simply do not exist. The
recent mysterious death of a key witness in an
important war crimes trial has reinforced the
perception that EULEX is unable to guarantee the
safety of those in its protective custody. The defendant
in the case in question is Fatmir Limaj, a powerful
former minister in Hashim Thaçi’s Cabinet. He has
been identified by the Council of Europe, together with
several others, including Thaçi himself, as having
played vital roles as co-conspirators in various
categories of criminal activity.
The witness, Mr. Agim Zogaj, had been under the
protection of EULEX, but somehow ended up alone
and dead in a park in Duisburg, Germany. Local
authorities have stated that they were unaware that he
required 24-hour protection. In an authentic diary
excerpt published posthumously by the Pristina daily
newspaper Koha Ditore, Zogaj addresses Limaj
directly, writing that “for years now my children fear
you more than they feared Milosevic”. In another
passage, written just a few days before his death, he
suggests that EULEX did not have the capacity to
protect him. That raises the question of whether he
truly committed suicide, as the local police have
preliminarily concluded.

7

S/PV.6670

My Government is resolved to undertake all the
necessary measures to pave the way for establishing a
comprehensive peace between Serbs and Albanians.
We will keep working relentlessly in its pursuit, despite
all the setbacks caused by unilateralism. Dialogue is
the only vehicle to reach that goal. Its intention — as
stated in a General Assembly resolution that was
adopted by acclamation and initiated the dialogue, is to
“improve the lives of the people” (resolution 64/298,
para. 2). That is its most important, status-neutral
objective. The talks are not an exercise in enforcing
either party’s legal position. They are focused on
practical considerations. If both sides are prepared to
be flexible, common ground can surely be found.
A great twentieth-century leader famously once
called for a fresh start. “Let us begin anew”, he said,
“remembering on both sides that civility is not a
sign of weakness, and sincerity is always subject
to proof. Let us never negotiate out of fear. But
let us never fear to negotiate. Let both sides
explore what problems unite us instead of
belabouring those problems which divide us”.
We too must reinvigorate our efforts. It is essential that
all stakeholders pledge to make the dialogue the sole
mechanism within which differences will be brought to
the fore.
We are facing a worsening situation in Kosovo. It
necessitates more active engagement by this body. I
call on the Security Council to make sure that no more
forceful unilateral acts are allowed to take place, and
that it does so in clear, unequivocal, unbiased and
status-neutral terms. I urge this body to take that
crucial step without any further hesitation.
If we are genuinely concerned about peace and
stability in Kosovo — if re-establishing security and
improving the quality of life for the people on the
ground is our objective — then there can be no
justification for refusing to heed such a call right now.
A failure to act would be a disappointing abdication of
the responsibility entrusted to this Council by the
world’s family of nations. Taking charge of the present
moment, on the other hand, cannot but enhance the
enduring benefit and honour of the founding principles
of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj.

8

Mr. Hoxhaj: It is a great honour for me to
address the Security Council again regarding the recent
developments in Kosovo. I also express the gratitude of
the people of the Republic of Kosovo for the Council’s
support for our young but functional and multi-ethnic
democracy.
Before us is the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on Kosovo (S/2011/675). The
situation outlined in that report helps to remind us that
Kosovo is an important State in the Balkans. In its
fourth year as an independent nation, Kosovo has
proven to be a factor of peace and stability and security
in the region and throughout Europe.
Allow me to speak about four key developments
in Kosovo.
The first deals with the further consolidation of
Kosovo’s statehood. In the last three months, we made
crucial progress in strengthening our institutions.
Kosovo has maintained institutional stability, and there
are visible improvements in all aspects of life,
including democratic governance, the rule of law and a
market-based economy. It has proved to be a cohesive
State. A report published recently by the United
Nations Development Programme states that there has
been a general increase in people’s satisfaction with the
work of the key executive, legislative and judicial
institutions.
The democratization process is going in the right
direction. There is an open and democratic dialogue
that includes all stakeholders in our society and that
covers a wide range of different policies and issues.
That is illustrated by the work of the commission for
constitutional changes and the commission for a new
election law. Cooperation between all political parties
and other, non-political actors is excellent. The Kosovo
Assembly has passed 33 laws on issues such as
municipal cooperation, missing persons, education,
cadastral
regulations
and
international
legal
cooperation in criminal matters.
We are committed to strengthening the rule of
law. The Kosovo justice system is engaged in fighting
organized crime and corruption. There have been
concrete results on cases involving war crimes,
organized crime and corruption. Kosovo has had
excellent preparation with the European Union Rule of
Law Mission (EULEX) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia on all those cases.
Once again, we consider the rule of law fundamental

11-60960

S/PV.6670

for Kosovo’s development and the development of the
Western Balkans.
Like other countries in the region, we have had
many challenges this year. Despite the fact that our
people are optimistic about the prospects for economic
development, unemployment remains one of the key
problems that we face today. For that reason, we are
working very hard to ensure economic growth and
social welfare.
Kosovo has maintained macroeconomic stability
and continuous economic growth. While Europe is
facing a debt crisis, Kosovo remains the least indebted
country in the Balkans. The new budget law was
presented to Parliament earlier this month. It foresees a
6 per cent increase in gross domestic production for the
next year. We aim to accomplish this through
investments, exports and consumption, which in turn
will provide jobs and help ease unemployment. We
consider economic growth a crucial element of our
social cohesion and our efforts at ethnic integration.
In this reporting period we made significant
progress in our efforts to participate in regional and
international initiatives. We have been and we remain a
responsible member of the international community.
The size and geographic scope of Kosovo’s recognition
is global, which demonstrates that Kosovo’s
independence is a geopolitical reality. In that
connection I would like to thank the Governments of
Gabon, Kuwait and the Ivory Coast for their decisions
to recognize independent Kosovo. We strongly believe
that many other countries will follow suit in the near
future. Following the firm verdict of the International
Court of Justice, which confirmed that the declaration
of Kosovo’s independence did not violate international
law and resolution 1244 (1999), there are no legal
reasons to further delay the recognition of Kosovo’s
independence.
The second point I wish to make has to do with
the process of European integration. We see Kosovo,
like other countries in the Balkans, as a critical part of
Europe in terms of history, geography and culture.
However, political integration, in terms of the
European integration process, is the best framework for
ensuring long-term peace, stability and prosperity in
our region. At the same time, it is also the best way for
the region to overcome divisions, through a process of
reform and mutual support.

11-60960

I would like to inform the Council that on
12 October we received the European Commission’s
progress report on Kosovo, which correctly reflects the
situation on the ground, stating that “Kosovo has made
progress as regards the political criteria in a number of
important areas”. The work of the central and local
governments and relevant departments is praised.
Progress was also mentioned in our decentralization
efforts in building multi-ethnic institutions and a
diverse society.
Like our neighbours, we aspire to secure visa
liberalization for all citizens and contractual relations
with the European Union. Due to our progress, the
report delivered the long-awaited news about launching
a dialogue on the visa liberalization process towards
the end of this year. That is a remarkable achievement
for Kosovo. Now we also hope that the European
Council will support us by concluding a contractual
relationship in the form of a trade agreement or even a
stabilization and association agreement.
I believe that Kosovo should not be a forgotten
and isolated country. In 2011, Kosovo made important
steps towards European integration. We hope that 2012
will be the year of a European Kosovo.
The third important point for the Government of
Kosovo and for the future of the region is the situation
in the north of the country. In our previous meetings in
this Chamber, I presented my Government’s views with
respect to the situation in the north of Kosovo. Again, I
consider it very important to inform the Council about
the latest developments.
The state of affairs in the north of Kosovo is
complex. It threatens the functionality of Kosovo as a
multi-ethnic State and is a serious threat to regional
peace and security. The status quo has been tolerated
since 1999, in violation of resolution 1244 (1999).
Under these circumstances, the Government of Serbia
has maintained control and has sponsored a complete,
illegal system of its structures. Security and police
units, as well as paramilitary and defence structures,
are still present and operating in that part of Kosovo.
This is taking place in direct violation of resolution
1244 (1999) and of the Kumanovo Agreement, which
explicitly prohibits Serbia from maintaining a security
and armed forces presence.
The operation of illegal Serbian structures has
posed a significant obstacle to the integration of the
local population and to the implementation of the rule

9

S/PV.6670

of law. This is the only corner of Europe that has not
had free and democratic elections or participation in
democratic institutions in the last twelve years. It is
also the only case in Europe in which one country,
through its security forces, is controlling part of
another country. In that area, where law and order are
absent, criminal activities and organized crime have
flourished. As we have seen, besides the economic
implications for Kosovo, Serbia and the rest of the
Balkans, such a black-hole situation has seriously
threatened regional security.
The illegal security structures of organized crime
aim to create a status quo in order to safeguard their
illegal economic activities, such as smuggling,
trafficking and others. With the support of the Serbian
Government, illegal structures have held the local
population hostage and threaten peace and order.
It is necessary to mention here that since 1999 we
have been a great financial contributor to the local
institutions in that part of Kosovo. Just this year, we
invested over €5 million in different projects, and we
will do more. Unfortunately, Belgrade has at all times
interfered and denied every form of cooperation for the
good of the local Serb community there.
The Government of Kosovo has shown patience
for a year. We have insisted that the situation should be
resolved in cooperation with international mechanisms.
We have been and remain committed to resolving this
situation through cooperation, not confrontation. But
our approach — to give peace and understanding a
chance — has been misused by the Government of
Serbia. Serbia refers to resolution 1244 (1999) over
and over again, as it did today. However, Serbia has
done everything in its power to prevent the
implementation of that resolution in the north of
Kosovo and to prevent the development of the multiethnic character of our society there.
The same has happened with the Ahtisaari Plan
since 2008. Most of the provisions of the Ahtisaari
Plan are aimed at ensuring the best mechanisms and
rights for the Kosovo Serbs. To date, Kosovo has
implemented more than 90 per cent of the Plan, and the
integration of the Kosovo Serbs across the country is a
reality. The Plan could not be implemented in the north
because Serbia never showed any interest in improving
the lives of the local Serbs there.
When I mention the north of Kosovo, I am
specifically referring to the three and a half

10

municipalities: the northern part of the city of
Mitrovica, Leposavić, Zveçan and Zubin Potok.
Thirteen thousand people live in this part of Kosovo,
but the majority of Kosovo Serbs live across Kosovo,
and around 100,000 take part in all levels of Kosovo
institutions.
The decision of the Kosovo Government to
establish the rule of law and to enforce reciprocity
measures in trade relations was not a violent act. It was
an attempt to establish the rule of law and order and to
implement the agreement on Customs stamps reached
in Brussels. The Government of Kosovo has been
working in close coordination with international
partners to secure basic freedom of movement and the
rule of law.
What is currently happening in that part of
Kosovo, even as we meet here today? The situation
remains unchanged, blocked and threatening. Trucks,
rocks and various obstacles are blocking most of the
roads in the three municipalities in the north. A total of
18 roadblocks are preventing the free movement of
people and goods. Even the troops of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), a force mandated by resolution 1244 (1999),
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) are prevented from crossing those
barricades. This poses a real threat to security within
Kosovo and to regional peace and stability.
At the same time, we are concerned about the war
narratives that are still present in the Serbian political
discourse. That was confirmed last week by the
statements made by members of the Serbian
Government, who, when talking about Kosovo, said
that Serbia could not and would not watch peacefully if
a red line was crossed. They sent threatening messages
and promoted the concept of a balance of fear between
Kosovo and Serbia.
It is necessary to mention here that since 25 July,
the Kosovo institutions have not been the ones to use
violence. The opposite is true. The illegal Serbian
security structures have systematically used violence
against citizens and peacekeeping soldiers. In the last
two weeks alone, more than 54 soldiers have been
wounded, including in the escalation of violence that
occurred yesterday.
We have been patient, hoping that our neighbour,
Serbia, would understand that roadblocks and threats
are not solutions to our problems. We do not wish to be
part of destabilizing scenarios, and we will not tolerate

11-60960

S/PV.6670

being threatened by destructive forms of intimidation.
We are a constructive partner in resolving the issues we
face, but we will not give up our serenity or the
functioning of our young, democratic State. We are
working to improve our good-neighbourly relations,
always oriented towards dialogue and European
integration.
This brings me to my last point: the technical
dialogue. Our dedication to peace and stability and to a
European future for the whole region led us to engage
in a dialogue with Serbia that is facilitated by the
European Union. This technical dialogue is aimed at
finding solutions to the practical issues that our people
are faced with every day.
Dialogue is a very important instrument for us to
build good-neighbourly relations as two independent
States. We are willing to put the past behind us and
work together for a better future. It is for that reason
that we are participating in this dialogue in a
constructive manner and in good faith. We are working
towards outcomes that improve the lives of all citizens
in Kosovo and Serbia. The resolution of issues
concerning the freedom of movement of people and
goods will greatly benefit people in both countries.
Our goal is to bring services closer to all citizens
of Kosovo, and all of the solutions that we have
proposed so far are aimed at bringing communities
together, not dividing them. I do not believe that there
should be, or could be, ethnic electricity, ethnic mobile
telephones or ethnic car plates, as these concepts are
against European values and norms. We will therefore
accept all solutions that are European solutions. Such
solutions should be clear and easy to implement and
should not produce more parallelism.
But let me make clear the position of my
Government on the dialogue. Kosovo is and will be
part of this dialogue. We welcome the fact that Serbia,
after some months of boycott, returned to the
negotiating table last week. However, we should not
understand dialogue as a process that involves simply
attending meetings, without any concrete results. We
are very much interested in outcomes and in the
implementation of agreements.
As I reported here at previous meetings in July
and September, Kosovo and Serbia agreed on many
important issues. To date, only one agreement has been
implemented by Serbia. This undermines the trust

11-60960

between both sides and hinders the prospects for new
agreements.
Kosovo supports the integration of the region into
the European Union. However, we will never accept
countries aspiring to integration, such as Serbia,
undermining Kosovo’s statehood and controlling part
of its territory through illegal security structures. We
therefore believe that the time has come for Serbia to
remove the roadblocks, dismantle its security structures
and accept the European model of integrated border
management between the two countries.
We are deeply committed to the implementation
of the entire Ahtisaari Plan as the best model for the
integration of the Kosovo Serbs. According to the Plan,
Kosovo Serbs in these three municipalities can have
full self-governance, something that no other
community can enjoy today in Europe.
We expect that the next round of dialogue,
scheduled for tomorrow, will take place and will bring
concrete outcomes in the areas of regional cooperation,
integrated border management, telecommunications
and energy. But let me repeat: we are very interested in
reaching agreement on those issues, and, more
importantly, implementing them on the ground. We
hope that Serbia is not using the dialogue to score
political points in order to get European Union
candidate status. We also hope that it will not boycott it
again after 9 December, when the European Council
will take important decisions for the Balkans.
Let me conclude by saying that the Government
of Kosovo is committed to providing all its citizens the
peaceful and prosperous future that they deserve. We
are determined to integrate the people in this part of
Kosovo with the rest of the country and maintain our
internationally recognized borders. We will make every
effort to communicate with the Kosovo Serbs in the
north, and we will spare no resource to enable the
creation of free and democratic institutions in the
north, so that people can live free of fear and
intimidation. The Government of Kosovo will exercise
its legitimate right to guarantee law, order and peace in
its entire territory. The municipalities in the north are
part of Kosovo. They will be so forever. We will never
accept a status quo, a frozen situation or ethnic
partition, as senior-level officials in Serbia are
promoting.
I think that, after 20 years, the time has come for
Serbia to define its national interests in terms of

11

S/PV.6670

political integration within Europe and economic
development, and not in terms of territory. Serbia
should come to terms with independent Kosovo. We
remain willing to normalize relations with Serbia. The
policy goal of my Government is the integration of
Kosovo into the Euro-Atlantic institutions.
Finally, the Security Council can count on
Kosovo for cooperation in order to maintain
international peace and security. As the report of the
Secretary-General shows, a threat to Kosovo’s peace is
indeed a threat to regional security and stability.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif for his briefing and for
the Secretary-General’s comprehensive report on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), covering the period of July to
October (S/2011/675). I would also like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign Minister of
Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.
There have been a few positive developments
during the reporting period. We note that during the
European Union-facilitated dialogue in Brussels on
2 September, Serbia agreed to recognize Kosovo’s
customs stamps. The two sides also reached
agreements on the issue of cadastre records and on
establishing a fully reliable cadastre in Kosovo in order
to provide legal certainty and to protect the rights of
people with legitimate claims to property. In addition,
both parties expressed their commitment to look
further into the technical and political aspects of issues
such as telecommunications, energy and university
diplomas. The two sides also continued to cooperate on
the issue of missing persons.
While such agreements are welcome, they have
been overshadowed by the situation on the ground in
northern Kosovo. We note with concern that the overall
security situation was negatively affected by the
developments on border crossings and that there was a
24 per cent increase in incidents affecting minority
communities. Those developments also prevented
further talks between the parties until about a week
ago. The incidents during the reporting period and
those that took place yesterday have underlined the
fragility of the security situation in the area. That
requires careful handling.

12

While we welcome the efforts made by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) to investigate allegations of inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo and note the appointment of the lead
prosecutor, Serbia continues to be interested in a role
of the Security Council in that investigation. We
continue to support the proposal for the creation of a
mechanism that enjoys the support and confidence of
all stakeholders.
We think that a number of unresolved issues are
connected with the question of status, which can be
resolved only through bilateral talks between the
parties. While such talks are being facilitated by the
European Union, it is necessary that the international
presence in Kosovo, including UNMIK, EULEX and
the Kosovo Force, act with strict neutrality and
impartiality and in accordance with their respective
mandates, including resolution 1244 (1999). They
should also ensure that there is no violence or change
of the status quo by force. Unilateral actions should be
avoided, and the parties should resolve sensitive issues
through peaceful means on the basis of consultations
and engagement with all communities.
In conclusion, we call upon the concerned parties
to resolve all issues concerning Kosovo through
consultation and dialogue without resorting to violence
or destabilizing unilateral action. Only thus can the
aspirations of all peoples concerned be met and lasting
peace and stability established in the region.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Zarif for his briefing. We welcome him in his new
role as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I thank
Foreign Minister Hoxhaj and Foreign Minister Jeremić
for their presence here today and for their statements.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2011/675) highlights the challenges to
long-term peace and security in Kosovo and the Balkan
region. However, it also highlights the successes that
Kosovo and the region have achieved, including the
2 September agreement by Belgrade and Pristina to
recognize each other’s customs stamps, as well as
ongoing cooperation on cultural heritage projects.
Despite the recent violence caused by the acts of a few
extremists, the United States remains optimistic that

11-60960

S/PV.6670

Kosovo and Serbia can eventually resolve their
differences and that Kosovo will continue to develop
the successful institutions of a democratic nation. I
would like to make four points today.
First, we echo the Secretary-General’s call for the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) to continue its efforts to ensure
freedom of movement throughout Kosovo. The Council
has affirmed that Kosovo is a single customs space.
That is fully in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999)
and was a key point in the Secretary-General’s
November 2008 report on UNMIK (S/2008/692),
which the Council welcomed in its presidential
statement of 26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44).
Kosovo therefore has the right to control its borders
and to uphold the rule of law, in full cooperation with
the international community. It cannot be considered
unilateral action for Kosovo to enforce its customs
controls. Moreover, Kosovo also coordinated its
activities with the international community, including
KFOR and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX).
Furthermore, Kosovo announced its intention to
establish full border and customs functions at the gates
after Serbia agreed to recognize the Kosovo customs
stamp at the 2 September dialogue. Kosovo established
those functions, in accordance with an operational plan
coordinated with EULEX and KFOR. The obstructions
to freedom of movement are due to the actions of hardline Kosovo Serb factions, with the support of illegal
parallel institutions and, in some cases, with the
endorsement of Serbian Government officials. We call
on all actors, including the Serbian Government, to
cooperate fully with KFOR and EULEX in the
immediate removal of the remaining roadblocks, in
ensuring proper controls at the borders and in
supporting the rule of law through cooperation on the
arrests of key criminal suspects. UNMIK can best
facilitate those goals by clearly supporting the presence
of Kosovo customs officials at the border gates and by
emphasizing that Kosovo is a single customs space.
We remain deeply concerned by the violence in
northern Kosovo during recent months, including the
murder of a Kosovo police officer on 26 July; attacks
on nine KFOR soldiers on 27 September; injuries to
21 KFOR soldiers on 23 and 24 November; and, on
25 November, injuries to over 25 KFOR soldiers,
including two wounded by gunfire while attempting to
remove roadblocks that obstructed freedom of
movement.

11-60960

It is a serious matter that such incidents occurred
while Serbian security structures remained illegally
deployed in those areas. Members of the Council
should be unequivocal in condemning the violence
perpetrated against KFOR and in supporting the
Mission. Just as any attack on United Nations
peacekeepers is unacceptable, so is any attack on
KFOR.
My Government emphasizes that KFOR’s actions
have been and continue to be in complete accord with
its mandate under resolution 1244 (1999). We
commend KFOR for using minimal force in selfdefence to de-escalate the situation, and we believe
that Serbia’s request to the Secretary-General for a
special investigation into the events of 27 September is
unwarranted.
Secondly, we welcome the progress that has been
made by the European Union (EU) to facilitate a
dialogue to date, but we note that a long list of critical
issues remains unresolved. We commend the
Government of Serbia for returning to the dialogue as
of 21 November for the seventh meeting, in which the
parties agreed on mutual acceptance of university
diplomas, and we commend the Government of Kosovo
for its progress in implementing previously reached
agreements. We call on both sides to demonstrate
flexibility as they return to the table tomorrow,
30 November. The European Union continues to have
our full support in its facilitation of the dialogue. It is
the primary — indeed, the only — high-level dialogue
between the two countries and should be vigorously
supported by all parties.
Thirdly, we would like to comment on some
assertions in the Secretary-General’s report. For
example, the Government of Kosovo has substantially
increased human and financial resources in support of
its returnees, even though their number has decreased.
Kosovo’s funding for the reintegration of returnees
increased tenfold from 2010 to 2011. In addition, the
central Government has increased its coordination with
municipalities and established new mechanisms for
better addressing the needs of returnees. The low
number of voluntary returns is not surprising, given
difficult economic conditions and still unresolved
property disputes. We also note that many potential
returnees have integrated into their new places of
residence over the past 12 years.

13

S/PV.6670

Furthermore, we do not agree with the claim that
an embargo imposed by the Government of Kosovo has
directly caused the supposed hardship in the Kosovo
Serb community. Any denial of access to goods or
services is a direct result of actions by northern
Kosovo Serbs and their parallel institutions, which
severely limited freedom of movement for people and
goods by installing numerous barricades and using of
threats and acts of violence. Neither KFOR nor the
Government of Kosovo can be fairly accused of
blocking the import of any goods.
My final point is that the United States fully
supports Ambassador Clint Williamson in his new role
as lead prosecutor for the international Special
Investigative Task Force. The Task Force will continue
the EULEX investigation into the allegations set forth
in the report of the Council of Europe’s Special
Rapporteur, Dick Marty. EULEX’s mandate is
enshrined in Kosovo’s Constitution and laws, and the
EU Joint Action explicitly provides for EULEX to
investigate and prosecute serious crimes, such as those
alleged in the Marty report, and to do so independently.
Furthermore, neighbouring States, including Serbia,
have offered the Task Force their full cooperation. We
believe there is therefore no need for the Security
Council to interfere with EULEX’s ongoing
investigations.
The international community has invested
extraordinary amounts of time and resources in
maintaining peace and security in Kosovo and the
Balkan region. The entire region is now on the
threshold of fulfilling its Euro-Atlantic aspirations.
This opportunity should not be squandered because of
actions by a few extremists. In the long term, the multiethnic communities in Kosovo will bear full
responsibility for their own future. They will decide
whether their future will be characterized by deadlock
and strife or dialogue and cooperation. In the short
term, however, the international community must
ensure that physical and political barriers do not
prevent them for attaining their goals and obtaining
their rights.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by thanking the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing today. I am also pleased to welcome to the
Council His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and His Excellency

14

Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/675), which tallies
with much of the European Commission’s own
assessment of progress in Kosovo. A central theme of
both reports, with which we agree, is that while
Kosovo has made progress, substantial reforms are still
required. Areas where Kosovo has made particular
progress this year are judicial reform and migration. In
his report, the Secretary-General notes the positive
trend of the Kosovo authorities’ increased efforts to
fight organized crime, notably through coordinated
actions against human trafficking, smuggling, money
laundering and drug trafficking. The European
Commission’s offer of a formal dialogue on visa
liberalization is testament to much hard work by the
Kosovo Government with respect to judicial reform
and migration. I also commend Kosovo’s constructive
engagement in the European Union (EU)-facilitated
dialogue with Serbia.
But major challenges remain. The Commission’s
report correctly highlights that the rule of law and
minority rights are areas where further effort is needed.
I welcome the Kosovo Government’s commitment to
securing concrete progress on these issues, and its
commitment to the task of preparing for eventual EU
accession.
The Secretary-General’s report notes the
continuing challenges in northern Kosovo, and the
briefing by Special Representative Zarif highlighted
very worrying events over recent days. Many citizens
there are still unable to lead normal lives. They face
high levels of crime, unemployment and insecurity. We
encourage the Kosovo Government to intensify efforts
to demonstrate its commitment to its citizens in
northern Kosovo, and the concrete benefits — for
example, in the rule of law, education and
unemployment — it is able to bring. I urge Mr. Hoxhaj
and his colleagues to pursue this with vision and
energy.
But others also share the responsibility for
addressing current challenges. It is imperative that all
actors refrain from taking any actions that threaten the
stability and security of those living in northern
Kosovo. As the Secretary-General’s report notes, the
two northern crossings authorized by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in

11-60960

S/PV.6670

2001 remain effectively closed by illegal roadblocks.
Those who have erected those roadblocks are
undermining the welfare of their fellow citizens and
should remove the roadblocks immediately. Let me be
clear — there can be no excuse for any attempt to
restrict freedom of movement in northern Kosovo.
Nor can there be any place for violence. We
deeply regret the injuries and loss of life in recent
months, and express our sympathies to the families of
those affected. We also condemn in the strongest
possible terms the attacks on NATO peacekeepers on
27 September, 23 November and, most recently,
28 November near Zubin Potok, where protesters used
explosives and small arms against Kosovo Force
(KFOR) troops. Two soldiers received gunshot wounds
and more than 20 others were injured as a result of
Monday’s violence.
It is the responsibility of all who exercise
influence in northern Kosovo, including the
Government of Serbia, to work actively to deter
violence and restore freedom of movement. They must
also give consistent and unequivocal backing to both
KFOR and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) in the exercise of their legitimate mandates
to guarantee security and freedom of movement.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral referred to the steps taken to investigate
allegations of organized crime, including organ
trafficking, in Kosovo. The United Kingdom welcomes
the appointment of United States war crimes
Ambassador Clint Williamson as head of the EU
Special Investigative Task Force investigating
allegations of organized crime, including organ
trafficking, in Kosovo. We are also pleased that
Ambassador Williamson has already been able to visit
Pristina, Belgrade and Tirana. He and his Task Force
have the United Kingdom’s full support and confidence
as they take forward their investigations in a thorough
and professional manner. We are clear that EULEX has
the appropriate authority and jurisdiction to take this
important work forward.
The EU-facilitated dialogue is crucial to the
European futures of both Kosovo and Serbia, and for
the well-being of their citizens. Regional cooperation
such as this is essential to the future stability and
prosperity of the Western Balkans. Many of the
challenges that Western Balkans countries face today,
such as organized crime, can be effectively addressed

11-60960

only through close cooperation at both the technical
and political levels.
The 21 November meeting of the dialogue was a
welcome incremental step forward. Agreement was
found on the mutual recognition of university
diplomas, and constructive discussions were held on
customs arrangements and Kosovo’s participation in
regional forums. Regional cooperation is an integral
part of the EU accession process. That is why the
United
Kingdom
welcomed
the
European
Commission’s emphasis on the importance of
normalization of relations with Kosovo in its recent
opinion on Serbia’s application for EU membership.
The United Kingdom is a firm supporter of Serbia’s EU
accession; we will do all we can to support that
ambition.
There is much to welcome in the capture and
extradition of Mladić and Karadžić, which served as
historic moments for international justice and for the
region and a testament to firm leadership. Serbia’s
legislative reform programme has been impressive. But
it is how Serbia chooses to respond to the
Commission’s recommendations on Kosovo that will
determine the next steps on its path towards the
European Union.
Serbia must demonstrate that it is making
progress in normalizing its relationship with Kosovo if
EU member States are to be able to grant Serbia
candidate status in December. That means, among
other things, implementing fully those agreements
already
reached
in
the
dialogue,
engaging
constructively with a view to securing agreements on
other issues already under discussion, and taking
concrete steps towards resolving the current tensions
and restoration of freedom of movement in the north of
Kosovo, including through cooperation with EULEX.
I referred a moment ago to the centrality of the
dialogue to both countries’ futures. I echo the call by
the Secretary-General in his report for both Pristina
and Belgrade to continue to show confidence in the
dialogue. It is important that further progress be made
at the next round of talks tomorrow. We urge both
Kosovo and Serbia to work intensively and creatively
towards achieving further agreements. Compromise
and commitment will be essential.
Kosovo’s progress as a viable independent State
is irreversible. Its future belongs in the European
Union along with all other countries in the Western

15

S/PV.6670

Balkans. My Government will continue to work
tirelessly towards that goal.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zarif for his briefing. I listened attentively to the
statements by Foreign Minister Jeremić and
Mr. Hoxhaj.
For the last few days, the situation in northern
Kosovo has remained tense. China is greatly
concerned, as northern Kosovo is home to ethnic
minorities. All parties should fully recognize the
sensitivity and complexity that characterize the
situation on the ground, address their differences with
prudence and through dialogue and negotiation, and
refrain from any action that may further aggravate
tensions.
China once again calls upon the parties concerned
to take measures to ease the tension in northern
Kosovo and prevent the further escalation of violence.
We hope that the European Union Rule of Law Mission
and the International Security Force in Kosovo will
play a constructive role in maintaining stability in the
situation in northern Kosovo, as mandated by the
resolutions of the Security Council.
The situation in Kosovo bears on the peace and
stability of the Balkan region and even of the entire
European region. The sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia should be respected. Resolution
1244 (1999) is an important legal basis for the
settlement of the question of Kosovo, which should be
achieved within the framework of that resolution and
by the parties themselves through dialogue,
consultation, negotiation and other peaceful means.
China has taken note of the resumption of talks
between Serbia and Kosovo and hopes that the two
parties will continue to settle their differences through
negotiation. Against that background, we deplore the
tension that has re-emerged in northern Kosovo.
China is deeply concerned about the illicit
trafficking in human organs. Any action that violates
the norms of international law, and international
humanitarian law in particular, is not to be condoned.
Serbia’s concern about the matter is justified. We
support the United Nations carrying out investigations
into the relevant cases.
China appreciates the activities being carried out
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission

16

in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative Zarif and supports the Mission’s
continuing to play a positive role in maintaining peace
and stability in Kosovo and the entire region of the
Balkans.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank
Mr. Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for
his insightful remarks. I also thank Mr. Enver Hoxhaj
for his statement. I congratulate Mr. Farid Zarif on his
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and thank him for the update on the
situation in Kosovo.
The last few months have been marked by intense
activities related to efforts to address the border
incidents in northern Kosovo. The Council met on
several occasions to address the crisis and to create a
non-confrontational atmosphere. In addition, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
other actors have also engaged the parties in order to
arrest the deteriorating security situation and foster
peace in Kosovo. Those responses were, in our view,
timely, as they directly contributed to defusing the
tension in the territory.
We are, however, under no illusion that the
problem is solved. Yesterday’s incident seems to
confirm our fears. Those disturbing events, in addition
to the deteriorating inter-ethnic relations, remind us
once again of the imperative of a decisive response to
the outstanding issues in the territory.
We share the assessment in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/675) that the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
International Security Force in Kosovo should actively
engage with the northern Kosovo Serbs to increase
coordination and information-sharing and build
confidence in the communities. The parties should
engage assiduously in promoting reconciliation and the
peaceful settlement of pending issues through
negotiations rather than resorting to unilateral action or
violence.
It is also essential that all international presences
in Kosovo strengthen their cooperation and
communication in order to maximize the impact of
their common efforts to maintain peace and stability on
the ground. To underpin those efforts, regional and
international actors must speak with one voice and
work together to preserve peace and security in Kosovo
and the region.

11-60960

S/PV.6670

The resumption of European Union-facilitated
talks is a positive development; the parties have a lot to
gain from them. Indeed, the agreements reached during
the meetings in September and the positive
developments which followed in the area of trade are
indicative of the benefits derivable from such talks.
The international community, including the Security
Council, should do more to build confidence and trust
among the parties in order to sustain the momentum of
peace talks.
We are concerned by the low number of returns
recorded during the reporting period. The Special
Representative has attributed those developments to,
among other reasons, fewer housing reconstruction
projects. It is important to invest more resources in
providing the infrastructure necessary to promote the
viability and conditions of return. In addition,
concerted efforts on the part of law enforcement
authorities in preventing harassment and attacks on
returnees will go a long way towards promoting safe
returns, as well as reconciliation and the long-term
stability and development of Kosovo. We urge the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the international
community to continue to promote an environment
conducive to returns.
Nigeria wishes to underline the need to bring to
justice those persons involved in inhuman treatment
and the illicit trafficking in human organs. We are also
convinced of the need to accommodate the views and
concerns of all stakeholders in designing the form for
these investigations, which, as we have previously
indicated, will ensure that the final outcome of such
investigations will enjoy the broadest possible support.
We commend UNMIK for its efforts to promote
security and stability in Kosovo and the entire region.
UNMIK’s unrelenting engagement with the parties to
the agreements with regard to such areas as the rule of
law, cultural and religious heritage, returns,
reconciliation and respect for human rights in Kosovo
continues to enjoy strong support. We express our
appreciation to Special Representative Zarif and the
staff of UNMIK for their valuable contributions and
ensure the Mission of Nigeria’s support in its work.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for

11-60960

Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, for their statements. I also
congratulate Mr. Farid Zarif on his appointment.
The situation in northern Kosovo has been the
subject of numerous Council meetings since the end of
July, and I will therefore skip the origins and evolution
of the incidents, which have been covered in detail in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/675). However,
new confrontations have recently occurred that have
resulted in about 25 wounded Kosovo Force (KFOR)
soldiers, among whom two were hit by bullets. Such
violent attacks against the international mission
charged with guaranteeing the safety of the civilian
populations are unacceptable. France condemns those
deliberate attacks against staff of NATO and the
European Union, who are carrying out tasks under a
United Nations mandate.
The responses of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and KFOR in
confronting those acts of violence have been adequate
and proportional. Those interventions in consultation
with the local authorities have led to reduced tensions,
but the roadblocks in northern Kosovo continue to
impede
implementation
of
the
international
contingents’ mandate and to make civilian life difficult.
We therefore call for the immediate removal of the
roadblocks and for respect for the right of freedom of
movement in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).
A return to calm is above all in the interest of the
inhabitants of northern Kosovo, who are the first to
suffer from the impediments to free movement. Neither
the international community nor neighbouring States
desire to see the inhabitants or their territory isolated
or subject to control by the criminal networks
responsible for violence, which is not motivated by
nationalism, but because border controls make the
trafficking by which they earn their living more
difficult. Our adversary is the organized criminal
networks that manipulate the population, not the
population itself.
The resumption of commercial relations between
Serbia and Kosovo, the EULEX presence at Gates 1
and 31 in conformity with its 2008 United Nations
mandate, and the return to dialogue facilitated by the
European Union between Belgrade and Pristina on
21 November and tomorrow, 30 November, are
positive developments that must be encouraged.
A return to calm is in the interests of Belgrade
and Pristina, which want to move closer to the

17

S/PV.6670

European Union. The differences between the parties
must be resolved through dialogue and a spirit of
compromise. We call upon Serbia and Kosovo to
pursue that dialogue responsibly and to focus their
efforts on accession to the European Union, based on
the recommendations contained in the last progress
report of the European Commission and to abstain
from all acts, and statements that could worsen
tensions.
Finally,
we
welcome
Mr.
Williamson’s
appointment to lead the EULEX Special Investigative
Task Force in charge of investigating the allegations of
illicit trafficking in human organs, as described in the
report of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe, which was published at the end of 2010.
France calls upon all States of the region to
promote cooperation with EULEX and welcomes their
expressed readiness to cooperate with the investigation.
EULEX thus has the resources to undertake a credible
investigation that should be carried out calmly without
any undue influence being brought to bear in the
context of dialogue.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Zarif for presenting the report
of the Secretary-General on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (S/2011/675). I would like to take the
opportunity to congratulate him on his official
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNMIK and to wish
him successful and productive work in this important
post.
The
Russian
Federation
welcomes
the
participation in today’s meeting of the Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
shares his concerns.
We have listened attentively to the statement of
Mr. Hoxhaj. We note the non-compliance with the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999). The position of
the Russian Federation in not recognizing Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence remains
unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains in full
force and is still considered by all as the binding
international legal base for settling Kosovo and
providing security in the area.
We believe it important for the interested parties
to resume their dialogue aimed at a formula for a

18

durable settlement of the Kosovo problem. Unilateral
actions of Pristina and the international presence in
northern Kosovo are unacceptable.
The Russian Federation is seriously concerned by
the abrupt deterioration in the situation in the northern
part of the district. There have even been certain
flagrant incidents. For example, on 9 November in one
of the neighbourhoods of Kosovska Mitrovica, a mixed
ethnic area, a group of Albanians opened machine gun
fire on three Serbs, one of whom died in hospital
shortly thereafter. It is quite telling that during the
burial service on the shore of the Ibar River, Albanians
partied openly to loud music.
The Kosovo Force (KFOR) is also forcefully
pressuring Kosovo Serbs. Only yesterday, the two
groups were engaged in yet another skirmish, as NATO
forces were capturing a Serbian barricade in the
municipality of Zubin Potok. Dozens of casualties
occurred on both sides. The KFOR command has
issued threats of using their weapons with lethal intent.
It is patently obvious to us that that type of situation
could be avoided if KFOR focused not on removing the
Serbian barricades that were erected in reaction to
Pristina’s provocative attempts to take control over the
administrative border with Serbia, but on providing
security in the interest of all of the district’s inhabitants
as per its mandate.
The statements of some of our Council colleagues
to the effect that the actions of KFOR and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) are somehow ensuring the protection of
freedom of movement as well as a single customs
space for Kosovo as provided under resolution 1244
(1999) are nothing more than a bit of semantic sleight
of hand. Let us not forget that those mandates were
adopted under conditions when, under resolution 1244
(1999), Kosovo enjoyed substantial autonomy as a
union republic of Yugoslavia. The resolution also
called for protection of the interests of the Serbian
population of the district and for providing for its
security. We thus oppose selective implementation of
the mandates of KFOR and EULEX, which openly
plays into the hands of the Kosovo authorities.
The use of force to implement legislation of the
so-called Republic of Kosovo is outside the mandates
of those international entities and violates the principle
of their neutral status. In that context and bearing in
mind the communications on that topic submitted by

11-60960

S/PV.6670

the Government of Serbia to the Secretary-General, the
Russian Federation calls for a thorough investigation of
the incident of 27 September, where KFOR used
weapons that resulted in civilian casualties.

regional
and
international
organizations
and
mechanisms. We hope the new Head of UNMIK will
provide the corresponding impulse to the Mission’s
work.

We are left to wonder: Why is it that after
12 years of efforts, the international community has
been unable to ensure safe living conditions for one of
the parties to the Kosovo conflict? In that regard, we
believe it would be advisable that in his next report, the
Secretary-General conduct an in-depth analysis of the
ways in which the international presences are
implementing their security mandates to protect the
rights of the entire population of Kosovo.

We believe that Council measures must send an
unambiguous signal to both the Kosovo parties and the
international presences on the need to refrain from
violence and to continue the dialogue. The Russian
delegation will circulate a draft presidential statement
for the press.

In equal measure, we call for a full and objective
investigation of the facts related to the illicit trafficking
in human organs uncovered by Mr. Dick Marty, Special
Rapporteur of the Council of Europe’s Parliamentary
Assembly. In our view, such an investigation should
proceed under United Nations auspices and report to
the Security Council. Here we note the extremely
unsatisfactory situation in Kosovo relating to witness
protection, which has been confirmed by the Council
of Europe. Those facts have been blatantly ignored,
and as a result key witnesses have been eliminated.
The security situation in the district remains
tense, owing most of all to Pristina’s growing tendency
to use force to control Serb-inhabited regions. Attacks
such as those of 2004 must not be allowed. The
situation regarding the return of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) to Kosovo, most of whom are Serb,
remains unsatisfactory. There are many reasons for
that, including the fact that the IDPs have no assurance
of safety. The ransacking of homes and theft of
property of Kosovo Serbs has been going on with
impunity. International presences must take all
necessary measures to protect Serbian Orthodox holy
sites and believers. We share the concern of the
authorities of Serbia and the Serbian Orthodox Church
with the situation developing in relation to the
handover by NATO forces of protective responsibilities
of significant Serbian cultural and religious heritage
sites to the Kosovo police. These actions could cause
additional security tensions in Kosovo.
The Mission in Kosovo, on the basis of its
Security Council mandate, must play as active a role as
possible in promoting the Kosovo settlement process.
We call on UNMIK to fulfil its duties, including with
regard to the external representation of Kosovo in

11-60960

Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me join my
colleagues in congratulating Mr. Zarif on his recent
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo and welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign Minister of
Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Foreign
Minister of Kosovo.
We view the situation in the northern part of
Kosovo with great concern. The last month has seen a
significant deterioration in the security situation
because of provocative action by Kosovo’s Serb
demonstrators. Only yesterday we witnessed a new
level of violence perpetrated by Kosovo Serb
demonstrators against soldiers of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). While implementing their mandate to ensure
freedom of movement, KFOR troops were attacked
with stones, fireworks and Molotov cocktails. Thirty
KFOR soldiers from Germany and Austria were
wounded. Among them, two German soldiers sustained
gunshot wounds from small arms fired from the
sidelines of the demonstration.
Let me make this point in no uncertain terms: any
use of violence against KFOR or the other international
presences is unacceptable. It must be condemned in the
strongest terms. Both KFOR and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) are fulfilling their
mandate to ensure and maintain a safe environment,
including freedom of movement, and to establish the
rule of law. They act in full compliance with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Attacks
against KFOR are thus attacks against the integrity and
authority of the Security Council.
We call on all citizens in Kosovo, including in
northern Kosovo, to refrain from any violence. We also
call on the Serbian authorities to exert their influence
on those responsible for inciting and resorting to
violence.

19

S/PV.6670

We have full confidence in the work of KFOR
and EULEX. All parties concerned have to cooperate
fully with the international presences. Erecting
barricades to restrict the freedom of movement in this
part of Kosovo is unacceptable. In this context, I would
like to welcome the call by President Tadić this
morning on the people in northern Kosovo to dismantle
the roadblocks and to refrain from violence. We
explicitly welcome that call by President Tadić. Our
objective is peace and stability in the region with a
clear European perspective.
It is also pointed out in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/675) that the outstanding
issues can be resolved only through peaceful means.
The European Union-mandated dialogue is at the core
of the process that leads to peace and stability in the
region.
Germany actively supports the process of
dialogue under the auspices of Mrs. Ashton. This open
and constructive dialogue is designed to improve the
daily lives of citizens in both countries, to promote the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo,
and to pave the way for both countries to a secure,
European future. We thus welcome the new round of
bilateral talks that took place on 21 and 22 November,
which produced an agreement by both parties on
mutual recognition of school and university diplomas.
We call on both sides to build on the positive
momentum and reach further tangible results in the
meeting on 30 November and to ensure swift
implementation of the agreements already reached.
We deplore the increase in incidents of crime,
including those affecting minority communities, as
described
in
the
Secretary-General’s
report.
Widespread organized crime remains a serious issue in
Kosovo. Nonetheless, we welcome the efforts by the
Kosovo authorities to address this issue. We share the
observation in the report on the overall positive
developments with regard to the rule of law in Kosovo
and the positive impact on the everyday life of the
citizens of Kosovo and the region. We also appreciate
the facilitating role played by UNMIK, be it with
respect to cooperation between Kosovo authorities and
INTERPOL, or between the Serbian and the Kosovo
Ministries of Justice.
EULEX has achieved further progress in recent
months in its full investigation of the allegations of
despicable crimes committed against Serbian nationals

20

during, and after the end of, the armed conflict in
Kosovo. With the appointment of Mr. Clint Williamson
as lead prosecutor for the Special Investigative Task
Force, a distinguished and capable prosecutor has been
tasked to lead the investigation. This development has
also been welcomed by Foreign Minister Jeremić. In
particular, I welcome that Mr. Williamson has received
full support from Kosovo, Serbia and Albania.
We have already stated that in our view that there
is no doubt that the EU Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo has the capacities, the competence and the
jurisdiction to carry out these investigations. EULEX
has Germany’s full support and confidence. EULEX
has opened a preliminary investigation, and EULEX
prosecutors have met with Senator Marty to discuss his
findings. The Government of Kosovo is ready to
cooperate fully. EULEX has established good
cooperation with the authorities in Belgrade and
Tirana. EULEX prosecutors have already met twice
with the General Prosecutor of Albania on the matter.
We therefore do not believe it is necessary to set up an
additional mechanism for investigations, in the light of
the EULEX mandate.
In conclusion, let me underline once more that
Germany will continue to closely monitor the
developments in Kosovo. We remain committed to the
European perspective of the whole region. We
appreciate the contribution by UNMIK to peace and
stability and commend the dedication and service of its
staff.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I wish to congratulate Mr. Farid Zarif on his
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I wish him every success, and I thank him
for his briefing today. I also would like to welcome His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Jeremić, and to thank him for his statement. I also
wish to thank Mr. Hoxhaj for his statement.
I wish to renew our support for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, for
its role in facilitating reconciliation, supporting
security and enhancing human rights. We also wish to
indicate the positive role that it plays in several issues,
such as missing persons and the protection of religious
and cultural heritage, as well as in facilitating contacts
between the different groups. We consider it important

11-60960

S/PV.6670

that coordination and cooperation continue between
UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) within the
status-neutral framework in Kosovo, as stated in
resolution 1244 (1999).
With regard to security, we would like to note the
coordinated measures adopted by local authorities to
combat money-laundering, smuggling and the drug
trade, and the resulting decrease in the crime rate.
We share the concern of the Secretary-General
over the deterioration of the security situation in
northern Kosovo and the accompanying tension and
polarization among the different communities in the
north. The developments concerning Gates 1 and 31
have shown, over the past few months, that any
outstanding issue between the two sides may quickly
become contentious and a source of tension and
violence, seriously hampering the dialogue process. It
is therefore important, in the coming stage, to refrain
from taking any unilateral action or resorting to
violence, and to focus efforts on achieving
reconciliation among the communities and setting the
stage for dialogue.
In that context, we urge all influential parties in
the region to play a facilitating and supportive role in
efforts to build confidence among the communities and
the parties. That will have a positive influence on the
dialogue and on the security situation in the north.
We take note of the periodic coordination
meetings held with representatives of northern Kosovo
Serbs, the United Nations and the European Union
Missions and KFOR, as part of efforts to build
confidence among local communities.
We welcome the continued cooperation between
Belgrade and Pristina, in coordination with the
International Committee of the Red Cross, to clarify
the fate of those persons still missing. Despite the fact
that progress in disclosing the fate of missing persons
is still slow, we nevertheless view such efforts as a key
component of any reconciliation among communities.
In conclusion, as to allegations of inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo in 1999, we stress the importance of
adopting measures that will guarantee effective
protection for witnesses. We call for a comprehensive
and transparent investigation that will reveal the truth
and hold the perpetrators to account, as there can be no

11-60960

genuine reconciliation or sustainable peace without
justice.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): South Africa
would like to congratulate Mr. Farid Zarif on his
appointment as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. We
also thank him for his briefing. We also join others in
welcoming Foreign Minister Jeremić of Serbia to the
Council and in thanking him for his statement. We also
welcome Mr. Hoxhaj and thank him for his statement
as well.
South Africa remains concerned about the
developments in North Kosovo. We condemn all forms
of violence by all sides, including the shooting that
wounded NATO soldiers and injured more than 20
others, as violence threatens peace and stability in the
region. All parties should exercise restraint and refrain
from unilateral actions and the use of force, since that
would reverse the gains made by the parties in their
dialogue processes and ultimately make reconciliation
more difficult to achieve.
My delegation is also concerned about the
deterioration in inter-ethnic relations throughout
Kosovo, which in our view does not contribute to the
reconciliation and dialogue process. A number of
incidents that have been reported by the SecretaryGeneral are of concern to us, including the
contamination of a well supplying potable water and
the desecration of cemeteries.
Tensions are worsened by the perception of
Kosovo Serbs regarding the lack of status neutrality of
the international presence, especially following the
actions of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in
north Kosovo.
South Africa reiterates its position that Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force and
forms the basis for resolving the situation in Kosovo. It
is therefore incumbent on the international presences in
Kosovo, including KFOR and EULEX, to maintain a
status-neutral position in the execution of their
respective mandates, in line with the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2008/44) adopted by the Council in
November 2008.
South Africa continues to support the dialogue
process between the parties, as mandated by the

21

S/PV.6670

General Assembly. Moreover, we believe that the
resumption of talks between the parties is an important
confidence-building measure that should improve trust
and allow them to address all outstanding issues. We
agree with the Secretary-General’s observation that
unresolved issues threaten peace and stability in the
region. In that regard, my delegation urges all parties
to show cooperation and flexibility in finding solutions
to the outstanding issues, including border concerns.
Negotiations remain the only way to produce a
mutually beneficial and sustainable solution.
With regard to the allegations of trafficking in
human organs, we reiterate our position that a credible,
thorough, impartial and independent inquiry into those
allegations should be conducted. The death of a key
witness in a war crimes case raises concerns about
witness protection. In that regard, we share the
concerns of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights that an independent
witness- and victim-protection system is necessary.
In conclusion, South Africa once more urges both
sides to refrain from taking any actions that will
undermine the achievements attained in the dialogue
process. We therefore call on the parties to show
flexibility, with a view to enhancing their engagement
in order to resolve outstanding matters and for
reconciliation to prevail.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to welcome Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
congratulate him on his recent appointment. We thank
him for his briefing on the situation in Kosovo and for
the accompanying report (S/2011/675), which provides
a detailed description of recent events, the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), which he leads, and efforts to find
lasting peace in the region.
We regret the various incidents that have
occurred in border areas, the most recent being
yesterday, when several NATO soldiers were injured
and two were shot as they attempted to dismantle
roadblocks that had been set up in some areas. We also
regret the death of a Serbian civilian and two other
individuals who were injured at the beginning of this
month.
Colombia urges the parties to adopt measures that
will help to reduce tensions and prevent the emergence
of new crises. At the same time, we encourage the

22

parties to renew their efforts to achieve peaceful
coexistence and deepen their commitment to dialogue
in order to resolve the issues under dispute.
We thank Foreign Ministers Vuk Jeremić and
Enver Hoxhaj for their statements, which show that
there is clear intent to engage in dialogue and that
progress has been made in that regard. However, their
remarks also reveal a degree of harshness. I believe
that it is crucial to find some terms for coming
together. In that spirit, we call on local authorities to
improve their mechanisms for cooperation, goodneighbourliness and the early settlement of disputes.
We are convinced that the resulting arrangements will
always play a role in creating unity and harmony, and
will surely set the best example on both sides of the
border.
We note with optimism tomorrow’s meeting
between the parties, to be held in Brussels, and hope
that steps will be taken there to consolidate the process
on the basis of agreements reached in previous rounds
of talks, including those held in that city on 21 and
22 November. The meeting will provide an opportunity
for convergence and, in turn, make it possible for the
parties to resolve their problems. We hope that
progress is made on practical matters and in areas of
cooperation,
such
as
the
energy
and
telecommunications sectors, as has been done with
regard to the recognition of university degrees.
My country takes an optimistic view of the area’s
economic outlook. Its proximity to the European Union
makes it a valid trading partner, which augurs well for
further physical, customs and transport integration. The
parties can take the first step in that direction by
avoiding confrontational language, which will facilitate
efforts to reach agreements that will benefit all parties.
With regard to allegations involving the crimes of
murder, inhuman treatment of people, illegal
trafficking in human organs and violations of human
dignity, which we have addressed here on several
occasions, we note with interest the efforts being made
to pursue the ongoing investigations and trials as
described in the most recent report. We hope that in the
future, it will be possible to identify those responsible
for those crimes and bring them to justice.
We would underscore what was said in the report
with regard to the problem of missing persons, which
remains a major obstacle to community reconciliation
and continues to undermine the returns process.

11-60960

S/PV.6670

Colombia believes that those investigations must be
fully completed so as to lay the groundwork for social
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence.
Finally, according to the latest report, the process
of returns has been slow. We therefore call for
extraordinary efforts to establish the conditions
necessary to allow speedy returns to communities in a
climate of safety and confidence.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I also welcome
Mr. Farid Zarif and congratulate him on his
appointment. I thank him for his briefing and wish him
a successful tenure as Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I
also thank Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for his remarks.
Brazil wishes that we could dedicate a larger part
of our statement today to positive developments during
the reporting period, such as progress on the issue of
stamps and trade flows. Unfortunately, recent negative
events have taken the forefront. Brazil is concerned
over the increase of tensions between Belgrade and
Pristina, in particular clashes between the population in
the area and the Kosovo Force and police forces. We
join the Secretary-General in calling on both sides, as
well as on the communities on the ground, to act with
restraint and patience as they seek a peaceful solution
to the crisis.
The underlying tensions that have translated into
these incidents are a reminder of the urgent need to
address the broader unresolved issues in the region. A
spirit of compromise must guide actions by all parties.
Brazil expects that discussions between Belgrade and
Pristina, which have been following a positive course,
will resume shortly in order to build confidence and to
promote progress that benefit the populations of the
area.
Brazil reaffirms its belief that resolution 1244
(1999) offers an adequate framework for a negotiated
settlement, under the auspices of the Security Council
and with the support of UNMIK and regional
organizations.
We remain concerned over the allegations of
inhuman treatment of people and trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo. We are encouraged by the
willingness of the parties to cooperate in the
investigation of these cases, which must be subject to

11-60960

independent and credible scrutiny. In this regard, we
note the ongoing investigations being carried out by
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
and reiterate our interest in exploring options that take
into account the need to involve various jurisdictions
and the importance of ensuring consistency with
resolution 1244 (1999).
UNMIK’s role is crucial to the stability of the
region. We commend the positive work the Mission has
undertaken to facilitate communications between the
parties and to create conditions for reaching agreement
on a number of issues. The Council should continue to
keep political developments in Kosovo under close
review and to encourage further dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. Every effort must be made to
find creative solutions to the pending issues, while
maintaining peace in the region. The long-term benefits
of peaceful dialogue between the parties must be made
evident to all stakeholders.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, the new Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his
briefing on the situation in that country. We wish once
again to express our appreciation to him and his team
for their commitment to peace and stability in Kosovo.
I also welcome the presence here today of the
Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo, and I thank them for
their respective statements.
My delegation will focus its statement on the
security and political aspects of the situation,
particularly in northern Kosovo, which has drawn the
attention of UNMIK and other international missions
operating under resolution 1244 (1999).
The events of July, which we all regretted,
contributed in large measure to the deterioration of the
security situation in northern Kosovo. According to the
report of the Secretary-General before us (S/2011/675),
they have also hindered the continuation of political
dialogue. As recently as yesterday, an incident arose in
which two soldiers of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) were
wounded, which we wholeheartedly deplore. We call
on all parties to exercise restraint and to resort to
dialogue and cooperation to resolve issues of common
interest. Peace and sustainable security in the region
can be established only through such means.

23

S/PV.6670

The efforts of the international organizations —
UNMIK, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and KFOR — should be
welcomed, as should the resumption on 21 November
in Brussels of discussions between Belgrade and
Pristina. My delegation believes that these discussions,
pertaining to subjects that are vital to peace and
security in the Balkans, must be strongly supported by
the international community.
Furthermore, the conclusion of an agreement on
customs stamps in Kosovo and the resumption of trade
between Kosovo and Serbia are achievements that
deserve the support of the Council. We call on the
parties to be equally resolved to end the current
impasse with respect to the reopening of the northern
border posts. My country calls on all parties to refrain
from taking any unilateral action that could spark new
tensions.
As we have often said in prior statements, we
remain convinced that finding a settlement in Kosovo
is the primary responsibility of the parties directly
involved. Indeed, it is up to them to establish the
conditions necessary to a peaceful settlement of the
situation, which would contribute greatly to the
implementation of the European perspectives of Serbia
and Kosovo. Lastly, we reiterate that the international
community should continue its financial support for the
protection of cultural and religious heritage and for the
work of the Working Group on Missing persons. It
should also facilitate the return of displaced persons to
their homes.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2011/675). We
also welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, and
thank him for his comprehensive briefing. We would
like to express our support to the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).
We welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, as well as
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
reiterates
its
appreciation for UNMIK’s efforts in fulfilling its

24

mandate, including support for the process of
reconciliation, facilitation of constructive dialogue and
regional cooperation, its focus on mediation between
the communities, as well as its support to minority
communities.
During the reporting period, as a result of recent
incidents that we strongly condemn, the security
situation, mainly in northern Kosovo, has been
deteriorating. Furthermore, these latest developments
have also resulted in the worsening of inter-ethnic
relations throughout Kosovo, the polarization of
political positions, and the widening of gaps between
the communities. The aforementioned incidents and the
overall situation in Kosovo are causes of concern for
our delegation.
Taking into account all the circumstances, now
more than ever we remain convinced that sustained
dialogue is indispensable to achieving mutually
acceptable solutions to all outstanding issues in
Kosovo. It is therefore necessary that both sides remain
committed to the resumption of dialogue on pending
issues, facilitated by the European Union. We believe
that the international community, as well as all relevant
stakeholders, should continue their efforts to create
conditions for the peaceful resolution of long-standing
issues for the benefit of all.
It is our well-known position that the rule of law
is crucial to stability and progress in the Balkans. In
that regard, we reiterate our support to the activities of
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, operating within the status-neutral
framework of the United Nations.
In the context of improving inter-community
dialogue and building confidence among the parties,
we believe in the crucial role of UNMIK and welcome
its efforts to decrease tensions, draw attention to
common needs and provide conditions conducive to
sustainable returns.
The problem of missing persons remains a great
challenge to the process of reconciliation between the
communities and prolongs the process of returns. In
that context, we take positive note of the fact that the
Belgrade-Pristina Working Group on Missing Persons
resumed its activities and cooperation on that important
issue. Despite all efforts, the number of voluntary
returns remains low, including due to socio-economic
difficulties associated with the reintegration of
returnees and the tense security situation.

11-60960

S/PV.6670

During the reporting period, UNMIK, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Danish Refugee Council facilitated
several go-and-see and go-and-inform visits, which
provided displaced persons an opportunity to visit their
properties and make first-hand assessments of
conditions in the receiving community.

regard, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has undertaken serious
efforts to bring together relevant political players in the
north of Kosovo and to supplement several failures in
fundamental supplies, thereby contributing importantly
to a safer and more secure environment. Those efforts
should be commended.

In conclusion, we reiterate our enduring position
that stability and security in Kosovo are of great
significance for achieving lasting peace and prosperity
in our region. We consider that the international
community should continue to play an important role
in supporting the aspirations of the countries of the
region towards their integration into European and
Euro-Atlantic structures.

Also on the issue of political dialogue, we
welcome the resumption of the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina on 21 November. The latest
agreement between the parties on the mutual
recognition of university diplomas is a welcome
development. Portugal believes that the European
perspective of Serbia and Kosovo must be a constant
reminder to both parties of the importance of
remaining constructively engaged in their negotiations.
While we are aware of the challenges ahead, we stress
that time is of the paramount importance on this issue.
We appeal to both parties to renew their efforts, both
internally and among each other, to make headway on
all fundamental issues.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, operating within the framework of resolution
1244 (1999), and its role of maintaining peace,
security, stability and respect of human rights in
Kosovo.
The President: I shall now make a brief
statement in my national capacity.
Like previous speakers, I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif for
his comprehensive briefing. I congratulate him on his
appointment and wish him all the best in his
challenging tasks. I also thank Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Foreign Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxjah,
Foreign Minister of Kosovo, for their statements.
I start by expressing our deep concern about the
escalation of violence directed against United Nationsmandated international forces in Kosovo, which has
resulted in a significant number of wounded, among
whom were 12 Portuguese soldiers, as mentioned by
Mr. Zarif. Portugal condemns, in the strongest terms,
those attacks and reiterates that all attempts to hamper,
by the use of force, the freedom of movement in
northern Kosovo are totally unacceptable and can only
worsen an already very tense situation. Portugal
appeals, in unequivocal terms, for restraint. It is
fundamental to deflate the present situation in order to
prevent an even more dangerous escalation of tensions,
further bloodshed and the worsening of the situation of
tens of thousands of civilians.
Strengthened political dialogue is, from our point
of view, the only way to achieve that goal. In that

11-60960

We would like to underline the importance of
some of the issues mentioned in the UNMIK report
(S/2011/675). We welcome the fact that several
important Serbia Orthodox Church events took place in
Kosovo without incident. The freedom of worship is an
essential element of democratic conviviality and
respect for the rule of law, and must be protected.
Unfortunately, there was a worrying increase in
incidents affecting minority communities Kosovowide. Indeed, progress in upholding minority rights is
fundamental to peace and security in Kosovo and in the
Western Balkans.
On the report of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), I would like to underline
that the Mission’s essential role in promoting and
upholding the rule of law and law enforcement in
Kosovo should be duly appreciated. Portugal has
consistently been a strong promoter of the role that the
Rule of Law Mission plays in Kosovo. But Portugal
continues to believe that the Council would benefit
from hearing more directly about the work of EULEX
and its future perspectives on the investigations it has
undertaken in areas as diverse and as serious as human
organ trafficking, tax evasion, border control and the
fight against corruption.
My final words are to express my appreciation
for, and encouragement of, the work of the various

25

S/PV.6670

international presences in Kosovo. Winter is a
particularly challenging time in Kosovo, and may
prove to be the source of more instability. The
mandates of UNMIK, the Kosovo Force and EULEX,
among others, aim to correspond as much as possible
to guaranteeing peace, stability and justice to the
country. They will continue to do so under the Security
Council’s oversight and with its help.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Jeremić has asked for the floor to make a
further statement. I now call on him.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I would like to briefly
address some of the remarks made in the Chamber this
morning.
First of all, I would like to refer to the so-called
parallel structures. In order to have something parallel,
one needs to have something to which it is parallel.
Those are the only structures that exist in that part of
our sovereign province. Those are the only structures
that are providing any kind of order in that part of the
territory. There are no other structures. Truly parallel
structures are ones that are not in line with resolution
1244 (1999), but that are organized based on the
unilateral declaration of independence of 17 February
2008.

Plan was not in line with resolution 1244 (1999). It was
discussed here in the Chamber on numerous occasions
and failed to receive the support of the Council. I
would like to remind members that, despite numerous
attempts, the Ahtisaari Plan did not receive the
endorsement of the Council. For us in Serbia, it is null
and void.
In speaking about human organ harvesting and
trafficking, one country here today repeatedly referred
to that as organized crime. It may be organized crime if
one is trying to sell somebody’s organs on the
international black market for organs, but it is a war
crime when several hundred civilians are allegedly
taken to a clinic to be killed and their organs removed
during a conflict. That is a war crime, not organized
crime, and it should be treated as such.
All of the war crimes committed in the wars of
Yugoslav succession have so far been treated in the
same way, with the Security Council being kept abreast
of what was going on in the investigations. What we
are asking for is simply to be treated in the same way
and that this serious, heinous allegation of a war crime
be treated in the same way as any other war crime,
namely, that it not be hidden from the international
community. That is what the families of the victims
demand.
Serbia strongly reiterates the need for
transparency and fairness in this investigation. I appeal
to the members of the Security Council to allow
fairness and transparency to prevail for the sake of the
families of the victims.

I think that the lack of trust is what is really at the
heart of what we are discussing here. I remember the
time when there was very little trust in Serbian
institutions in Kosovo and when the whole series of
parallel structures — actually, the entire life of Kosovo
Albanians — was organized in a way that was entirely
parallel to the legal institutions of the Republic of
Serbia. At that time, every single country in the world
recognized the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Serbia. I am referring to the pre-1999
period. They were structures that had absolute
parallelism with the legal structures of the Republic of
Serbia, because the Albanians had no trust in the
structures of the Republic of Serbia. Today, the
situation is pretty much parallel in the north. Kosovo
Serbs have zero trust in the structures that are Pristinabased. That is simply a fact of life and a part of the
reality that we have to take into account when we try to
resolve peacefully the problem that we have at hand.

The President:
Mr. Hoxhaj.

In response to a statement made here with regard
to the Ahtisaari Plan, I would like to underline that this

Mr. Hoxhaj: I am going to make some remarks
not about the past but about the future.

26

Finally, I would like to underline once again that
Serbia has made and will continue to make strong calls
for peace and stability inside the territory. President
Tadić today made a very strong call for that, and I wish
to reiterate it here in this Chamber. We need to refrain
from the use of force and from violence. Barricades are
not in anyone’s interest, but they must not be removed
violently; that is only going to lead to more violence.
The best way to ensure full freedom of movement in
the territory is through dialogue, engagement and close
work between the parties, especially the parties on the
ground, all of which Serbia strongly supports.
I

now

give

the

floor

to

11-60960

S/PV.6670

First, I think that it is necessary for all sides to
call for a stop to the violence in the northern part of
Kosovo, and for the situation there to show some
improvement 12 years after the war.
Secondly, security and stability in that part of
Kosovo, within Kosovo as a whole and in the region
are always going to be a challenge as long as security
forces, paramilitary organizations and police forces
from the Republic of Serbia are operating in that part
of Kosovo. Accordingly, it is really time for Serbia to
dismantle these structures. We have seen the same
phenomenon occur everywhere in the former
Yugoslavia over the past 20 years; that has been the
situation from 1991 until today.
Thirdly, we are very interested in solving all
problems through dialogue, and we call on Serbia to
start implementing the agreements reached in Brussels.
To date, there has been the possibility of seeing
implementation only of the agreement on customs

stamps, but nothing else. Nothing else has been
implemented until now.
Regarding the barricades, the European Union
insists on two principles — freedom of movement of
peoples and freedom of movement of goods. If Serbia
aspires to European Union candidate status but is
putting up barricades in a part of another country, I
think that is the best evidence of how interested Serbia
is in a European future.
I will stop here. I am not interested in bothering
the Council with more remarks. At the same time, I call
on my friends not to bring the spirit of a Balkan
country election campaign into a meeting of the
Security Council.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

11-60960

27
