United Nations

A/RES/56/98

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 January 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 21 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/56/L.43 and Add.1)]

56/98.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Latin
American Economic System

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/8 of 25 October 1999 on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Latin American Economic System,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 1
Bearing in mind the Agreement between the United Nations and the Latin
American Economic System, 2 in which the parties agree to strengthen and expand
their cooperation in matters that are of common concern in the field of their
respective competence pursuant to their constitutional instruments,
Considering that the Latin American Economic System is developing joint
activities with the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes of
the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
World Intellectual Property Organization, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization and the Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean,
Welcoming the continued monitoring of changes in the treatment of topics
relating to the United Nations system, in close contact with the delegations of the
Member States participating in such deliberations,
1.

Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General; 1

2.
Urges the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean to
continue deepening its coordination and mutual support activities with the Latin
American Economic System;
3.
Urges the United Nations Development Programme, within its new
overall framework and high-priority development objectives in support of

_______________
1
2

01 47981

A/56/171.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1651, No. 1061.

A/RES/56/98

sustainable development, to continue its financial and technical cooperation with the
programmes that the Permanent Secretariat of the Latin American Economic System
is carrying out in areas of mutual interest and concern, aimed at complementing the
technical assistance activities conducted by the Latin American Economic System;
4.
Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system to continue and intensify their support
for, and cooperation in the activities of, the Latin American Economic System;
5.
Reiterates its request to both the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Permanent Secretary of the Latin American Economic System to assess, at
the appropriate time, the implementation of the Agreement between the United
Nations and the Latin American Economic System2 and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
86th plenary meeting
14 December 2001

2
