II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Taking note of paragraphs 26. 27 and 52 of the report of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, 51
I. Strongly reaffirms its rejection of those provisions
of the accords which ignore, infringe. violate or deny the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the
right of return, the right of self-determination and the right
to national independence and sovereignty in Palestine, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law, and which envisage and condone continued Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967. including Jerusalem:
2. Expresses its strong opposition to all partial agreements and separate treaties which constitute a flagrant violation of the rights of the Palestinian people, the principles
of the Charter and the resolutions adopted in the various
international forums on the Palestinian issue, as well as the
principles of international law, and declares that all agreements and separate treaties have no validity in so far as they
purport to determine the future of the Palestinian people and
of the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967.
including Jerusalem;
3. Declares that no State has the right to undertake any
actions, measures or negotiations that could affect the future
of the Palestinian people, its inalienable rights and the occupied Palestinian territories without the participation of the
Palestine Liberation Organization on an equal footing, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, rejects all such actions, measures and negotiations.
and considers all such actions, measures and negotiations
as a flagrant violation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people;
4. Decides that all actions, measures and negotiations
to implement or execute such accords and agreements, or
any part thereof, are null and void in so far as they purport
to determine the future of the Palestinian people and of the
Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 196 7, including Jerusalem.
93rd plenary mcetinR
/() Dcccmhcr /911/

36/121.

Question of Namibia
A

SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESULTING FROM THE ILLEGAL OCCUPATION OF THE TERRITORY BY SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia56 and the relevant chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 57
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967 and subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council relating to Namibia, as well as the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971. ,K
'\h OJficial Records l f the c;nwral A, "'mhh
rl,iu,· ,i\th Sc\.\1011, Su/'
plemenr No. 24 (A/36/24)
"/hid .. Supplement No. ?3 (Ai.1n12.1.Rcv 11. char,. I-VI "nd VIII
"'~ Legal Consequences for Stall'.\ o( 1he C1111trn11ed Pn·.,cnce 11( So11th
Africa in Namihia (South w,,st Africa) 11otll'ith,1a11d111g Scrnm, ( ·"1111cil
Resolution 276 (/970). A,fri\()n Opi111011. IC J R,'/>ort, l'/71. p 16

29

delivered in response to the request addressed to it by the
Council in its resolution 284 (1970) of 29 July 1970,
Recalling also its resolutions 3111 (XXVIII) of 12 December I973, and 31/146 and 31/152 of 20 December 1976,
by which it, inter alia, recognized the South West Africa
People's Organization as the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people and granted observer status
to it.
Taking into consideration the Panama Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia, 59 adopted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary
meeting held at Panama City on 5 June 1981,
Taking into consideration resolution CM/Res. 853
(XXXVII) on Namibia adopted by the Council of Ministers
of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-seventh
ordinary session, held at Nairobi from 15 to 26 June 1981 ,60
and endorsed by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its eighteenth ordinary session, held at Nairobi from 24 to 27 June
1981, as well as decisions of the Organization of African
Unity reaffirming the unequivocal support of member States
for the just armed struggle of liberation waged by the Namibian people under the leadership of the South West Africa
People's Organization, the sole legitimate and genuine representative of the Namibian people,
Strongly condemning France, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America for their collusion with the South African racists
as manifested in the triple vetoes in the Security Council.
where the majority of the world body demonstrated its determination to adopt concrete political and economic measures aimed at isolating terrorist South Africa in order to
compel it to vacate Namibia.
Taking into consideration the Paris Declaration on Sanctions against South Africa and the Special Declaration on
Namibia/'' adopted by the International Conference on
Sanctions against South Africa, held at Paris from 20 to 27
May 1981.
Welcoming the establishment of a Solidarity Fund by the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and of an Emergency
Namibia Liberation Fund by the Organization of African
Unity to support the efforts of the South West Africa
People's Organization in its liberation struggle,
Stressing the grave responsibility of the international
community to take all possible measures in support of the
Namibian people in their liberation struggle under the leadership of their sole and authentic representative, the South
West Africa People's Organization.
Strongly reiterating its support for the national liberation
movement of Namibia, the South West Africa People's
Organization, the sole and authentic representative of the
Namibian people in their struggle to achieve self-determination, freedom and national independence in a united
Namibia.
Reaffirming its full support for the armed struggle of the
Namibian people under the leadership of the South West
African People's Organization,
Strongly condemning South Africa's continued illegal
occupation of Namibia, its brutal repression of the Namibian
people and its ruthless exploitation of the people and resources of Namibia, as well as its attempts to destroy the
national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia,

~·, Off/( l{l/ Rl'cnrds o/ the ( ,-,,,,t-ral A\,\1'mhlr. Fl11rt\'-.,i\1h St'.uion. Su1111le11u.'111 .\'o _..,../ (Ai".i(112--1-). p;11.t

'"' Sec V.16 5.14. ,urnn I
'' .-\ CON~· I 07 X. 'L'VI

\.

..,")..,

30

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Indignant at South Africa's refusal to comply with Security Council resolutions 385 (1976) of 30 January I 976,
431 (1978) of 27 July I 978, 435 (1978) of 29 Sep~ember
1978 and 439 ( 1978) of 13 November 1978 and at its manoeuvres aimed at gaining international recognitio_n _for illegitimate groups which it has \n~tal_led in N'.1m1bia and
which are subservient to Pretona s mterests m order to
maintain its policies of domination and exploitation of the
people and natural resources of Namibia,
Strongly condemning the racist regime ?f South ".',~rica
for its efforts to develop a nuclear capability for m1htary
and aggressive purposes,
Deeply concerned by th~ increasing milit~ization_ of
Namibia and by the continumg acts of aggression agamst
neighbouring independent African States, p~icularly Angola and Zambia, which have caused extensive loss of human lives and destruction of economic infrastructures,
Noting with grave concern that the Security Council failed
on 31 August 1981, 62 on account of the ye_t<;> _of ~he United
States of America, to exercise its respons1b1hl!es m the face
of unprovoked massive armed aggression against Angola.
Reaffirming that the resources of Namibia are the inviolable heritage of the Namibian people and that the exploitation of those resources by fore_ign ec~nomic in_terests
under the protection of the repressive racist colo_mal administration, in violation of the Charter of the Umted Nations, of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, and of Decree No. I for the
Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by
the United Nations Council for Namibia on 27 September
1974 ,63 is illegal and contributes to the maintenance of the
illegal occupation regime,
Indignant at the arbitrary imprisonment and detention_ of
political leaders and followers of the South West Afnca
People's Organization, the killing of Namibian patriots and
other acts of brutality, including the wanton beating, torture
and murder of innocent Namibians, and the arbitrary inhuman measures of collective punishment and measures
designed to intimidate the Namibian people and to destroy
their will to fulfil their legitimate aspirations for selfdetermination, freedom and national independence in a
united Namibia,
Commending the efforts of the United Nations Council
for Namibia in the discharge of the responsibilities entrusted
to it under the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia until
independence,
I. Approves the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia;
2. Requests all Member States to co-operate fully with
the United Nations Council for Namibia, the legal Administering Authority for the Territory until independence, in
the discharge of the mandate entrusted to it under the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19
May 1967 and subsequent resolutions of the Assembly;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination, freedom and national independence in a united Namibia, including Walvis Bay and
the offshore islands, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and as recognized in General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2145 (XXI), as well as in subsequent resolutions of the Assembly relating to Namibia, and
the legitimacy of their struggle by all means at their disposal.

2
•
See Official Records of the Securitv Council. Thirtv-sixth Year. 2300th
meeting.
63
Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirtv-fifth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/35/24). vol. I, annex II.

including armed struggle, against the illegal occupation of
their territory by South Africa;
4. Reiterates that Namibia is the direct responsibility
of the United Nations until genuine self-determination and
national independence are achieved in the Territory and, for
this purpose, reaffirms the _mandate given to th~ _Uni~ed
Nations Council for Namibia as the legal Admm1stenng
Authority for Namibia until independence;
5. Stronglv supports the efforts of the United Nations
Council for Namibia in the discharge of the responsibilities
entrusted to it both as a policy-making organ of the United
Nations and as the legal Administering Authority for
Namibia;
6. Reaffirms that the South West Africa People's Organization, the national liberation m<?vement of Nam_i~ia,
is the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian
people;
7. Supports the armed struggle of the Namibian people.
under the leadership of the South West Africa People's
Organization, to achieve self-determination, freedom and
national independence in a united Namibia;
8. Solemnly reaffirms that the genuine independence of
Namibia can be achieved only with the direct and full participation of the South West Africa People's Organization.
the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people, in all efforts to implement resolutions of the United
Nations relating to Namibia and further reaffirms that the
only parties to the conflict in Namibia are, on the one hand,
South Africa, which is illegally occupying the Territory and
committing aggression against the people, and, on the other.
the Namibian people. under the leadership of the South
West Africa People's Organization, supported by the United
Nations, which has direct responsibility for the Territory
until independence;
9. Calls upon Member States, specialized agencies and
other international organizations to render sustained and
increased support and material, financial, military and other
assistance to the South West Africa People's Organization
to enable it to intensify its struggle for the liberation of
Namibia;
10. Strongly condemns the South African regime for its
continued illegal occupation of Namibia and for its persistent
refusal to comply with the resolutions of the United Nations
relating to Namibia;
11. Strongly condemns the manoeuvres of South Africa
in Namibia aimed at transferring power to illegitimate
groups subservient to its interests in order to maintain its
policies of domination and exploitation of the people and
natural resources of the Territory and declares that actions
taken in this regard by the racist Pretoria regime are illegal,
null and void;
12. Strongly condemns South Africa for its everincreasing military build-up in Namibia, its recruitment and
· training of Namibians for tribal armies and the use of mercenaries to carry out its policy of military attacks against
independent African States, particularly Angola and Zambia. its threats and acts of subversion and aggression against
those countries and the forcible and massive displacement
of Namibians from their homes for military and political
purposes;
13. Strongly condemns the illegal South African administration for its introduction of compulsory military service for Namibians:
14. Declares that all measures by the illegal occupation
regime to enforce military conscription in Namibia are
illegal, null and void;
15. Stronglv condemns South Africa for obstructing the
implementation· of Security Council resolutions 385 ( 1976).

II.

31

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

435 (1978) and 439 (1978) and for its manoeuvres, in contravention of those resolutions, designed to consolidate its
colonial and neo-colonial interests at the expense of the
legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people for genuine
self-determination, freedom and national independence in
a united Namibia;
16. Condemns South Africa for its increased oppression
of the Namibian people, for the massive militarization of
Namibia and for its armed attacks against neighbouring
States, particularly Angola;
17. Strongly condemns the collusion by the Governments of certain Western countries and other States, particularly those of the United States of America, the Federal
Republic of Germany and Israel, with the racist regime
of South Africa in the nuclear field and calls upon France
and all other States to refrain from supplying the racist minority regime of South Africa, directly or indirectly, with
installations that might enable it to produce uranium,
plutonium and other nuclear materials, reactors or military
equipment;
18. Strongly condemns the activities of all foreign economic interests operating in Namibia under the illegal South
African administration which are exploiting illegally the
resources of the Territory and demands that transnational
corporations and others engaged in such exploitation comply
with all relevant resolutions of the United Nations by immediately abstaining from any new investment or activities
in Namibia, by withdrawing from the Territory and by putting an end to their co-operation with the illegal South
African administration;
19. Declares that, by their depletive exploitation of
natural resources and continued accumulation and repatriation of huge profits, the activities of foreign economic,
financial and other interests operating at present in Namibia
constitute a major obstacle to its political independence;
20. Calls upon the international community, especially
all Member States, to continue to refrain from according
any recognition to or co-operation with any regime which
the illegal South African administration may impose upon
the Namibian people in disregard of the provisions of Security Council resolutions 385 (1976), 435 (1978) and 439
(1978) and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Council;
21. Reiterates that, in accordance with the resolutions
of the United Nations, in particular General Assembly resolution S-9/2 of 3 May 1978 and Security Council resolution
432 (1978) of 27 July 1978, Walvis Bay and the offshore
islands of Namibia are an integral part of Namibia and that
any decision by South Africa to annex Walvis Bay is therefore illegal, null and void;
22. Affirms that the offshore islands of Namibiaincluding Penguin, lchaboe, Hollamsbird, Mercury, Long,
Seal, Halifax, Possession, Albatross Rock, Pomona, Plum
Pudding and Sinclair's-are an integral part of Namibia and
that any decision by South Africa to claim sovereignty over
those islands is illegal, null and void;
23. Strongly condemns the illegal South African administration for its massive repression of the people of
Namibia and their national liberation movement, the South
West Africa People's Organization, with the intention of
establishing an atmosphere of intimidation and terror for the
purpose of imposing upon the Namibian people a political
arrangement aimed at undermining the territorial integrity
and unity of Namibia as well as perpetuating the systematic
plunder of the natural resources of the Territory;
24. Demands that South Africa immediately release all
Namibian political prisoners, including all those imprisoned
or detained under the so-called internal security laws, martial law or any other arbitrary measures, whether such

Namibians have been charged or tried or are being held
without charge in Namibia or South Africa;
25. Demands that South Africa account for all "disappeared" Namibians and release any who are still alive
and declares that South Africa shall be liable for damages
to compensate the victims, their families and the future
lawful Government of an independent Namibia for the losses
sustained;
26. Declares that the illegal occupation of Namibia by
South Africa continues to constitute an act of aggression
against the Namibian people and against the United Nations,
which has direct responsiblity for the Territory until
independence;
27. Declares that South Africa's defiance of the United
Nations, its illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia,
its war of repression against the Namibian people, its persistent acts of aggression launched from bases in Namibia
against independent African States, its policy of apartheid
and its development of nuclear weapons constitute a serious
threat to international peace and security;
28. Calls upon the international community to extend,
as a matter of urgency, full support and assistance, including
military assistance, to the front-line States in order to enable
them to defend their sovereignty and territorial integrity
against the repeated acts of aggression by South Africa;
29. Demands that South Africa urgently comply fully
and unconditionally with the resolutions of the Security
Council, in particular resolutions 385 ( 1976) and 435 ( 1978)
and subsequent resolutions of the Council relating to
Namibia;
30. Reaffirms that Security Council resolution 435
(1978), in which the Council endorsed the United Nations
plan for the independence of Namibia, is the only basis for
a peaceful settlement;
31. Firmly rejects the manoeuvres by certain members
of the Western contact group aimed at undermining the
international consensus embodied in Security Council resolution 435 ( 1978) and at depriving the oppressed Namibian
people of their hard-won victories in the struggle for national
liberation;
32. Demands the immediate commencement of the unconditional implementation of Security Council resolution
435 ( 1978) without any prevarication, qualification or modification and not later than December 1981;
33. Strongly urges the Security Council to act decisively
against any dilatory manoeuvres and fraudulent schemes of
the illegal occupation regime aimed at frustrating the legitimate struggle of the Namibian people, under the leadership
of the South West Africa People's Organization, for selfdetermination and national liberation, as well as at negating
the achievements of their just struggle;
34. Strongly urges the Security Council, in the light of
the serious threat to international peace and security posed
by South Africa, to respond positively to the overwhelming
demand of the international community by immediately imposing against that country comprehensive mandatory sanctions, as provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
93rd plenary meeting
JO December I 98 I

B
ACTION BY MEMBER STATES IN SUPPORT OF NAMIBIA

The General Assemblv.
Having examined the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, 56

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

32

Recalling its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966
and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, as well as its subsequent
resolutions relating to Namibia,
Recalling its resolution 3295 (XXIX) of 13 December
1974, by which it requested all Member States to take measures to ensure compliance with Decree No. I for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia on 27 September
1974, 63
Taking into consideration the Panama Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia, 59 adopted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary
meeting held at Panama City on 5 June 1981 ,
Recalling its request to the Security Council, in the light
of the serious threat to international peace and security posed
by South Africa, to respond positively to the overwhelming
demand of the international community by immediately imposing against that country comprehensive mandatory sanctions as provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, 64
Recalling its call upon States, in view of the threat to
international peace and security posed by South Africa, to
impose against that country compr hensive mandatory sanctions in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, 64
Recalling its call upon States to cease forthwith, individually and collectively, all dealings with South Africa in
order totally to isolate it politically, economically, militarily
and culturally, 64
Conscious of the continuing need to mobilize world public
opinion against the involvement of foreign economic, iinancial and other interests in the exploitation of the human
and natural resources of Namibia, which contributes to the
perpetuation of the illegal South African occupation of
Namibia,
1. Requests all States to take legislative, administrative
and other measures, as appropriate, in order effectively to
isolate South Africa politically, economically, militarily and
culturally, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
ES-8/2 of 14 September 1981;
2. Calls upon all States to sever all diplomatic, consular
and trade relations with South Africa;
3. Requests all States, in furtherance of the objective
of bringing to an end South Africa's illegal occupation of
Namibia, to prevent:
(a) The import into their territories of all commodities
and products originating in South Africa or illegally occupied Namibia and exported therefrom after the date of the
present resolution, whether or not the commodities or products are for consumption or processing in their territories,
whether or not they are imported in bond and whether or
not any special legal status with respect to the import of
goods is enjoyed by the port or other place where they are
imported or stored;
(b) Any activities by their nationals or in their territories
which would promote or are calculated to promote the export
of any commodities or products from South Africa or occupied Namibia, and any dealings by their nationals or in
~heir territories in any commodities or products originating
m South Africa or occupied Namibia and exported therefrom
after the date of the present resolution, including in particular .~Y transfer of funds to South Africa or occupied
Nam1b1a for the purposes of such activities or dealings;
(c) The sale or supply by their nationals or from their
territories of any commodities or products-whether or not
?riginating ~n their territ?ries, but not including supplies
mtended stnctly for medical purposes, educational equip64

See resolution ES-8/2,

ment and material for use in schools and other educational
institutions, publications, news material and, in special humanitarian circumstances, foodstuffs-to any person or
body in South Africa or occupied Namibia or to any other
person or body for the purposes of any business carried on
in or operated from South Africa or occupied Namibia and
any activities by their nationals or in their territories which
promote or are calculated to promote such sale or supply;
4. Requests all States not to make available to the
regime of South Africa or illegally occupied Namibia, or
to any commercial, industrial or public utility undertaking,
including tourist enterprises, in South Africa or occupied
Namibia, any funds for investment or any other financial
or economic resources, and to prevent their nationals and
any persons within their territories from making available
to the regime or to any such undertaking any such funds or
resources and from remitting any other funds to persons or
bodies within South Africa or occupied Namibia, except
payments exclusively for pensions or for strictly medical,
humanitarian or educational purposes or for the provision
of news material and, in special humanitarian circumstances, foodstuffs;
5. Requests all States to prevent the entry into their
territories, save on exceptional humanitarian grounds, of
any person travelling on a South African passport, regardless
of its date of issue, or on a purported passport issued by or
on behalf of the illegal administration of South Africa in
Namibia;
6. Calls upon all States to prohibit travel by their nationals to South Africa or occupied Namibia for any purpose,
including tourism, sports and scientific and cultural exchanges;
7. Requests all States to prevent airline companies constituted in their territories and aircraft of their registration
or under charter to their nationals from operating to or from
South Africa or occupied Namibia and from linking up with
any airline company constituted or aircraft registered in
South Africa or occupied Namibia;
8. Reiterates that the exploitation of the resources of
Namibia by foreign economic interests under the protection
of the repressive raci~t administration, in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, of relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council and of Decree
No. I for the Protection of the Natural Resources of
Namibia, is illegal and contributes to the maintenance of
the illegal occupation regime;
9. Requests once again all Member States to take all
appropriate measures, including legislation and enforcement
action, to ensure the full application of, and compliance
with, the provisions of Decree No. I for the Protection of
the Natural Resources of Namibia;
10. Calls upon all States to prohibit State-controlled
corporations from investing or obtaining concessions in
Namibia, as called for in Security Council resolutions 276
( 1970) of 30 January 1970, 283 ( 1970) of 29 July 1970 and
30 I (l 971) of 20 October 1971;
11. Calls upon atl States to prohibit companies of their
nationality not under direct governmental control from investing or obtaining concessions in Namibia and to announce that they will not protect such investments against
claims of a future lawful government of Namibia;
12. Requests all States to prevent investment in projects
or corporations within their territories by corporations or
individuals of South African nationality, or based in South
Africa or illegally occupied Namibia;
13. Requests all States to adopt legislation which will
penalize corporations dealing with South Africa or with
entities in illegally occupied Namibia by the denial of tax
relief and the imposition of fines exceeding the amount of
profits derived from those dealings;

II.

14.

33

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Requests all States to prohibit:
(a) The sale or supply of petroleum or petroleum products to any person or body in South Africa or occupied
Namibia, or to any person or body for the purpose of eventual supply to South Africa or occupied Namibia;
(b) Any activities by their nationals or in their territories
which promote or are calculated to promote the sale or
supply of petroleum or petroleum products to South Africa
or occupied Namibia;
(c) The shipment in vessels, aircraft or any other means
of transportation of their registration, or under charter to
their nationals, of any petroleum or petroleum products to
South Africa or occupied Namibia;
(d) Any investments in, or provision of technical and
other assistance, including technical advice and spare parts,
to the petroleum industry in South Africa or occupied
Namibia;
(e) The provision of transit facilities in their territories,
including the use of their ports, airports, roads or railway
network, to vessels, aircraft or any other means of transportation carrying petroleum or petroleum products to South
Africa or occupied Namibia;
(f) Any activities by their nationals or in their territories
which promote or are calculated to promote the prospecting
for petroleum in South Africa or occupied Namibia;
15. Requests all States to cease forthwith any provision
to South Africa of arms and related materiel of all types,
including the sale or transfer of weapons and ammunition,
military vehicles and equipment, paramilitary police equipment and spare parts for the aforementioned, and to cease
as well the provision of all types of equipment and supplies
and grants of licensing arrangements for the manufacture
or maintenance of the aforementioned, which would further
strengthen South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia;
16. Requests all States to ensure that arms-export agreements provide for guarantees that would prevent embargoed
items or any components thereof from reaching South Africa
through third countries under any circumstances, including
subcontracts by firms from one country to another;
17. Requests all States to prohibit the export of spare
parts for embargoed aircraft and other military equipment
belonging to South Africa, and the maintenance and servicing of such equipment;
18. Requests all States to prohibit government agencies
and corporations under their jurisdiction from transferring
technology for the manufacture of arms and related materiel
of all types to South Africa;
19. Requests all States to prohibit government agencies.
corporations and individuals under their jurisdiction from
investing in the manufacture of arms and related materiel
in South Africa;
20. Requests all States to prohibit all imports of arms
and related materiel of any type from South Africa;
21. Requests those States that have not yet done so to
renounce those elements of bilateral or multilateral treaties
in which South Africa has claimed to represent Namibia,
or to take other action to ensure that those treaties cannot
be interpreted as applying to Namibia;
22. Requests the Governments of Germany, Federal
Republic of, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which operate the
Urenco uranium-enrichment plant. to have Namibian uranium specifically excluded from the Treaty of Almelo.
which regulates the activities of Urenco;
23. Requests all States, by making use of article 35 8
of the Convention on International Civil Aviation, signed

at Chicago on 7 December 1944, 65 to prohibit the carriage
of Namibian uranium or other products emanating from
Namibia above their territory;
24. Calls upon all States to take effective legislative
measures to prevent the recruitment, training and transit of
mercenaries for service in Namibia;
25. Urges, having regard to the principles set forth in
Article 2 of the Charter, States not members of the United
Nations to act in accordance with the provisions of the
present resolution;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in consultation with the United Nations Development Programme,
a comprehensive programme of assistance to States which
are neighbours of South Africa and Namibia, on the understanding that such assistance should not only envisage
the overcoming of short-term difficulties but be designed
to enable those States to move towards complete selfreliance;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the preparation
of the above programme;
28. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to seek from any States information relevant to the implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council on Namibia, particularly Assembly
resolution ES-8/2, and to compile information from other
sources;
29. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in implementation of paragraph 15 of General Assembly
resolution ES-8/2, to continue to monitor the boycott of
South Africa and to submit to the Assembly at its thirtyseventh session a comprehensive report on all contacts between Member States and South Africa, containing a systematic analysis of the information received from Member
States and other sources on the continuing political, economic, financial and other relations of States and their economic and other interests with South Africa and of measures
taken by Member States to terminate all dealings with the
racist regime of South Africa;
30. Requests all States to co-operate fully with the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the fulfilment of
its tasks concerning the implementation of resolution
ES-8/2 and to supply such information as may be sought
by the Council in pursuance of the present resolution;
31. Requests all States to report to the SecretaryGeneral by the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly on the measures taken by them to implement the
present resolution;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

C
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE UNITED NATIONS
COUNC'JL FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembl_v,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, 56
Recalling its resolution 2248 (S-V) of I 9 May 196 7, by
which it established the United Nations Council for Namibia
as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia until
independence,

"' United Nations, Trean \"eries, vol. 15. No. l02, p. 295.

34

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Taking into consideration the Panama Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia, 59 adopted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary
meeting held at Panama City on 5 June I 981,
Reaffirming that Namibia is the direct responsibility of
the United Nations and that the Namibian people must be
enabled to attain self-determination and independence in a
united Namibia,
Convinced of the need to continue consultations with the
South West Africa People's Organization in the formulation
and implementation of the programme of work of the United
Nations Council for Namibia as well as in any matter of
interest to the Namibian people,
l. Approves the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, including the recommendations contained
therein, 66 and decides to make adequate financial provision
for their implementation;
2. Decides that the United Nations Council for Namibia, in the discharge of its responsibilities as the legal
Administering Authority for Namibia until independence,
shall:
(a) Continue to mobilize international support in order
to press for the withdrawal of the illegal South African
administration from Namibia in accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations relating to Namibia;
(b) Counter the policies of South Africa against the
Namibian people and against the United Nations, as well
as against the United Nations Council for Namibia as the
legal Administering Authority for Namibia;
(c) Denounce and seek the rejection by all States of all
fraudulent constitutional or political schemes through wfiich
South Africa may attempt to perpetuate its presence in
Namibia;
(d) Ensure non-recognition of any administration or
entity installed at Windhoek not issuing from free elections
in Namibia, conducted on a territory-wide basis, under the
supervision and control of the United Nations, in accordance
with the resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolutions 385 (1976) of 30 January 1976, 435 (1978) of
29 September 1978 and 439 (1978) of 13 November 1978,
and subsequent relevant resolutions in their entirety;
3. Decides that the United Nations Council for Namibia
shall:
(a) Consult Governments in order to mobilize support
for the cause of Namibia and to further the implementation
of United Nations resolutions on the question of Namibia;
(b) Represent Namibia in United Nations conferences
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, bodies and conferences to ensure that the rights and
interests of Namibia shall be adequately protected;
4. Decides that Namibia, represented by the United
Nations Council for Namibia, shall participate as a full
member in all conferences and meetings organized by the
United Nations to which all States or, in the case of regional
conferences and meetings, all African States, are invited;
5. Decides that the United Nations Council for Namibia
shall also:
(a) Review the progress of the liberation struggle in
Namibia in its political, military and social aspects and
prepare periodic reports related thereto;
(b) Consider the compliance of Member States with the
relevant United Nations resolutions relating to Namibia,
taking into account the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 21 June 1971 ;58
66
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirt_v-sixth Session. Supplement No. 24 (A/36/24), para. 708.

(c) Consider the activities of foreign economic interests
operating in Namibia with a view to recommending appropriate policies to the General Assembly in order to counter
the support which those foreign economic interests give to
the illegal South African administration in Namibia;
(d) Continue to examine the exploitation of and trade
in Namibian uranium by foreign economic interests and
report on its findings to the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session;
( e) Notify the Governments of States whose corporations, whether public or private, operate in Namibia of the
illegality of such operations;
(j) Send missions of consultation to Governments whose
corporations have investments in Namibia in order to review
with them all possible action to discourage the continuation
of such investments;
(g) Contact administering and managing bodies of foreign corporations operating in Namibia regarding the illegal
basis on which they are operating in Namibia;
(h) Draw the attention of the specialized agencies to
Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources
of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations Council for
Namibia on 27 September 1974; 63
(i) Take all measures to ensure compliance with the
provisions of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural
Resources of Namibia, including consideration of the institution of legal proceedings in the domestic courts of States
and other appropriate bodies;
(j) Conduct hearings, seminars and workshops in order
to obtain relevant information on the exploitation of the
people and resources of Namibia by South African and other
foreign interests and to expose such activities;
(k) Prepare and publish reports on the political, economic, military, legal and social situation in and relating
to Namibia;
(l) Secure the territorial integrity of Namibia as a unitary
State, including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands of
Namibia;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in accordance with the guidelines established by the United Nations Council for Namibia, an indexed reference book on
transnational corporations operating in Namibia;
7. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in its capacity as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia, to accede to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 67 the
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid68 and such other related
conventions as may be appropriate;
8. Requests all committees and sub-committees of the
General Assembly to continue to invite a representative of
the United Nations Council for Namibia to participate whenever the rights and interests of Namibians are discussed,
and to consult closely with the Council before submitting
to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session any draft resolution which may involve the rights and interests of
Namibians;
9. Decides to make adequate financial provision in the
section of the programme budget of the United Nations
relating to the United Nations Council for Namibia to finance the office of the South West Africa People's Organization in New York in order to ensure appropriate
representation of the people of Namibia through the South
West Africa People's Organization at the United Nations;

"' Resolution 2106 A (XX). annex.
8
"
Resolution 3068 (XXVIII). annex.

II.

35

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

10. Decides to continue to defray the expenses of representatives of the South West Africa People's Organization, whenever the United Nations Council for Namibia so
decides;
11. Declares that all United Nations programmes for
the benefit of the Namibian people will be carried out in
accordance with the resolutions of the General Assembly
in support of the struggle of the Namibian people under the
leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization,
their sole and authentic representative, to achieve genuine
self-determination and national independence in a united
Namibia;
12. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to continue to consult with the South West Africa People's
Organization in the formulation and implementation of its
programme of work, as well as in any matter of interest to
the Namibian people;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to establish an office of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia at
Luanda early in 1982;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in order to facilitate
financial reporting to the United Nations Council for Namibia, to ensure that, within the section of the programme
budget of the United Nations relating to the Council, the
accounts shall reflect closely the activities of the Council
as described in the report of the Council to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, to review the requirements of personnel and facilities
of all units which service the Council so that the Council
may fully discharge all tasks and functions arising out of
its mandate;
16. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia,
in the discharge of its responsibilities as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia, to hold a series of plenary
meetings in Africa during 1982 and to recommend appropriate action to the General Assembly, in the light of the
refusal by South Africa to implement Security Council resolution 435 (1978), and requests the Secretary-General to
defray the cost of these meetings and to provide the necessary staff and services for them;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to give the widest
possible publicity to the extraordinary plenary meetings
through all the means at his disposal, including special publications, press releases, and radio and television broadcasts;
18. Requests the Secretary-General, after consulting the
United Nations Council for Namibia regarding its assessment of the situation pertaining to Namibia, to carry out
preparatory work with a view to organizing, at an appropriate time, an international conference in support of the
struggle of the Namibian people for independence;
19. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the
preparatory arrangements made.
93rd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

D
ACTION BY INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS WITH RESPECT TO NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, 56
Taking into consideration the Panama Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia, 59 adopted by the United

Nations Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary
meeting held at Panama City on 5 June 1981,
Bearing in mind the Declarations adopted by the International Conference on Sanctions against South Africa, held
in Paris from 20 to 27 May 1981, 61
I. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations and conferences of the United Nations system to
grant full membership to Namibia, represented by the United
Nations Council for Namibia, so that it may participate as
the legal Administering Authority for Namibia in the work
of those agencies, organizations and conferences;
2. Requests all specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to grant a waiver of
the assessment of Namibia during the period in which it is
represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia;
3. Requests all intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, bodies and conferences to ensure that the
rights and interests of Namibia shall be protected and to
invite Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council
for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia, to participate as a full member whenever such rights
and interests are involved;
4. Requests the International Atomic Energy Agency
to grant full membership to Namibia, represented by the
United Nations Council for Namibia;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to take
the necessary administrative action to end all contracts between, on the one hand, the United Nations, the United
Nations Development Programme and the specialized agencies and, on the other hand, corporations that directly or
indirectly support South Africa's illegal occupation of
Namibia;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session on the implementation of the above provision;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council to consider granting membership in the Executive Committee of
the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to Namibia, represented by the United Nations
Council for Namibia;
8. Expresses its appreciation to the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system for
their assistance to Namibia, to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia, to the United Nations Institute for Namibia and
to the Nationhood Programme and requests them to give
priority to the allocation of funds for material assistance to
the Namibian people;
9. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to
undertake a programme of co-operation with non-governmental organizations and support groups that are actively
engaged in supporting the struggle of the Namibian people
under the leadership of the South West Africa People's
Organization, their sole and authentic representative, in
order to intensify international action in support of the liberation struggle of the Namibian people;
IO. Decides to allocate the sum of $200,000 to be used
by the United Nations Council for Namibia to undertake a
programme of co-operation with non-governmental organizations, including support to conferences in solidarity with
Namibia arranged by those organizations, dissemination of
conclusions of such conferences and support to such other
activities as will promote the cause of the liberation struggle
of the Namibian people, subject to decisions of the Council
in each individual case, on the recommendation of the South
West Africa People's Organization.
93rd plenary meeting
JO December /981

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

36

E
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, 56
Taking into consideration the Panama Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia. 59 adopted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary
meeting held at Panama City on 5 June 1981 ,
Recalling its resolution ES-8/2 of 14 September 198 l,
Stressing the urgent need to mobilize international public
opinion on a continuous basis with a view to assisting effectively the people of Namibia in the achievement of selfdetermination, freedom and indepenaence in a united Namibia and, in particular, to intensify the world-wide and
continuous dissemination of information on the struggle for
liberation being waged by the people of Namibia, under the
leadership of the South West Africa People's Organization,
their sole and authentic representative,
Deploring the increased assistance rendered by certain
Western countries, especially the United States of America,
to South Africa in the political, economic, military and
cultural fields and expressing its conviction that this assistance should be exposed by the United Nations Council for
Namibia by all means available to it,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument
for furthering the mandate given by the General Assembly
to the United Nations Council for Namibia and mindful of
the pressing need for the Department of Public Information
of the Secretariat to intensify its efforts to acquaint world
public opinion with all aspects of the question of Namibia,
in accordance with policy guidelines formulated by the
Council,
1. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to
consider ways and means of increasing the dissemination
of information relating to Namibia;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, in all
its activ!ti~s of dissemination of information on the question
of Namibia, follows the policy guidelines laid down by the
United Nations Council for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the Department of Public Information, in addition to its responsibilities
relating to southern Africa, to assist, as a matter of priority,
the United Nations Council for Namibia in the implementation of its programme of dissemination of information in
order that the United Nations may intensify its efforts to
generate publicity and disseminate information with a view
to mobilizing public support for the independence
of Namibia, particularly in the Western countries;
4. Decides to launch an international campaign in support of the cause of Namibia and to expose and denounce
the collusion of certain Western countries with the South
African racists and, to this end, requests the United Nations
Council for Namibia to formulate a programme of activities
on dissemination of information, including the following:
(a) Preparation and dissemination of publications on the
Political, economic, military and social consequences of the
illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa, as well as
on legal matters and on the question of the territorial integrity of Namibia;
_ (b) _Production and dissemination of radio programmes
m English, French, German and Spanish designed to draw
the attention of world public opinion to the current situation
in Namibia;

(c) Production of material for publicity through radio
and television broadcasts;
(d) Placement of advertisements in newspapers and
magazines;
(e) Production of films, film-strips and slide sets on
Namibia;
(j) Production and dissemination of posters;
(g) Full utilization of the resources related to press releases, press conferences and press briefings in order to
maintain a constant flow of information to the public on all
aspects of the question of Namibia;
(h) Production and dissemination of a comprehensive
economic map of Namibia;
(i) Preparation and wide dissemination of booklets,
containing:
(i) The text of official declarations of the Council;
(ii) Joint communiques and press releases issued by
missions of consultation of the Council;
(iii) Resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council on the question of Namibia together
with relevant portions of Assembly resolutions on
the question of foreign economic interests operating
in Namibia and on military activities in Namibia;
()) Publicity for and distribution of an indexed reference
book on transnational corporations involved in Namibia;
(k) Preparation and dissemination of a booklet based on
a study on the implementation of Decree No. I for the
Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by
the Council on 27 September 1974; 63
(l) Acquisition of already published books and pamphlets for further dissemination;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to allocate, in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia, sales
numbers to publications on Namibia selected by the Council;
6. Requests the Department of Public Information to
indicate SJ?C~ifically, at the time of preparation of its budget,
the items m its work programme that relate to dissemination
of information on Namibia;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
United Nations Council for Namibia with the work programme of the Department of Public Information for the
year 1982 covering the activities of dissemination of information on Namibia, followed by quarterly reports on the
programmes undertaken, including details of expenses
mcurred;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to establish, in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia, basic
statistics on Namibia, and to include these statistics in the
appropriate United Nations publications;
9. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to
continue to inform leading opinion makers, media leaders,
political and academic institutions and other concerned nongovernmental organizations, cultural organizations and support groups about the objectives and functions of the United
N~ti_ons Council for Namibia and the struggle of the Nanubian people under the leadership of the South West Africa
People's Organization and also to hold consultations with,
and seek the co-operation of, those personalities and instit~tions_ by invit_ing t~em on special occasions to participate m the deliberations of the Council;
10. Requests Member States to broadcast programmes
on the_ir n_ation~l radio _and television networks and to publish
mat~nal m the1r official news media, informing their populations about the situation in Namibia and the obligation
of Governments and peoples to assist in the struggle of
Namibians for independence;

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. Requests all Member States to commemorate and
publicize Namibia Day and to issue special postage stamps
for the occasion;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the United
Nations Postal Administration to issue a special postage
stamp on Namibia by the end of 1982 in commemoration
of Namibia Day.
93rd plenary meeting
JO December 1981

F
UNITED NATIONS FUND FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia on the United Nations Fund for Namibia, 69
Recalling its resolution 2679 (XXV) of 9 December 1970,
by which it decided to establish the United Nations Fund
for Namibia,
Recalling also its resolution 3112 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973, by which it appointed the United Nations
Council for Namibia trustee of the United Nations Fund for
Namibia,
Taking into consideration the Panama Declaration and
Programme of Action on Namibia, 59 adopted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia at its extraordinary plenary
meeting held at Panama City on 5 June 1981 .
Recalling its resolution 34/92 A of 12 December 1979.
by which it approved the Charter of the United Nations
Institute for Namibia. 70
Commending the Institute for its effective contribution
in promoting the acquisition of skills by young Namibians,
thus enabling them to contribute to the administration of a
future independent Namibia, and for its research activities
into the various political, economic and social aspects of
the question of Namibia,
Recalling its resolution 3 I /153 of 20 December 1976, by
which it decided to launch a comprehensive assistance programme within the United Nations system, covering both
the period of struggle for independence and the initial years
of independence of Namibia,
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations Council for Namibia on the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
2. Expresses its appreciation to all States, the specialized agencies and other organizations in the United
Nations system, governmental and non-governmental
organizations and individuals that have made voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for Namibia, the
United Nations Institute for Namibia and the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia, and calls upon them to increase
their assistance to Namibians through those channels;
3. Decides that the utilization of the resources of the
United Nations Fund for Namibia should be considered also
in the context of the implementation of the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia;
4. Decides to allocate as a temporary measure to the
United Nations Fund for Namibia the sum of $1 million
from the regular budget of the United Nations for 1982;
5. Urges the organizations of the United Nations system
to waive programme-support costs in respect of projects in
favour of Namibians financed from the United Nations Fund
for Namibia and other sources;
69
Official Records of the General Assemhl.,·, J'hirtv-sixth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/36/24), part two. sect. V
70
Ibid .. Thirty-fourth Session, Suppfr,ment /Vo. 24 (A/34/24). annex
XXXII.

37

6. Requests the Secretary-General and the President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia to intensify appeals
to Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and individuals for generous voluntary contributions to the General Account of the United Nations
Fund for Namibia and to the special accounts for the Nationhood Programme and the United Nations Institute for
Namibia;
7. Invites Governments to appeal once more to their
national organizations and institutions for voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for Namibia;
8. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, when
planning and initiating their new measures of assistance to
Namibians, to do so within the context of the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia and the United Nations Institute
for Namibia;
9. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to assist
Namibian refugees and requests him to expand those efforts
in view of the substantial increase in the number of Namibian refugees;
I0. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be eligible
for assistance through the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa and the United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
11. Decides that the United Nations Council for Namibia shall:
(a) Continue to formulate policies of assistance to Namibians and co-ordinate assistance for Namibia provided
by the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system:
(b) Continue to act as trustee of the United Nations
Fund for Namibia and. in this capacity, administer and
manage the Fund:
(c) Provide broad guidelines and formulate the principles and policies for the United Nations Institute for
Namibia:
(d) Co-ordinate, plan and direct the Nationhood Programme for Namibia in consultation with the South West
Africa People's Organization. with the aim of consolidating
all measures of assistance by the specialized agencies and
other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system
into a comprehensive assistance programme;
(e) Continue to consult with the South West Africa People's Organization in the formulation and implementation
of assistance programmes for Namibians;
(j) Report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session on activities in respect of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia, the United Nations Institute for Namibia and
the Nationhood Programme for Namibia;
12. Commends the efforts of the United Nations I11stitute for Namibia to provide substantive support for the struggle for freedom of the Namibian people and the establishment
of an independent State of Namibia:
13. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to prepare and publish, through the United Nations Institute
for Namibia, a comprehensive reference book on Namibia,
covering all aspects of the question of Namibia as considered
by the United Nation~ since its inception, in accordance
with the outline prepared by the Council;
14. Urges those specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system which have not done
so to review with the United Nations Institute for Namibia
ways and means of strengthening its programme of activities;
15. Further urge.,· specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to co-

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

38

operate closely with the United Nations Institute for Namibia
in their efforts to support its programme;
16. Commends the progress made in the implementation
of the pre-independence components of the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia and requests the United Nations
Council for Namibia to elaborate and consider in due course
policies and contingency plans regarding the transitional and
post-independence phases of the Programme;
17. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system that have contributed to the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia and calls upon them to continue
their participation in the Programme by:
(a) Implementing projects approved by the United Nations Council for Namibia;
(b) Preparing new project proposals at the request of
the Council;
(c) Allocating funds from their own financial resources
for the implementation of the projects approved by the
Council;
18. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme for its contribution to the financing and administration of the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia and calls upon it to continue to allocate, at the
request of the United Nations Council for Namibia, funds
from the indicative planning figure for Namibia for the implementation of the projects within the Nationhood Programme and to increase the indicative planning figure for
Namibia;
19·_ Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia with
the necessary resources for the performance of the responsibilities entrusted to it by the United Nations Council for
Namibia as the co-ordinating authority in the implementation of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia.
93rd plenary meeting
/0 December /98/

36/137.

Appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Acting in accordance with the recommendation contained
in Security Council resolution 494 ( 1981) of 11 December
1981, 71
Appoints Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar Secretary-General
of the United Nations for a term of office beginning on I
January 1982 and ending on 31 December 1986.
98th plenary meeting
/5 December /98/

36/171.

Question of human rights relating to the case
of Mr. Ziad Abu Eain

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 72
Recalling its resolution 32/14 of 7 November 1977 and
other pertinent resolutions in which the General Assembly,
inter alia, reaffirmed the legitimacy of the struggle for independence, territorial integrity, national unity and libera71

Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session. Annexe;, agenda item 16, document

A/36/820.
72

Resolution 217 A (III)

tion from colonial and foreign domination and alien
subjugation by all available means,
Noting that Mr. Ziad Abu Eain, a Palestinian national
from occupied Palestinian territory and a Jordanian citizen,
was illegally detained in prison in the United States of America for over two years,
Noting also that the sole basis for "probable cause"
against Mr. Ziad Abu Eain was a statement in Hebrew
extracted from a person who had no knowledge of the Hebrew language and who was in Israeli custody. whose statement was later recanted.
Deeply concerned that the Government of the United
States has extradited Mr. Ziad Abu Eain and delivered him
to Israel, the occupying Power,
I . Strongly deplores the action of the Government of
the United States of America in extraditing Mr. Ziad Abu
Eain to Israel, the occupying Power;
2. Demands that Mr. Ziad Abu Eain be immediately
released and that the Government of the United States, being
responsible for his safety, should facilitate his safe transfer
to the country of his choice;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly no later than 31 December 1981 on the implementation of the present resolution;
4. Decides to retain item 12 on the agenda of its thirtysixth session for the sole purpose of further considering the
question of human rights relating to the case of Mr. Ziad
Abu Eain.
JO l st plenary meeting
16 December 1981

36/172.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa 71
A
SITU A IION IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee
against Apartheid. 74
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity
and a threat to international peace and security,
Recognizing the contribution of the struggle for freedom
and equality in South Africa to the purposes of the United
Nations,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations and
the international community towards the oppressed people
of South Africa and their national liberation movement, as
proclaimed, in particular, in General Assembly resolution
3411 C (XXX) of 28 November 1975,
Convinced that it is incumbent on the international community to provide all necessary assistance to the oppressed
people of South Africa and their national liberation movement in their legitimate struggle for the establishment of a
democratic society in accordance with their inalienable
rights, as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 75
Welcoming with great satisfaction the growing mobilization of world public opinion and of all segments of the
oppressed people of South Africa against apartheid,
Commending, in particular, the courageous struggle of
the black workers of South Africa for their legitimate rights,
,, See also sect. I, footnote 8, and sect. X.B.2. decision .~61419.
" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-sixth Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/36122 and Corr. I) and Supplement No. 22A (A/36/221
Add.! and 2)
" Resolution 217 A (Ill).
