S/PRST/2006/50

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 December 2006
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5580th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 December 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the announcement by the Supreme
Court of Justice on 27 November of the formal results of the second round of
the presidential election in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
“The Security Council congratulates President Joseph Kabila on his
election and commends once again the Congolese people, whose determination
and sense of civic responsibility enabled the first democratic elections to be
held in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in more than 40 years.
“The Security Council welcomes Mr. Jean-Pierre Bemba’s commitment,
in his statement on 28 November 2006, to continue to participate actively in
Congolese politics within the framework of the institutions of the Republic.
“The Security Council looks forward to the completion of the electoral
process, and reiterates the need for all political parties to act responsibly after
the elections within the framework of democratic institutions and the rule of
law. The Security Council attaches great importance to the fact that the
democratically elected government should work side by side with all
Congolese people and political actors to address the many reconstruction and
security challenges facing the country and ensure the long-term peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
“The Security Council expresses its sincere appreciation for the central
role played by the Independent Electoral Commission and the Congolese
National Police in, respectively, organizing the elections and providing
security during the electoral process. It commends the invaluable support
provided for the holding of the elections by the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the EUFOR
operation and by all the regional and international partners, in particular the
African Union, South Africa and the European Union. The Security Council
also recalls the vital roles that the International Committee of Eminent Persons
and the International Committee in support of the Transition (CIAT) have been
playing throughout the electoral process.

06-64617 (E) 061206

*0664617*

S/PRST/2006/50

“The Security Council pays tribute to the donor community for the
assistance they have provided to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
particular to the electoral process, and encourages the international community
as a whole to continue to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo during
the process of peace consolidation, reconstruction and recovery.
“The Security Council expresses its serious concern at the recent
hostilities launched by non-integrated army units in Sake, in the North Kivu
province and at the impact that these actions have had on the civilian
population including women, children and the elderly. It calls on these units to
cease their hostilities, return without delay to their initial positions and submit
themselves to the army integration or demobilization process.
“The Security Council encourages MONUC, in accordance with its
mandate, to continue to address with determination such security challenges,
and supports the steps it has taken recently in this regard, particularly in the
district of Ituri and the North Kivu province.”

2

06-64617
