S/2014/153

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 March 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution
2098 (2013), in which the Council requested that I submit a report on the
implementation of the commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. 1 The report
covers developments since the issuance of my report of 23 December 2013
(S/2013/773) and describes recent peace and security initiatives with regard to
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. Furthermore, the report
discusses progress in the implementation of the Framework, as stipulated in
paragraphs 4 and 5 of resolution 2098 (2013).

II. Recent developments
A.

Political and security developments
2.
During the period under review, the security situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo has remained volatile and was marked by sporadic attacks by
various armed groups. On the political front, there was limited progress in the
implementation of the Kampala Declarations, which formally ended the conflict
between the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)) and the Mouvement du
23 mars (M23). A positive development was President Kabila’s promulgation, on
11 February, of the amnesty law provided for in the Kampala Declarations. The law
grants amnesty for acts of insurgency, acts of war, and political offences committed

__________________
1 In this context, the region is defined as covering the signatories to the Peace, Security and

Cooperation Framework, namely, Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, Uganda, the United
Republic of Tanzania and Zambia, as well as Kenya and the Sudan, which became new members
on 31 January 2014. In addition, the following four intergovernmental organizations act as
guarantors for the Framework: the African Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the Southern African Development Community and the United Nations. For
further information, see S/2013/119 and S/2013/131, annex.

14-24664 (E) 100314

*1424664*

S/2014/153

in the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo between 18 February 2006
and 20 December 2013. The two dates refer, respectively, to the promulgation of the
Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the expiry of the
Government’s ultimatum to armed groups to lay down their arms. Those eligible for
amnesty will have to pledge in writing before the Ministry of Justice, within six
months of the coming into effect of the law, that they will refrain from recommitting
the same offences covered by this amnesty. Any violation of this pledge will
automatically disqualify the perpetrator from this and any future amnesties.
Consistent with international humanitarian and human rights instruments, the law
excludes from amnesty those responsible for crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and gross violations of human rights. On a separate note, the
Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) unanimously adopted a new
Code of Conduct for political parties and candidates, during its fourth consultative
meeting, held on 8 January. The code was signed by the INEC and 233 political
parties, as of 10 February.
3.
At the regional level, some encouraging developments were observed during
the period under review. On 14 and 15 January, the fifth ordinary Summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) was held in Luanda
under the chairmanship of the President of Angola, José Eduardo dos Santos, who
took over from the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni. The Summit took stock
of the commitments undertaken under the 2006 Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, as well as the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. My Special Envoy attended the Summit, together with the
Special Representative of the African Union for the Great Lakes Region, Boubacar
Diarra, the Special Envoy of the United States of America for the Great Lakes
Region, Russ Feingold, and the Senior Coordinator of the European Union for the
Great Lakes Region, Koen Vervaeke.
4.
President dos Santos outlined the priorities for Angola’s two-year
chairmanship of ICGLR. At the political level, he pledged to promote dialogue
among the countries in the region; encourage the implementation of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development, as well as the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework; and support efforts for peaceful resolution of conflicts in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. On the economic front, he undertook to promote
trade and diversification of the region’s economy and to fight poverty. With regard
to defence and security, President dos Santos stated that Angola would promote joint
border management and improve regional cooperation on security issues, including
the fight against human trafficking and the illegal exploitation of natural resources.
5.
The Summit was preceded by meetings of ICGLR security and political
mechanisms, held from 10 to 14 January. They included a meeting of the Chiefs of
Intelligence Services; a meeting of the Chiefs of Defence staff; a meeting of the
Committee of Defence Ministers; and a meeting of the Regional Inter-ministerial
Committee comprised of Ministers of Foreign Affairs and National ICGLR
Coordinators. The Ministers of Defence and Ministers of Foreign Affairs discussed
progress in the implementation of the Pact on Security, Stability and Development
and considered the report of the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism (EJVM) on
recent developments in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Furthermore,
they reviewed the terms of reference of the EJVM, assessed the conflicts in South
Sudan and the Central African Republic, and discussed a possible role for the EJVM
in monitoring developments in both countries. In line with the recommendations

2/12

14-24664

S/2014/153

made by the Chiefs of Defence Staff at their meeting held in the United Republic of
Tanzania on 7 October 2013, the EJVM now comprises 33 members, including
representatives of South Africa, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the African
Union. As new Chair of ICGLR, Angola will soon appoint a senior military officer
to lead the EJVM.
6.
The ICGLR Summit concluded with the adoption of a set of recommendations
formulated by the political and security mechanisms, which included 42 decisions
pertaining to eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, South Sudan, the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, and the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development. Key decisions related to the
Framework included: (a) a request to MONUSCO to intensify its operations against
the Allied Democratic Forces, the Democratic forces for the Liberation of Rwanda
and other armed groups operating in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo;
(b) a call on Member States to strengthen the EJVM and the Joint Intelligence
Fusion Centre; (c) a pledge by the secretariats of ICGLR and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) to implement the final communiqué of the first
joint SADC-ICGLR Summit, held in Pretoria on 4 November 2013; (d) a call on the
African Union and its partners to strengthen the International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic; (e) a commitment to continue supporting the ongoing
mediation in South Sudan by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD); an expression of support to my Special Envoy’s efforts to advance the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, including through the implementation
of the Plan of Action endorsed by the Regional Oversight Mechanism on
31 January; and (f) a call on Member States to respect the ICGLR Protocol on
non-aggression.
7.
Another significant regional development was the meeting in Kigali, on 7 and
8 January, of senior representatives of three member States of the East African
Community. The Ministers of Defence and Internal Security of Kenya, Rwanda and
Uganda signed and approved relevant documents for the establishment of a Mutual
Defence Pact and a Mutual Peace and Security Pact between the three countries.

B.

Humanitarian situation
8.
While recent national, regional and international initiatives have helped reduce
conflict and violence in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
humanitarian situation has remained precarious in much of the region. Further
information on the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
can be found in my separate report on MONUSCO.

C.

Update on human rights, child protection and sexual and
gender-based violence
9.
As part of the Framework’s focus on protecting and empowering women in the
Great Lakes region, the World Bank Group is developing a regional Great Lakes
women’s health and empowerment project to provide: (a) holistic services for
survivors of sexual and gender-based violence; (b) high impact basic health and
nutrition services; and (c) research, networking and regional knowledge-sharing.

14-24664

3/12

S/2014/153

The project is expected to be approved by June 2014 and will complement existing
national and regional programmes.

III. Implementation of the commitments under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region
A.

Commitments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
10. During the reporting period, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo made some progress in implementing its national commitments, as
detailed in my separate report on MONUSCO. However, nine months after the
establishment of the National Oversight Mechanism, this important institution
operates with limited material and human resources and has yet to adopt its
workplan and rules of procedure. Furthermore, the Consultative Council of the
National Oversight Mechanism, which brings together representatives of different
sectors, including public institutions and civil society, has yet to hold its first
meeting. Nevertheless, the Executive Committee of the National Oversight
Mechanism is gradually advancing the benchmarking process, which will form the
basis for an action plan and the formulation of priority programmes.
11. On 13 January, the Coordinator of the Executive Committee of the National
Oversight Mechanism requested MONUSCO to help organize a workshop to refine
benchmarks and indicators for the six national commitments under the Framework.
On 23 January, my Deputy Special Representative and Resident Coordinator met
with the Coordinator of the National Oversight Mechanism, François Mwamba, to
discuss how to co-organize the proposed workshop. Tentatively scheduled for late
February, the workshop seeks to promote an inclusive process and lay the
groundwork for a deeper partnership between the National Oversight Mechanism
and various stakeholders, including the donor community, known in Kinshasa as the
Groupe de Coordination des Partenaires.
12. Meanwhile, on 26 December 2013, at a meeting the Cabinet adopted the
Government’s third national disarmament demobilization and reintegration Plan,
which is now pending before the President. In its present form, the plan proposes a
budget of $US 99,574,416, currently unfunded, to demobilize an estimated
14,805 combatants and include some 24,410 individuals in the reintegration process
in war-affected areas. The Government also announced its intention to seek support
from MONUSCO to form a Steering Committee to implement the new programme.
13. Following the recovery of areas previously occupied by M23 in North Kivu,
MONUSCO supported government efforts to restore state authority, notably by
assisting with the deployment of state actors to those areas to prevent a relapse into
conflict. As part of this process, some 950 elements of the Police nationale
congolaise and provincial Ministries have already redeployed to Rutshuru
and Kiwanja.
14. MONUSCO and international partners also continued to encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to adopt a plan for army
reform and articulate a national defence strategy. As part of continued efforts to
enhance the capacity of the FARDC, MONUSCO deployed military trainers to the

4/12

14-24664

S/2014/153

Tactical Training Centre in Kisangani. MONUSCO Brigades also provided
mentoring and training to FARDC units in North Kivu, South Kivu and the Ituri
District in Orientale province. The FARDC delay in designating trainee units in
Kisangani has impeded further progress and prevented the vetting of the FARDC
rapid reaction units during the reporting period.
15. In his address to the nation on 31 December 2013, President Joseph Kabila
stressed the need to accelerate the decentralization process, including the
progressive establishment of new provinces, the devolution of financial services
from the central Government to the provinces, and the prompt establishment of the
Caisse nationale de péréquation (National Stabilization Fund).
16. On 26 December 2013, the Comité de suivi des concertations nationales
(National Dialogue Follow-up Committee), co-chaired by National Assembly
Speaker Aubin Minaku and Senate President Leon Kengo, adopted its rules of
procedure and identified its priorities. The Committee, which consists of
parliamentarians and representatives of civil society organizations, is expected to
monitor the implementation of the recommendations of the concertations nationales
(national dialogue). Together with my Special Envoy and other partners,
MONUSCO has consistently underscored the need to align the functions and
activities of the National Oversight Mechanism with those of the National Dialogue
Follow-up Committee.

B.

Commitments of the region and development of benchmarks and
action plan
17. In line with the recommendations of the ICGLR technical colloquium on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, held in June 2013, and the Plan of
Action endorsed by the Regional Oversight Mechanism on 31 January, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and MONUSCO conducted working-level
consultations on a regional mechanism for disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and resettlement. Most urgently, viable and attractive
alternatives must be provided to the former M23 combatants present in Uganda and
Rwanda. To that effect, MONUSCO conducted a visit to Uganda late in January and
noted ongoing steps by the International Committee of the Red Cross and the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to repatriate children separated from M23 to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. The Ugandan authorities indicated
that, between 10 and 16 December, the Ugandan People’s Defence Forces had
disarmed and regrouped 1,325 former M23 combatants in Kasese, Uganda. Of those
individuals, 117 were adult females and 134 were children. The MONUSCO
delegation also discussed the establishment of a working-level mechanism on
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and resettlement that would
include the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and the United Nations.
18. At its fifth meeting, held on 7-8 January in Nairobi, under the auspices of the
United Nations and the African Union, the Technical Support Committee of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism finalized the draft Plan of Action for the
implementation of regional commitments. The plan identifies 15 priorities
encompassing the seven regional commitments that the Governments of the region
have committed to implement in 2014. While the plan is a living document that will
be updated as necessary, its initial implementation time frame is one year from its

14-24664

5/12

S/2014/153

adoption. The members of the Committee also agreed to monitor the implementation
of the Plan of Action, with technical support from the Office of my Special Envoy.
The Committee resolved to discuss the costing and funding implications of that
decision at its next meeting.
19. On 31 January, the Regional Oversight Mechanism held its third meeting in
Addis Ababa, on the margins of the 22nd African Union Summit. The meeting was
co-chaired by Erastus Mwencha, Deputy Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and Jan Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations. In
attendance were my Special Envoy, my Special Representative for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, other senior officials from regional and international
organizations, and representatives of the Security Council.
20. The Regional Oversight Mechanism reviewed progress in the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, almost a year after its signing. It
approved the Plan of Action for the implementation of the regional commitments
and welcomed Kenya and the Sudan as new signatories. The Regional Oversight
Mechanism further endorsed my Special Envoy’s initiative to organize, together
with the ICGLR, a private sector investment forum later this year. Moreover, the
meeting welcomed the launch of my Special Envoy’s initiative, the Great Lakes
Women’s Platform for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Eliasson, urged all signatories to remain committed and
underscored the need for a comprehensive strategy to address the root causes of
conflict and promote dialogue in the region.
21. In the final communiqué of the meeting, the Regional Oversight Mechanism
renewed its commitment to the Framework and called for the immediate
implementation of the Plan of Action. The leaders requested the Technical Support
Committee to submit at their next meeting, through my Special Envoy and the
Special Representative of the African Union for the Great Lakes region, a progress
report on the implementation of the Plan of Action. The Regional Oversight
Mechanism also requested my Special Envoy to consult signatories on ways to
sustain dialogue between the leaders of the region.
22. Furthermore, the Regional Oversight Mechanism urged the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to extend its authority to all areas and strengthen
its security and judicial institutions. The meeting encouraged countries in the region
to join forces to neutralize illegal armed groups, combat impunity for war crimes,
crimes against humanity, conflict-related sexual violence, and other gross violations
of human rights. It also urged Governments to take appropriate action against
persons falling under the United Nations sanctions regime.

C.

International commitments
23. During the reporting period, my Special Envoy continued her close
cooperation with the Team of Envoys and the International Contact Group on the
Great Lakes Region, and the chairpersons of ICGLR and SADC. In particular, her
Office worked closely with the members of the International Contact Group on the
Great Lakes Region to finalize benchmarks for the implementation of the
international commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.

6/12

14-24664

S/2014/153

24. In line with the outcome of my joint visit to the Great Lakes region with the
President of the World Bank, Jim Yong Kim, in May of last year, my Special Envoy
deepened cooperation with the World Bank and United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). In this context, her Office partnered with the World Bank, and
UNDP headquarters and relevant country offices, to ensure that economic activities
under the Plan of Action complement the outcomes of the meeting on “Regional
Approaches to Development in the Countries of the Great Lakes”, co-organized by
the World Bank, the United Nations and the African Union Commission in July 2013.
25. In response to the pressing need to reform the community recovery sector and
link community recovery to local development in the Great Lakes region, UNDP
hosted a three-day workshop in Bujumbura on 17 February. The workshop provided
an opportunity for representatives of governments in the Great Lakes region,
industry, civil society, academia and the international donor community to discuss
the challenges and opportunities that community recovery presents in the region,
and how responsible community recovery can contribute to economic growth,
environmental protection and social equity at the local level. The workshop was
designed to stimulate reflection and discussion on sustainable community recovery
practices, facilitate networking, and deliver broad consensus on approaches to link
community recovery and local development.

IV. Activities of my Special Envoy
26. My Special Envoy has continued to engage regional leaders, bilateral and
multilateral partners, and civil society organizations to ensure that the broadest
possible range of actors remains committed to the Framework. In addition, she
launched a number of initiatives derived from her six-point plan, which I introduced
in my last report (S/2013/773, para. 24).
27. After the signing of the Kampala Dialogue Declarations and Communiqué, my
Special Envoy consistently engaged regional leaders, urging swift implementation
of the parties’ commitments, starting with the passing of an amnesty law in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As indicated earlier in this report (para. 2), this
important legislation has now been promulgated. My Special Envoy has also been
calling for the implementation of an effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to enable the
repatriation of former M23 combatants of Congolese nationality from Rwanda
and Uganda.
28. From 11 to 13 January, my Special Envoy visited Kinshasa to assess and aid
progress in the implementation of the national commitments made by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. She met with President
Kabila, other government officials, and the donor community. In her meetings with
government officials, she urged swift implementation of the outcomes of the
Kampala Dialogue, stressed the need to strengthen the National Oversight
Mechanism, and suggested a road map for broader national reconciliation, as a
follow-up to the national dialogue. In response, the Government reiterated its
readiness to implement its national commitments. My Special Envoy, Mary
Robinson, briefed donors on ongoing activities related to the regional commitments
and Plan of Action. She further noted the efforts made by international partners to
coordinate their support to the Framework.

14-24664

7/12

S/2014/153

29. My Special Envoy returned to Kinshasa on 12 and 13 February to discuss the
outcomes of the last meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism and evaluate
progress in the implementation of the Framework since her last visit. She met
President Kabila and Foreign Minister Raymond Tshibanda. She also met the
Coordinator of the National Oversight Mechanism who briefed her on the
formulation of benchmarks for the implementation of national commitments. My
Special Envoy took advantage of her presence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to reach out to the donor community, notably the Executive Committee of the
Groupe de Coordination des Partenaires. Together with my Special Representative
Kobler, she met diplomatic representatives of SADC countries and held
consultations with the Senior Coordinator of the European Union for the Great
Lakes Region, Koen Vervaeke.
30. After Kinshasa, my Special Envoy proceeded to Luanda for a three-day visit,
during which she met President dos Santos, as well as the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs, Defence, and the Economy. During her meeting with President dos Santos
on 18 February, my Special Envoy commended the leadership displayed by the
President since assuming the chairmanship of ICGLR. She also encouraged him to
pursue the dialogue on sensitive issues that he initiated during the fifth ordinary
Summit of ICGLR in Luanda. President dos Santos briefed my Special Envoy on the
priorities that he and his peers identified during the closed meeting that he convened
in mid-January, on the margins of the ICGLR Summit. These include (a) repatriation
of M23 elements in the context of the Kampala Declarations; (b) operations against
the Allied Democratic Forces; and (c) operations against the Democratic Forces for
the Liberation of Rwanda. He further noted that he would concentrate on promoting
sustained political dialogue between the leaders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. Lastly, he welcomed my Special Envoy’s plan to hold
a private sector investment conference in June, preceded by regional consultations
to be hosted by Angola in May.
31. To help build trust and confidence in the region, my Special Envoy has taken
steps to initiate a high-level political dialogue to discuss complex issues falling
under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. She shared her proposal
with regional leaders during the recent ICGLR Summit in Luanda. At its third
meeting, on 31 January, the Regional Oversight Mechanism considered that proposal
and undertook to support broad political dialogue on issues of mutual concern.
32. In line with her commitment to promote a bottom-up approach to the
Framework, my Special Envoy took advantage of her presence in Addis Ababa for
the third meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism to reach out to civil society
organizations. On 28 January, she launched the Great Lakes Women’s Platform for
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, with the support of the Global
Fund for Women. The ceremony was attended by over 100 participants representing
Governments, the United Nations, other multilateral institutions, civil society,
women’s organizations, and foundations. The Platform aims to support the active
involvement of women in the Framework and to ensure that their voices and
aspirations are effectively communicated across the region, in line with Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000).
33. Participants at the launching ceremony agreed that the Women’s Platform
should: (a) take concrete actions to improve the lives of girls and women in the
region; (b) ensure that girls and women are at the centre of efforts to bring peace,

8/12

14-24664

S/2014/153

security and development to the region; (c) collaborate with other national and
regional mechanisms, particularly the ICGLR Regional Women’s Forum; and
(d) develop measurable indicators to evaluate its own impact.
34. Over the next three years, the Platform will carry out three core activities:
(a) providing grant support to women’s rights organizations; (b) convening grant
recipients for collective action and shared learning; (c) disseminating the
accomplishments of women’s groups; and (d) advocating for increased resources for
women’s groups and community-based mechanisms. The Platform will also provide
technical support to women’s groups active in the following four areas:
(a) monitoring and advocacy for the Framework, and regional and national plans of
action under Security Council resolution 1325 (2000); (b) combating conflict-related
violence against women and supporting victims; (c) improving women’s livelihoods
and development; and (d) promoting access to clean energy at the local level.
35. Prior to launching the Women’s Platform, my Special Envoy participated in a
consultative dialogue with civil society organizations, hosted by Oxfam
International, on 27 January. The event was attended by some 55 representatives of
international, regional, national and local organizations working in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. The dialogue provided an
opportunity to discuss the roles and responsibilities of civil society in the
implementation of the Framework. Noting civil society’s role in holding
Governments to their commitments, my Special Envoy requested civil society
organizations to help disseminate these commitments and track progress in their
implementation. She reiterated her commitment to a bottom-up approach and
reaffirmed her resolve to remain engaged with civil society groups. To this effect,
she proposed that consultative dialogues on the Framework with non-governmental
organizations and other non-state actors become a regular feature on the margins of
African Union Summits.

V. Observations and recommendations
36. When the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework was signed on
24 February 2013 in Addis Ababa, the peace and security situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo was fragile. Tension among the countries in the
region was, once again, on the rise. A year after signing the Framework, the
situation on the ground, though relatively delicate, has improved considerably,
owing to a number of concerted national, regional and international efforts. On the
military front, following the end of the M23 rebellion and the formal conclusion of
the Kampala Dialogue, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
now able to regain control of territories previously held by M23 and has commenced
new operations against foreign armed groups operating in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, such as the Allied Democratic Forces, the Democratic
Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda and the Forces nationales de libération. The
defeat of M23 has also led to the spontaneous surrender of elements from other
armed groups, which now need to be sustained by effective demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration programmes, at the national and regional levels.
37. On the political front, the signatories to the Framework have taken crucial
steps to establish the required mechanisms and tools for effective implementation of
their commitments. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, President Joseph

14-24664

9/12

S/2014/153

Kabila established a National Oversight Mechanism to oversee the implementation
of the national commitments. In addition, he launched the concertations nationales
(national dialogue), involving the majority of political parties. He also established a
follow-up committee, co-chaired by the Presidents from both chambers of the
National Assembly to monitor the implementation of its outcome.
38. At the regional level, signatory countries have displayed a greater sense of
ownership in finding solutions to the conflict in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and improving relations in the region. In that regard, President Yoweri
Museveni, in his capacity as the Chair of ICGLR, played a key role in facilitating
the resolution of the conflict between the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and M23, through the Kampala Dialogue. Furthermore, the frequent
interactions between the principal representatives of the Heads of State and
Government through the organ of the Technical Support Committee, with the
support of my Special Envoy, provided a useful platform for dialogue, consensus
and trust building in the development of regional benchmarks, which were adopted
last September, and the Plan of Action for the implementation of the regional
commitments, which was endorsed during the third meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism in Addis Ababa on 31 January 2014.
39. Leaders in the region further demonstrated their resolve to promote closer
regional cooperation by holding a joint ICGLR-SADC Summit, during which
discussions focused on peace and stability in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. The decision reached at that Summit, to organize annual joint
Summits and convene foreign ministers every six months, illustrates the growing
political will in the region to exploit synergies in the pursuit of common objectives.
40. Meanwhile, coherent and coordinated messaging and support by international
partners remain critical to support those positive efforts and developments in the
region. As indicated in my previous reports, I welcome the continuous commitment
of the international community to work closely with my Special Envoy in support of
the Framework, notably through the coordinated efforts of the Team of Envoys, and
the engagement of some partners at the local and regional levels. I commend the
leaders in the region, their representatives at the Technical Support Committee, the
Executive Secretaries of ICGLR and SADC and international partners for their
efforts to implement the Framework over the past year.
41. Although these important steps have contributed to creating a foundation for
peace and security, it is nonetheless important to emphasize the enormous amount of
work that still lies ahead to achieve the overall objectives of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework and address the root causes of conflict in the Great Lakes
region. The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region still face a number of
peace and security challenges which, if not properly addressed, could negatively
affect the progress achieved thus far.
42. I am particularly concerned about the series of armed attacks perpetrated in
Kinshasa, Lubumbashi and Kindu on 30 December. I also deplore the heavy loss of
lives during the operations carried out by security forces in the aftermath of those
attacks. These armed attacks indicate that the road to national cohesion and
reconciliation remains difficult, despite the recent encouraging efforts of the
Government. The lack of operational capacity of the National Oversight
Mechanism, delays in the implementation of recommendations of the national
dialogue as well as the absence of a single harmonized road map for the

10/12

14-24664

S/2014/153

implementation of national reforms are of serious concern and need to be addressed
swiftly. The implementation of the key points agreed upon during the Kampala
Dialogue also deserves urgent and immediate attention, in addition to measures to
implement the amnesty law recently promulgated by President Kabila.
43. While I am mindful of the complexity and sensitivities of the issues at stake, I
encourage the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to accelerate
the implementation of its commitments under the Framework, the recommendations
of the national dialogue, and the declarations concluding the Kampala Dialogue. I
also urge the Government to seek support from international partners for security
sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes and
elections. Constructive dialogue with the neighbours of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will also be essential to accelerate the repatriation of the former M23
combatants present in Uganda and Rwanda. My Special Envoy, Mary Robinson, and
my Special Representative, Martin Kobler, stand ready to assist the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in this endeavour, as appropriate.
44. With the adoption of the regional benchmarks and the plan of action, the
region now has effective tools to guide the implementation of its commitments and
to measure progress accordingly. I urge the signatory countries of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework to take concrete steps to move this process
forward. In line with the communiqué of the last meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism, I call on countries in the region to cooperate and take the necessary
measures to neutralize illegal armed groups, combat impunity for war crimes,
crimes against humanity, conflict-related sexual violence and other gross violations
of human rights, and to take appropriate actions against persons falling under the
United Nations sanctions regime.
45. I am concerned about continuing reports of violence, including sexual
violence, by armed forces and by illegal armed groups in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in other parts of the region, such as the Central African
Republic and South Sudan. I would like to urge all signatories to the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework to fully implement their commitments, including those
related to the fight against impunity for serious crimes and their obligation to
neither harbour nor provide protection to persons accused of war crimes, crimes
against humanity, acts of genocide or crimes of aggression. I urge Heads of State in
the region to address the question of judicial cooperation and accountability as a
matter of utmost priority and ensure that people suspected of committing heinous
crimes and serious human rights violations are held accountable.
46. The issue of the return of refugees and internally displaced persons remains a
major humanitarian concern and a driver of conflict in the region. Accordingly, no
effort should be spared to find lasting solutions through coordinated action at the
national, regional and international levels. My Special Envoy will continue to work
with mandated agencies in that regard. I call on Governments in the region to
enhance their collaboration on the refugee issue in the context of the tripartite
agreements, while keeping in mind their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law.
47. In that regard, I would like to commend President José Eduardo dos Santos, of
Angola, who, as the new Chair of ICGLR, has commenced his tenure by displaying
leadership in engaging his peers to address sensitive peace and security issues, as
demonstrated during the recent ICGLR Summit held in Luanda. I welcome the

14-24664

11/12

S/2014/153

renewed engagement of Angola in the Great Lakes region and encourage President
dos Santos and his Government to work closely with my Special Envoy, who has
already offered to work closely with the leaders of the region to support broad
political dialogue on difficult issues that could hamper the effective implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
48. Building on the efforts of the past year, my Special Envoy will continue to
steer the process of promoting the full implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, in line with the Plan of Action and her six-point plan that I
presented in my last report. In that regard, my Special Envoy will concentrate on the
following issues in the next few months: support dialogue on sensitive regional
issues, including the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda, and the
repatriation of eligible former M23 combatants present in neighbouring countries,
working closely with the Chair of ICGLR; encourage ICGLR to work closely with
the National Oversight Mechanism to track progress in the implementation of the
Kampala Declaration; mobilize key countries in the region and international
partners to strengthen the capacity of the EJVM, in order to effectively conduct its
investigation and monitoring mandate; organize a private sector investment
conference to promote the social and economic pillars of the Framework; work with
civil society organizations, Governments and donors to operationalize the Women’s
Platform for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, with a view to
ensuring greater participation at the grass-roots level and maximizing the considerable
potential of a bottom-up approach; and mobilize international and regional support
to establish a regional training facility on sexual and gender-based violence.
49. However, it must be stressed that these efforts will produce results only if the
signatory countries and the guarantors of the Framework remain committed to
achieving the goals we set for ourselves a year ago. I would like to thank my Special
Envoy, Mary Robinson, my Special Representative in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Martin Kobler, and all the staff of peacekeeping and special political
missions in the region, for their efforts in challenging and complex environments. I
call on the members of the Security Council and other international partners to
continue to provide support to my Special Envoy and my Special Representative to
ensure the effective implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework.

12/12

14-24664
