S/2019/157

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 February 2019
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018) and 2449 (2018)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the fifty-ninth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017),
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018) and paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018), in
the last of which the Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a report on
a regular basis, at least every 60 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all
parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system
on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for December 2018 and January
2019.

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points: December 2018 and January 2019
1.
Serious concerns persisted about the protection of civilians in the Hajin area of
south-eastern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, where military operations against Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant continued, and about the well-being of some 25,000
people displaced from this area to the Hawl camp during the reporting period.
2.
The humanitarian situation in the makeshift settlement at Rukban continued to
deteriorate, with deployment of additional humanitarian assistance to the area
becoming increasingly critical. By the end of the reporting period, final preparations
were being made for a major aid convoy to Rukban to provide comprehensive
assistance to some 42,000 people.

19-02510 (E)

200219

*1902510*

S/2019/157

3.
Flooding and severe cold compounded the suffering of millions of people in
need throughout much of the country, with several camps for internally displaced
persons in the north-east and north-west experiencing heavy flooding, resulting in the
destruction of shelters and secondary displacement of already extremely vulnerable
people.
4.
Concerns around the risk of military escalation in Idlib grew, with cha nges in
control over the course of the reporting period further complicating the operating
environment for humanitarian organizations. The suspension of funding by some
donors for stabilization activities, linked to concerns following changes in control,
reduced the coverage of health services in some areas in the north-west of the country.
5.
Attacks on educational and medical facilities continued to be reported and
verified by humanitarian organizations, with four attacks on schools and four attacks
on hospitals confirmed during the reporting period.
6.
United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach millions
of people in need throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. Humanitarian assistance
provided by United Nations agencies included food for an average of 3.37 million
people in need each month and nearly 3 million health and medical treatments to
people in the country.
7.
In several areas that shifted control in 2018, including locations in eastern
Ghouta, south-eastern Idlib, northern rural Homs and the southern part of the Syrian
Arab Republic, sustained and predictable humanitarian access remained challenging
owing to a number of constraints, including administrative restrictions and insecurity.
8.
The United Nations and non-governmental organizations continued to deliver
life-saving assistance to more than 700,000 people each month in the north -eastern
part of the Syrian Arab Republic, including recent arrivals in sites for internally
displaced persons. The uncertain operating environment, including in the context of
recent announcements about possible adjustments to military deployments in the
north-east of the country, raised concerns among humanitarian organizations.

3.
Throughout December and January, large numbers of civilians were reportedly
killed and injured in Hajin and surrounding areas in south-eastern Dayr al-Zawr
Governorate owing to air strikes and intense fighting between the Syrian Democratic
Forces and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). During the period, some
25,000 people were relocated from Hajin to the Hawl camp in Hasakah Governorate,
approximately 300 km to the north. Women, children and older persons comprised
the majority of people fleeing Hajin. Extremely harsh conditions were reported along
the route north, including cold temperatures and a lack of food, water, shelter and
health services. By early February, at least 39 children were reported to have died
either while in transit or shortly after arriving in the Hawl camp, owing mostly to
hypothermia caused by exposure and a lack of access to health care, while making
the arduous journey northwards.
4.
The rapid rate of new arrivals tripled the population of the Hawl camp over the
course of the reporting period. While humanitarian assistance was scaled up in the
camp, humanitarian access to Hajin itself and to displaced people in transit remained
extremely limited, owing in part to insecurity and active conflict. Protection concerns
included constraints on freedom of movement, with many of those arriving at Hawl
expressing a preference to move to other locations, in most cases to connect with
family members or friends in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate.

2/16

19-02510

S/2019/157

5.
Humanitarian conditions in the makeshift settlement at Rukban, on the Syria n
Arab Republic-Jordan border, deteriorated significantly during the reporting period.
Cold weather exacerbated an already dire situation, with an estimated 42,000 people,
of whom the vast majority were women and children, facing growing shortages of
basic commodities and limited access to medical care and other basic services. At
least eight young children were reported to have died in the settlement by mid January.
6.
In early January, armed clashes between the Levant Liberation Organization and
other non-State armed opposition groups spread across Aleppo and Idlib
Governorates, with some fighting taking place near camps for internally displaced
persons and with reports of civilian casualties in a number of locations. A ceasefire
was reported on 10 January, with indications that the Levant Liberation Organization
had, by that point, significantly expanded its area of influence in the north -west of
the country. Fighting between government forces and non-State armed opposition
groups also continued to be reported in Idlib and surrounding areas of the north -west,
including in areas understood to lie within the demilitarized zone established under
the agreement announced by the Russian Federation and Turkey on 17 September (see
S/2018/852). Humanitarian organizations continued to highlight the likely
catastrophic consequences of a major military operation in the Idlib area.
7.
Severe flooding affected many locations in the north-west and north-east of the
Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period, with sites for internally displaced
persons among the locations worst affected. Humanitarian organizations estimated
that more than 70 per cent of the Arishah camp, in Hasakah Governorate, had been
flooded by late January, forcing more than 1,000 families from their shelters. Other
sites affected by flooding in January included the Karamah camps in Atmah, close to
the Syrian Arab Republic-Turkey border and the Salah al-Din, Habl and Shuhada’
camps in Khirbat al-Jawz and Zawf, western Idlib Governorate. Close to 82,000
internally displaced persons were directly affected in the north -west alone, with the
Zarbah and Atarib subdistricts of Aleppo Governorate among those hardest hit.
8.
On 20 December, the then Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Staffan de Mistura, noted that it had not yet been possible to convene a sufficiently
balanced, credible and inclusive constitutional committee as part of United Nations
efforts to implement Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
9.
The new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Geir O. Pedersen,
assumed his functions on 7 January. He reiterated the commitment of the United
Nations to moving the Syrian-led political process forward, as mandated in Security
Council resolution 2254 (2015) and guided by the 2012 Geneva Communiqué.
Mr. Pedersen consulted members of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in
Damascus and the opposition Syrian Negotiations Committee in Riyadh, as well as
regional and international interlocutors in Geneva and in capitals.
Protection
10. Notwithstanding a relative decrease in the overall intensity of violence, civilians
in many parts of the Syrian Arab Republic continued to be severely affected by the
direct and indirect consequences of hostilities. Air and ground -based strikes
continued to kill and injure civilians and damage and destroy civilian infrastructure,
in particular in eastern Dayr al-Zawr. In addition, in eastern Dayr al-Zawr, ISIL
appears to have continued to systematically commit violations of international
humanitarian law and abuses of human rights. In areas under its control, it reportedly
carried out a range of killings, targeting civilians perceived to be either opposed to its
ideology or affiliated with or providing information to rival non -State armed
opposition groups. An unknown number of civilians remained trapped in ISIL-held
19-02510

3/16

S/2019/157

areas, prevented from fleeing to other areas and effectively being exploited as human
shields.
11. Many civilians who were able to flee ISIL-held areas found themselves in camps
or sites for internally displaced persons in areas controlled by non-State armed
opposition groups, where conditions were dire, with limited access to food, water and
medical services and with significant constraints on freedom of movement.
Humanitarian protection actors highlighted a number of additional concerns in
relation to displacement from the Hajin area, including lengthy security screening
procedures, involuntary relocation by non-State armed opposition groups and
confiscation of documentation.
12. Ground-based bombardment in the north-west of the country increased, with
near-daily reports of shelling along frontlines in northern Hama, south -eastern Idlib
and western Aleppo. An increase in the use of improvised explosive devices in various
areas throughout the north-west and north-east was also observed. The number of
civilian casualties and the scale of the destruction of civilian infrastructure remained
a strong indication that the fundamental rules of distinction, proportionality and
precaution and, in particular, the prohibition on the launching of indiscriminate
attacks may not have been respected.
13. In Idlib and surrounding areas, lawlessness and criminality, including by the
Levant Liberation Organization, continued to be reported., Civilians, including
human rights activists, health service providers and journalists, were abducted or
detained, either on suspicion of affiliation with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic or for being critical of the Levant Liberation Organization. Abductions for
ransom by criminal gangs were also reported. The fate and whereabouts of many of
those abducted remain unknown.
14. In Idlib, the Levant Liberation Organization appeared to target communities of
specific ethnic or religious groups. In December, the Office of the United Na tions
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) documented reports of the Levant
Liberation Organization seizing the houses, land and properties of absent Christians
and Shi’a civilians who had either fled the violence in the Governorate or were
displaced following “ceasefire and reconciliation” agreements concluded by
government forces and their allies and non-State armed opposition groups, including
the Levant Liberation Organization. OHCHR received reports that the Levant
Liberation Organization had issued notices claiming as “spoils of war” all properties
of Christian families who had fled the violence in Idlib city. The Christian owners
had, in many cases, left their houses in the care of neighbours and friends. The Levant
Liberation Organization has reportedly given tenants in the Kanisah neighbourhood
in Idlib city a three-day ultimatum to either register those houses or evacuate them.
15. In Dar‘a Governorate, OHCHR continued to receive reports of the arrest of
civilians by government forces, which, in some cases, may amount to arbitrary arrest
and detention. OHCHR documented 452 individuals who were detained between
26 July 2018 and 14 January 2019, including 136 civilians, among them 3 women and
115 former fighters. The reasons for those arrests remain unclear. Often, relatives
were not informed of the detention of their family members or the location of their
detention, raising concerns about whether due process was adequately followed in all
cases and whether all relevant rights were afforded to them, as required by
international law.
16. Explosive weapons continued to be fired into populated areas, killing and
injuring civilians and destroying and damaging vital infrastructure. Explosive hazard
contamination in a number of populated areas killed and injured civilians and
impeded humanitarian access. The use of improvised explosive devices in some areas

4/16

19-02510

S/2019/157

added to the complexity of the explosive hazard threat and hindered the work of
humanitarian actors.
17. Attacks on educational facilities continued to be reported by humanitarian
organizations. On 1 December, in Tah town in Idlib Governorate, shelling hit a
complex of three schools (Al-Mahabba, Walid al-Mohammad and Tah schools),
causing partial damage to buildings. The non-State armed opposition group-affiliated
“Directorate of Education” in Idlib announced the closure of schools in Tah and its
countryside for four days owing to the incident and continued threats. On
12 December, in I‘zaz city in rural Aleppo governate, Ibn Zaydun primary school was
damaged and rendered non-functional owing to a vehicle-borne improvised explosive
device attack reportedly targeting the building of the local council. Multiple civilian
casualties were reported. On 18 December, in Jarjanaz town, Idlib Governorate, Hittin
school was damaged by artillery shelling. No casualties were reported. On 1 January,
in Aleppo city, a mortar struck a school in the Nile Street neighbourhood. The mortar
damaged a laboratory. No injuries were reported because the school was closed at the
time. On 13 December, in Jarabulus, Aleppo Governorate, the education office
reportedly announced the closure of schools owing to the deteriorating security
situation in the area.
18. During the reporting period, the Surveillance System of Attacks on Healt h Care
of the World Health Organization (WHO) reported four cases of attacks that had
struck health-care facilities and assets. The most significant was the vehicle -borne
improvised explosive device attack in I‘zaz city noted above, which, in addition to
damaging a primary school, caused significant structural damage to a mental health
hospital and a prosthesis centre. Aa analysis of Surveillance System data over the
fourth quarter of 2018 identified a clear correlation between intensified conflict and
increased attacks affecting health-care facilities and assets, with a probable air strike
against a field hospital and an improvised explosive device attack against an
ambulance in Dayr al-Zawr among the more serious incidents recorded during that
period. WHO noted that the data were indicative of a disregard for protections for
medical personnel and objects in conflict situations, as provided for in international
humanitarian law.
Humanitarian response
19. During the reporting period, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners
continued to reach millions of people in need throughout the Syrian Arab Republic.
Humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations agencies included food for an
average of 3.37 million people in need each month and nearly 3 million health and
medical treatments to people throughout the country (see Table 1).
Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other
organizations through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic:
December 2018 and January 2019
Organization

19-02510

Average number of people
reached monthly

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

102 000

International Organization for Migration

118 000

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

2 340 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

3 000 000

United Nations Development Programme

527 000

United Nations Population Fund

830 000

5/16

S/2019/157

Organization

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East

Average number of people
reached monthly

350 000

World Food Programme

3 375 000

World Health Organization

2 915 000

20. From inside the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian assistance provided by
United Nations agencies included food for a monthly average of 2.81 million people.
More than 3.8 million people received water, sanitation and hygiene services and
supplies. Some 2.4 million children and mothers were reached with primary health care and immunization services. Moreover, approximately 660,000 people benefited
from protection and psychosocial support services and child protection services.
United Nations operations from within the Syrian Arab Republic also included nearly
2.5 million health and medical treatments to people throughout the country. The Mine
Action Service launched its first project from Damascus since opening its office in
2018, which provided training on explosive hazard risk education for 25 young Syrian
women and men, complementing ongoing humanitarian mine action activities in the
north-west of the country.
21. As part of its country-wide humanitarian response, the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) continued to deliver life-saving assistance
to more than 700,000 people each month in the three governorates of the north -eastern
part of the Syrian Arab Republic. This included supporting some of the most
vulnerable people in camps for internally displaced persons, such as those who have
recently been displaced owing to intense fighting in the last ISIL -held areas in Hajin
in south-eastern Dayr al-Zawr Governorate. At the Hawl camp, 24-hour response
teams were established to receive the newly displaced, quickly identify the most
vulnerable cases and provide urgent assistance, including medical and protection
support, with critical medical cases referred to nearby hospitals for treatment. Health
assistance was further scaled up through new health centres and mobile clinics, a
vaccination campaign for all new arrivals, and nutritional and psychosocial support.
Families also received food, shelter, winterization assistance and hygiene kits, and
heaters, essential in the cold winter weather, were being distributed. Humanitarian
partners are working to rapidly expand the capacity of the camp to host the new
arrivals.
22. Cross-border deliveries continued under the terms of Security Council
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and
2449 (2018) (see table 2). In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified
the Syrian authorities in advance of each shipment, including its contents, its
destination and the number of beneficiaries expected to be reached. In December and
January, 837 trucks (26 consignments) delivered life-saving assistance for more than
1 million people through cross-border deliveries (see figure I).

6/16

19-02510

S/2019/157

Figure I
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: December 2018 and
January 2019 (monthly average)
(Thousands)

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries, by sector and
by district: December 2018 and January 2019 (monthly average)
Education

Food

Health

Non-food
items/ shelter

Nutrition

Water, sanitation
and hygiene

Governorate

District

Aleppo

Bab

–

–

3 500

–

–

–

Aleppo

I‘zaz

–

38 065

136 984

101 837

88 058

25 379

Aleppo

Jarabulus

–

–

1 500

18 012

–

–

Aleppo

Jabal Sim‘an

8 760

185 655

88 000

–

–

–

Hasakah

Quamishli

14 100

–

115 000

28 500

68 000

30 000

Hama

Suqaylibiyah

–

–

2 500

–

–

–

Hama

Hama

–

–

10 000

–

–

–

Idlib

Ma‘arrah

–

34 988

74 100

18 190

–

–

Idlib

Ariha

–

30 000

32 400

15 728

–

–

Idlib

Harim

5 317

–

304 648

172 165

132 105

97 060

Idlib

Idlib

135 960

16 550

64 000

85 748

–

28 220

Idlib

Jisr al-Shughur

–

–

38 000

4 896

–

–

23. During the reporting period, the Russian Federation sent informational bulletins
to the United Nations from the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the
Syrian Arab Republic, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief assistance.
Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms of
humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian access
24. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners. The access

19-02510

7/16

S/2019/157

landscape in the Syrian Arab Republic is complex, with different areas serviced
differently, and different types of services requiring different operating modalities.
Access is critical for principled humanitarian action, which depends on an ability to
assess needs and to monitor and evaluate impact, including by regularly engaging
directly with affected people.
25. During the reporting period, the United Nations continued to provide assistance
from within the Syrian Arab Republic to millions of people in need in thousands of
locations throughout the country. More than 1,700 United Nations staff membe rs are
deployed in the country, with more than 500 in nine hubs outside Damascus (Aleppo,
Dar‘a, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Qamishli, Suwayda’ and Tartus).
Through these hubs, deliveries are made through established distribution points,
mobile teams and targeted convoys.
26. Many of the aid deliveries are implemented through national partners, in
particular the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. The United Nations regularly deploys
alongside the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, including to undertake assessment s,
accompany deliveries and follow up with monitoring and evaluation missions. In
December and January, the United Nations undertook hundreds of missions
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. Some of those missions required formal
approval (see table 3 and figures II–IV), while others were deployed in accordance
with part of broader agreements with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
where individual mission permissions are not required, including in locations for
which blanket approval has been granted (not reflected in table 3).
Table 3
Requests for United Nations access for single agency missions: December 2018
and January 2019
Type of request

Number requested

Number approved

Per cent approved

Assessment missions

31

14

45

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

21

11

52

Monitoring missions

100

42

42

Security and other missions

48

12

25

200

79

40

Total

8/16

19-02510

S/2019/157

Figure II
Requests for United Nations access for single agency missions, breakdown by
type of mission requested: December 2018 and January 2019
(Per cent)

Monitoring
missions
Assessment
missions

24
50

11

Missions
accompanying aid
deliveries

16

Logistics and other
missions

Figure III
Requests for United Nations access for single agency missions, breakdown by
responses received: December 2018 and January 2019
(Per cent)

4

Approved
Denied
40
Unanswered

48
Returned for
resubmission
8

19-02510

9/16

S/2019/157

Figure IV
Requests for United Nations access for single agency missions, breakdown by
type of mission requested and responses received: December 2018 and
January 2019
11 13 6

Program delivery

Assessment

14

2

Logistics and others

12

3

33

42

Monitoring

0

Approved

15

20

Denied

12

40

2

44

60

Returned for resubmission

80

100

120

Unanswered

27. The United Nations continued to face access challenges owing to a number of
constraints, including administrative restrictions and insecurity. Some 1.16 million
people remained in areas categorized by the United Nations as hard -to-reach. Of the
200 requests made by the United Nations to conduct humanitarian missions
referenced in table 3, 114 were either unanswered or denied. This had a considerable
effect on the access of the United Nations to specific locations with high severity of
need, including in eastern Ghouta, southwest Idlib and the southern part of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
28. Advocacy on the urgent deployment of additional humanitarian assistance to
Rukban continued at multiple levels during the reporting period. A humanitarian
convoy was allowed to proceed following verbal approval on 27 January by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and facilitation by the Russian Federation
and the United States. As at the end of January, the United Nations and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent were preparing to deploy the largest inter-agency aid convoy
implemented during the humanitarian operation in the Syrian Arab Republic,
involving some 133 trucks and 300 staff and volunteers. The convoy will deliver food,
medicines, medical equipment, cold weather items, shelter materials, dignity kits for
women and girls, and nutrition and education supplies. Staff will also continue the
vaccination programme launched during the previous convoy to Rukban, in
November, and carry out a survey of the intentions of internally displaced persons in
the site in order to support evidence-based planning on durable solutions for people
in the settlement in the longer term.
29. The provision of assistance along the route to Hawl camp, including at screening
sites, remains a critical priority, but access limitations and insecurity limited efforts
to respond to those most in need. Engagement and advocacy with parties in control
of the areas in question continued.
30. In the north-west, expansion of Levant Liberation Organization control over
most of Idlib Governorate and surrounding areas was not reported to have resulted in
a significant change in levels of humanitarian access, although incidents of
10/16

19-02510

S/2019/157

interference continued to be reported. Suspension of funding by some donors,
however, for stabilization and, in one instance, humanitarian activities linked to the
changes in control did result in reduced coverage of key services for civilians in some
areas. Overall, the suspension of funds was estimated to have affected 15 per cent of
medical consultations, with approximately 1,400 health workers, half of whom are
doctors, nurses and medical technicians, having had their salaries suspended.
Suspended funds were also reported to have been supporting the operating expenses
of 14 hospitals and 80 ambulances.
31. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as authorized under Security Council resolutions 2165
(2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016) and 2393 (2017). On 13 December
2018, Council resolution 2449 (2018) was adopted, extending authorization for crossborder humanitarian assistance operations for another year. During the reporting
period, the Mechanism monitored the delivery of 26 consignments by six United
Nations agencies, consisting of 837 trucks, from three border crossings: 13 from Bab
al-Hawa (635 trucks); 11 from Bab al-Salam (192 trucks); and 2 from Ya‘rubiyah (10
trucks). There were no concerns or questions about the humanitarian nature of the
consignments sent. The United Nations provided 48-hour notice to the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic regarding all shipments. The Mechanism continued to
benefit from the excellent cooperation of the Governments of Iraq, Jordan and Turkey.
Visas and registrations
32. The United Nations continues work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff (see table 4).
Table 4
Requests for United Nations visas: December 2018 and January 2019
Number
requested

Number
approved

Number rejected

Number pending

118

71

11

36

Renewals requested during reporting period

167

a

107

–

59

Visas pending from before reporting period

20

20

–

–

Renewals pending from before reporting period

59

59

–

–

Type of request

Visas requested during reporting period

a

One request for renewal was withdrawn by the United Nations.

33. A total of 24 international NGOs are registered with the Government to operate
in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
34. The United Nations and NGOs continued to implement programmes in areas
affected by frequent clashes among parties to the conflict, by air strikes and by the
regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and other attacks. Humanitarian relief
personnel also operate in areas highly contaminated with unexploded ordnance,
explosive remnants of war and landmines.
35. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including 22 staff members of the United Nations and
organizations of the United Nations system, 18 of whom were staff members of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA); 66 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8
staff members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. It is reported that
19-02510

11/16

S/2019/157

many staff members of international and national NGOs have also been killed. An
NGO staff member was abducted for ransom in Idlib Governorate in December 2018
and found dead several weeks later.
36. A total of 30 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (1 staff member of the United Nations Development Programme, 1 staff
member of the United Nations Population Fund and 28 staff members of UNRWA)
were detained or missing at the end of the reporting period.

III. Observations
37. With almost eight years having passed since the humanitarian crisis in the Syrian
Arab Republic began, some 11.7 million Syrians inside the country’s borders remain
in need of humanitarian assistance, while close to 5.7 million Syrian refugees have
been registered in the surrounding countries. The international community must
remain engaged in support of efforts to meet basic needs and ensure protection and,
ultimately, to find peaceful solutions to the conflict. The third Brussels Conference
on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, to be held from 12 to 14 March,
will be an opportunity to take stock of where progress has been made and to unite
behind key priorities for 2019. Syrian people, communities and civil society must be
at the centre of these efforts.
38. I am deeply alarmed by continuing reports of civilians being be killed and
injured by air strikes and ground fighting in eastern Dayr al-Zawr and of the appalling
conditions experienced by tens of thousands, mainly women, children and older
persons, who have been displaced from the area, having already endured
unimaginable suffering at the hands of ISIL. I urge all parties involved in military
operations in eastern Dayr al-Zawr, and throughout the country, to respect civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including schools and hospitals, and take all feasible
precautions to avoid harm to civilians. In addition, the parties should allow civilians
freedom of movement and must ensure that forcibly displaced persons are received
under satisfactory conditions of shelter, hygiene, health, safety and nutrition. The
parties must also facilitate the work of humanitarian organizations, including at any
screening or transit points along the route to the Hawl camp and within the camp
itself.
39. I welcome the progress made on deployment of a second convoy to Rukban,
where some 42,000 people continue to face appalling conditions and an alarming
shortage of essentials for survival. United Nations and Syrian Arab Red Crescent
teams were on the ground in the settlement by early February, delivering assistance
and vaccinating children. This, however, sadly came too late for at least eight children
who are reported to have died from preventable conditions at Rukban since December.
I reiterate that safe, rapid, unhindered and sustained humanitarian access is critical,
both for people in need in Rukban and throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. Lives
depend on it.
40. The situation in the north-west and north-east of the country has grown
increasingly uncertain during the current reporting period. Throughout Idlib and the
north-west, massive levels of need persist, and civilians are exposed to hostilities and
reportedly to a range of human rights abuses at the hands of the Levant Liberation
Organization and other non-State armed opposition groups. The extension of the
authorization by the Security Council of cross-border humanitarian assistance was
vital, given that it has enabled continued life-saving assistance, but the risk of military
escalation, and of potentially catastrophic humanitarian consequences, persists. I
appeal to all parties to maintain de-escalation efforts in the Idlib area and to ensure

12/16

19-02510

S/2019/157

that respect for international humanitarian law and human rights is at the centre of
efforts to address the challenging situation on the ground.
41. I remain concerned about the treatment and conditions of persons who are
detained by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic or by non -State armed
opposition groups throughout the country. I call upon all parties to ensure
fundamental guarantees for persons in their custody and to allow them to inform
family members of their detention.
42. Continuing impunity for alleged serious violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights violations and abuses by parties to the conflict remains of grave
concern. I call upon all parties to the conflict, in particular the Go vernment of the
Syrian Arab Republic, all States, civil society and the United Nations system to
cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to
Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011, in particular by providing relevant information and documentation.
Accountability for serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law is central to achieving sustainable peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate
my call for the situation in the country to be referred to the International Criminal
Court.
43. In view of ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to the
protection of civilians and other human rights concerns in the Syrian Arab Republic,
I strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with Human
Rights Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with OHCHR, including
through the establishment of a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote
human rights.
44. I strongly support the efforts of my Special Envoy to advance a United Nations facilitated, Syrian-led political process in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva Communiqué. Engagement of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the opposition and international support
will be essential to the sustainability of a negotiated political settlement. I welcome
my Special Envoy’s efforts to explore new entry points, including that of a credible,
inclusive and balanced constitutional committee, to advance the full implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015). Furthermore, I continue to call upon all parties to make
progress on advancing confidence-building measures, with a view to creating a
conducive environment in which a meaningful political process can emerge, one that
meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and can ultimately put an end to
the unimaginable suffering that the Syrian people have endured for far too many
years.

19-02510

13/16

S/2019/157

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: December
2018 and January 2019 *
Aleppo Governorate
• On 12 December, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonated near
a medical compound in the non-State armed opposition group-held city of I‘zaz
in northern rural Aleppo. Two civilians (1 woman and 1 twelve -year-old girl)
were killed and 19 other civilians, including 2 women, 2 girls and 3 boys, were
injured. The explosion was also reported to have resulted in significant material
damage.
• On 12 December, five civilians were injured as a result of an alleged explosion
of an improvised explosive device attached to a motorbike in a local market in
Ra‘i town of northern rural Aleppo.
• On 13 December, three civilian men were killed and at least four other civilians
injured as a result of an improvised explosive device reportedly attached to a
motorbike that exploded in the Nuwruz roundabout in the city of Afrin in
western rural Aleppo.
• On 16 December, four civilians were killed as a result of an attack with a
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device that detonated in the Al-Hal local
market in the city of Afrin. The explosion also resulted in significant material
damage.
• On 20 January, in the morning, three civilians were killed and seven others were
injured as a result of an alleged improvised explosive device detonation on a
bus transporting them near Saraya bridge in the city of Afrin in western rural
Aleppo.
• On 24 January, several improvised explosive device explosions reportedly
occurred in Bab city and in adjacent areas of Qabbasin and Ghandurah in
northern rural Aleppo, which is controlled by non-State armed opposition
groups. Improvised explosive devices attached to two motorbikes reportedly
detonated in the vicinity of the Centre roundabout area in Bab city and another
improvised explosive device detonated in a marketplace in the Qabbasin area.
At least one civilian was killed and three others were injured.
Idlib Governorate
• On 1 December, five civilians were injured as a result of what were alleged to
be ground-based strikes that hit a residential area in the village of Tah in the
Khan Shaykhun district of southern rural Idlib.
• On 2 December, Levant Liberation Organization gunmen abducted a medical
doctor at one of their checkpoints in the Dayr Hasan area of the Dana district of
northern Idlib. The doctor’s family was reportedly promised by the Levant
Liberation Organization that he would be released quickly, but his fate and
whereabouts remain unknown.
* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sourc es in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
14/16

19-02510

S/2019/157

• On 6 December, a civilian man was injured as a result of what was alleged to be
the explosion of an improvised explosive device attached to his vehicle in the
vicinity of the Idlib health directorate in Idlib city.
• On 10 December, three staff of the “Hama Health Department”, including its
head, were held by Levant Liberation Organization gunmen who raided their
office in the village of Kafr Nubl in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man district of southern
rural Idlib. One of the persons held was released the next day, while the other
two were released on 13 and 16 December, respectively.
• On 18 December, at least 30 displaced families from eastern Ghutah received
notices of eviction and were ordered by the Levant Liberation Organization to
appear before a Levant Liberation Organization “judge” to sign a pledge to
vacate houses that they had occupied in the village of Fu‘ah. While the displaced
families reportedly refused to vacate the houses until the end of winter, they
received a written eviction order on 25 December, signed and endorsed by the
so-called “Justice Ministry” of the so-called newly established Levant
Liberation Organization “Government of Salvation”.
• On 29 January, at least 11 civilians, including 1 wo man and 1 boy, were killed
and 9 other civilians injured as a result of alleged ground -based strikes by
government forces and their allies that hit several areas in the city of Ma ‘arrat
al-Nu‘man in southern rural Idlib Governorate. The first round of bomb ardment
reportedly hit a residential area and killed one boy, and the second round
followed 25 minutes later, hitting a busy local market (Bizir market), where the
majority of casualties were recorded.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 3 December, at least seven civilians, including one boy, were killed as a
result of what were alleged to be air strikes that hit a residential area in the
village of Albu Badran in Susah district of rural Albu Kamal area in eastern rural
Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 4 December, five civilians (three women and two children) were killed as a
result of what were alleged to be air strikes and ground -based strikes that hit a
warehouse, three houses and an area near Hajin hospital in the Hajin area of
eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 15 December, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) reportedly
executed two civilians (brothers) from Dhiban village in eastern rural Dayr
al-Zawr by shooting them in a desert area on accusations of cooperating with
the Syrian Democratic Forces.
• On 18 January, around noon, at least 21 civilians, including at least 1 woman
and 1 boy, were reportedly killed as a result of what were alleged to be air strikes
that hit the ISIL-held village of Baghuz Fawqani in the Sosah district of eastern
rural Dayr al-Zawr.
Hama
• On 15 December, one girl was injured as a result of alleged ground -based strikes
that hit a residential area in the city of Lataminah in northern rural Hama.
• On 16 December, a 12-year-old boy was injured while helping his father in an
agricultural land in the city of Lataminah as a result of unexploded ordnance
that detonated near him.
• On 22 December, a 10-year-old boy was killed and one civilian woman was
injured when Levant Liberation Organization gunmen opened fire at a minibus
19-02510

15/16

S/2019/157

transporting civilians along the Idlib-Bab al-Hawa highway. The Levant
Liberation Organization issued a statement confirming the incident and claimed
that it would pay compensation to the victims’ families.
• On 23 January, a girl was injured as a result of alleged ground -based strikes that
hit the town of Murak in northern rural Hama. In another incident, on
22 January, a 12-year-old girl was killed as a result of alleged ground-based
strikes that hit Kafr Zayta town in northern rural Hama.

16/16

19-02510
