General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

136

7. Expresses its appreciation to the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system for their assistance to Namibians and
requests them, in consultation with the United Nations
Council for Namibia, to give priority to the allocation
of funds for material assistance to the Namibian people;
8. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render
all necessary assistance to the United Nations Council
for Namibia in implementing its programme of work;
9. Calls upon all specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system-in particular the International Labour Organisation, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
the International Monetary Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research-to assist the
United Nations Institute for Namibia in all possible
ways, including the provision of specialists, lecturers
and researchers;
10. Expresses its appreciation of the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
assist Namibian refugees;
11. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be
eligible for assistance through the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa
and the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
12. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/152.

Observer status for the South West
Afrfra People's Organization

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Recognizing the crucial phase reached in the struggle
of the Namibian people and the added demands and
critical tasks imposed upon their liberation movement,
the South West Africa People's Organization,
Taking into consideration the report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia99 and the recommendations contained therein,1° 0
Reaffirming the resolutions and decisions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council concerning
the question of Namibia,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3111 (XXVIII)
of 12 December 1973, by which it recognized the South
West Africa People's Organization as the authentic
representative of the Namibian people,
Noting that the Organization of African Unity and
the non-aligned countries have recognized and invited
the South West Africa People's Organization to participate in their meetings in an observer capacity,
99 /bid., Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24).
100 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24),

and 273.

1. Invites the South West Africa People's Organization to participate in the sessions and the work of the
General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2. Invites the South West Africa People's Organization to participate in the sessions and the work of all
international conferences convened under the auspices
of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
3. Considers that the South West Africa People's
Organization is entitled to participate as an observer
in the sessions and the work of all international conferences convened under the auspices of other organs
of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps for the implementation of the present resolution and to accord all the facilities as may be required.
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/153.

Nationhood Programme for Namibia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which it decided to assume direct responsibility
for Namibia, as well as resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May
1967, by which it established the United Nations Council for Namibia to administer the Territory until its independence,
Aware of the decisive stage achieved in the struggle
of the Namibians for self-determination, freedom and
independence under the leadership of the South West
Africa People's Organization,
Recognizing that, by assuming direct responsibility
for Namibia, the United Nations and its Member States
have also assumed the responsibility of assisting the
people of Namibia morally and materially,
Recalling its resolution 2679 (XXV) of 9 December 1970, by which it decided to establish the United
Nations Fund for Namibia, as well as subsequent resolutions relating to the Fund,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Narnibia, 101
Welcoming the inauguration of the United Nations
Institute for Namibia at Lusaka,
Commending the steps taken by various specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies within the
United Nations system to provide assistance to Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to fulfil its responsibility
towards the people and Territory of Namibia,
1. Decides to launch, in suppon of the nationhood
of Namibia, a comprehensive assistance programme
within the United Nations system, covering both the
present period of struggle for independence and the
initial years of independence of Namibia and including:
(a) The review and planning of measures for assistance to Namibians by the specialized agencies and
other organizations and bodies within the United
Nations system;
( b) The consolidation of all measures in a comprehensive and sustained plan of action;
( c) The implementation of the plan of action;
2. Calls upon the United Nations Council for Namibia, as the Administering Authority of the Territory,

vol. I, paras. 272
101 /bid., Supplement No. 24

(A/31/24).
