c

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
lh

MEETING:

NEW

10 DECEMBER

1968

YORK

CONTENTS
Paby

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

459/Rev. 1)

, , .. . , . . . . , ., . .. ,. . . .. ...

Expression

of thanks to the retiring President

. ,. , . . . , . : .. . ,. .. . . .. ,. ,

1

Adoption

of the agenda

. . ., . , , .. , , . . . , . . . . . . , . . .. . .. ,. . , .. ...

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
addressed to tlze President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
(S/8914)
. . , , , . . . , *, . . , , . , . . . , . , . . . . . , , . . . . , . I.. . , . . . .

1

S/PV. 1459

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FIFTY-NINTH

Held in New York on Tuesday, 10 December

fiesident:

Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia).

The agenda was adopted.
letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the SecretafyGeneral on the United Nations
Operation in Cyprus (S/9914)

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 459/Rev.l)
Adoption of the agenda.

2.

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
tlhe Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cyprus (S/8914).

1968, at 10.30 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hun$;ary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

1.

MEETING

5. The PRESIDENT: Requests have been received’ from
the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece to be
invited to participate in the Council’s discussion this
morning. In accordance with the usual practice of the
Council, I propose now, with the consent of the,Council, to
invite those three representatives to take places at the
Council table in order to participate, without vote, in the
discussion.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

At the invitation of the President. Mr, Z. Rossides
(Qprus),
Mr. 0. Eralp (Turkey) and Mr. D. S. Bitsios
(Greece) took places at the Council table.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the usual
practice
of the Council, I should like to express to
Ambassador Borch of Denmark on behalf of all of us our
great appreciation for the courtesy, skill and tact with
which
he guided the work of the Security Council last
month while occupying the post of the President of the
Council. The standard he has set will be of great help to me
as I follow in his exemplary footsteps.

6. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now begin
its examination of the question on the agenda, in
connexion with which the S’ecretary-General has submitted
a report [S/8914]’
on the United Nations Operation in
Cyprus for the period from 8 June to 2 December 1968.
7. Pursuant to consultations which have been held among
the members of the Council, and in accordance with the
request of some of those members, a draft resolution has
been prepared, which I shall ask the Under-SecretaryGeneral to read out.

2. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): Mr, President, allow me to
thank you for the over-generous words you addressed to
me. Let me also state here and now how much I
appneciated the invaluable co-operation extended to me by
you
and other members of the Council during my
Presidency in the month of November.

8. Mr. KUTAKOV (Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Security Council Affairs): The text of the draft
resolution is as follows:

3. I wish also to congratulate you on your assumption of
the I?residency of the Council, Your profound knowledge
of the problems with which we are faced, your objectivity
and your unfailing courtesy: all those qualities are a
guar;mtee that with you in the Chair the conduct of the
affai.rs of the Security Council will be in the very best of
Izands, and I wish to assure you of the whole-hearted
co-operation
of the delegation of Denmark in your
endeavours.

“The Security Council,
“Noting from the report of the Secretary-General of
4 December 1968 (S/8914) that in the present circumstances the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus
is still needed if peace is to be maintained in the island,
‘Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that
in view of the prevailing conditions in the island it is
necessary to continue the Force beyond 15 December
1968,

4. The PRESIDENT: I should like to thank the
representative of Denmark for the very generous remarks he
has made with regard to me, and to assure him that the
sentiments he has expressed are fully reciprocated on my
part.

1 Offtcial Records of the SencrjtyCouncil,Twsnty4hirdYear,
Supplement
for October, November and December 1968.
1

‘Noting, from the observations in the report, the
encouraging recent developments in the island,

Greek compatriots without a single incident for nine
months now, the report points out that this is “an eloquent
demonstrationof the fact that the people of Cyprus desire
to live in peaceand harmony again and are able to do so”
(ibid., para.371.

“1. Reaffirms its resolutions 186 (1964) of 4 March,
187 (1964) of 13 March, 192(1964) of 20 June,
193 (1964) of9 August, I94 (1964) of 25 September and
198 (1964) of 18 December 1964, 201 (1965) of 19
March, 206 (1965) of 15 June, 207 (1965) of 10 August
and 219 (I965) of 17 December 1965, 220 (1966) of 16
March, 222 (1966) of 16 June and 231 (1966) of 15
December 1966, 238 (1967) of 19 June and 244 (1967)
of 22 December 1967, and 247 (1968) of 18 March and
254 (1968) of 18 June 1968, and the consensus expressed
by the President at the 1143rd meeting on 11 August
1964 and at the 1383rd meeting on 24 November 1967;

14. Also in his previous report the Secretary-General
noted with gratification “the easewith which ordinary
people of both communitieswere beginningto resumetheir
former amicablerelations” [S/8446, para. 142/. 2
15. The spirit of conciliation is a most essentialfactor for
the solutionof any problem. That spirit, I amglad to say, is
not lacking among the people >of Cyprus-Greek and
Turkish alike. It can produce its constructive results in
genuineco-operationtowards ajust and lastingsolution; for
indeed an enduringsolution and peacecan be achievedonly
through a senseof trust and a genuineco-operationfor the
commongoodin a commonand undivided homeland.

“2. Urges the parties concerned to act with the utmost
restraint and to continue deterpined co-operative efforts
to achieve the objectives of tpe Security Council by
availing themselves in a constructive manner of the
present auspicious climate and opportunities;

16. In such a political climate and in a unitary framework
freed from divisive concepts, progress in economic
co-operationcan flower and will be a most valuableassetto
all the people, particularly to the Turkish Cypriots. The
report pertinently speaksof the need for: “whole-hearted
economic co-operation” which “would result in a better
utilization of human and other resourcesand raisethe level
of living of the Turkish Cypriots” /S/8914, para. 521. In
that sense the Government Planning Commission is
speedingup the processof reconstructing the economy of
the Island.

“3. Extends once more the stationingi,nCyprusof the
United Nations Peace-keepingForce, establishedunder
Security Council resolution 186(1964), for a further
period ending 15 June 1969, in the expectation that by
then sufficient progresstowardsa final solutionwill make
possible a withdrawal or substantialreduction of the
Force.”

9. The PRESIDENT: A number of representativeshave
askedto speakbefore the vote. The first speakerinscribed
on my list is the representativeof Cyprus, on whom I now
call.

17. Further, referring to the political talks currently
taking placein Nicosia,the Secretary-Generalremarksthat
they are proceeding “with all earnestness” and he
commends“the patience, good will and statesmanship
displayed by the two negotiators and their principals”
[ibid., para. 871.

10. Mr. ROSSIDES(Cyprus): The Councilmeetsagainto
renew the mandateof the United NationsForce in Cyprus
on a note of hopefulness.The Secretary-General’s
report, a
lucid document, portrays with objectivity the prevailing
caIm and the continuing reIaxation of tensionin the Island.

18. However, the progressof the negotiations, depending
on a gradually growing mutual confidence, requires time.
These negotiations cannot be unduly hastened without
being impaired. We follow the talks with reserved but
positive optimism. It is our hope that they may yield
constructive resultspaving the way to a just and workable
solution of the problem. There is an earnestdesirein the
hearts of all Cypriots that the talks may lead to an
honourable and lasting settlement of the problem SO that
the people of the Island as an integrated whole may go
forward together on the road of peace towards the
achievementof their ccmmon progressand welfare.

11. A policy of good will and conciliation which my
Government initiated by unilaterally lifting all restrictions
on the movement of personsand goodsin and out of the
enclaves is, in the words of the report, “scrupulously
adhered to” [S/8914, para,461. And it is continued with
sincerity of purpose. We hope that it will bring a positive
responsefrom the other sideby a correspondinglifting of
the restrictions in the enclaves,so that a mutual and
growing trust through communication may create the
atmospherepropitious to further rapprochementtowardsa
just solution.
12. As the Secretary-Generalremarksin hisreport:
“ . . . There are also many signsthat the renewal of
contacts betweenGreek and Turkish Cypriots is spreading
from the grassroots to higherlevels,tendingto bridgethe
communication gap that has existed sincethe beginning
of 1964 . . .” /ibid., para. 381.

19. The solution must be one freely accepted by the
peopledirectly concerned,asthe peopleof a fully sovereign
and independentcountry, a Member of the United Nations;
and, in order that the solution may be soundand enduring,
it must be firmly basedon the principles of justice, unity
and freedom, as expressedin the Charter and spelledout in
the relevant resolutionsof the General AssembIy and the
Security Council on Cyprus.
20. As the report pertinently remarks, when there is the
will of the parties concerned to co-operate and compose

13. Referring to the freedom of movement within the
Government-controlled areasof the Turkish Cypriots living
in the enclavesand their friendly interminglingwith their

2 Ibid., Supplemenr

2

for

Jarmary, February and March 1968.

.
their differences the Organization can be of great assistance.
The moral authority of the United Nations on these matters
is of tremendous importance. We are indeed grateful for the
assistance it 11~ brought and is bringing to the situation h
~ypras and the solution of the problem. We deeply
appreciate the good offices of the Secretary-General,
whether exercised here or in Cyprus through his Special
Reprf:sentatiVC,
Mr. Osorio-Tafilll.

Cypriot compatriots for more than four years, have now
been moving among Greek Cypriots for some tine
months without a single significant intercommunal
incident-an eloquent demonstration of the fact that the
People of Cyprus desire to live in peace and harmony
again and are able to do so” [ibid., para. 371.
27. These are encouraging findings, which are a source of
satisfaction. They are particularly gratifying to my
delegation, since the Greek Government has constantly
sought to bring about such a relaxation of tensions which
alone, we believe, will enable the parties immediately
concerned to engagein fruitful co-operation,

21. I take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General, whose firm and abiding concern for
peace, justice and human
solidarity under the Charter have
been reflected in all his actions. WC are profoundly grateful
for his patient efforts towards a just solution of the
difficult problem of Cyprus. We also wish to place on
record our deep appreciation for the important contributions of the members of his staff both here and in Cyprus,
and particularly the Under-Sccrctaries, Mr. Bunche and
Mr, Rolz+Bennett. I would make special mention of the
consistent and dedicated endeavours of Mr. Osorio-Tafall,
whose diplomatic efficiency and tact have greatly
contributed to the recent developments and the good
results achieved SO far in the Island. We should also like to
exprass to General Murtola our profound esteem for his
efficient command of the United Nations Force, rendering
it an example of the effective and beneficial results a
United Nations peace-keeping force is able to achieve.

28. AS to the talks themselves, the Secretary-General
states that they are proceeding in all earnestness and that
the parties are engaged in a determined effort to emerge
from the deadlock.
29. At the same time, I have no intention of minimizing
the difficulties in the way of a solution. To do so would be
to flout realities. As I told the Council in June, time,
patience and above all perseverance would be needed. This
is still true today. The Secretary-General himself reminds us
that no break-through on fundamental issues has yet been
announced and that the conversations are bound to
continue for some time. Nevertheless, the desired goal is so
important that, in our view, no patience or perseverance
can be too great or sustained too long.

22. In conclusion, our appreciation and grateful thanks go
to those countries whose valuable contributions in military
contingents and in funds has rendered possible the United
Nations peace-keeping operations in Cyprus.

30. The Greek Government has from the outset declared
itself in favour of negotiations between the leaders of the
two parties. It has encouraged and will continue to
encourage this very promising step, in which it has always
placed its hopes. We believe that all our efforts must be
directed towards ensuring that these talks lead to a practical
and constructive
result
for the future. We therefore share
the view that the Security Council can today make a very
effective and decisive contribution to the attainment of this
goal by extending the mandate of the Force for the period
of six months recommended by the Secretary-General.

23. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Greece, to whom I now give the floor.
24. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (tmdated f,am Frunclz): Last
June [1$3,&d nzeetirg/, we met round this table to deal
with the question of the extension of the mandate of
UNFICYP for a period of six months, which is now about
to expire, I am sure that we all remember that the last
extension was decided upon
aFter a short debate
characterized by calm and moderation, and by a spirit of
reasoned optimism. There were two reasons for this: the
first was that Cyprus was fortunately passing through a
periosd of tranquillity broken by very few incidents; the
second was that negotiations had begun between Greek and
Turkish Cypriots in an endeavour to arrive at an agreement
on the problems which had so long divided the Island.

t

/

,

/
I

i
/

31. It is, of course, impossible at this point to predict the
results of the contacts among the Cypriots. One thing is
certain, however, and that is that the chance of success
remains. The parties concerned must not allow that chance
to elude them or to diminish. The Security Council will
enhance it by extending the mandate.
32. I have already said that, on the whole, the situation in
Cyprus has recently improved, as the Secretary-General has
pointed out. His personal contribution to this improvement
is deserving of the highest praise. U Thant has unceasingly
devoted his time and efforts to the problem of Cyprus. He
has done and is continuing to do everything in his power to
bring about a just and peaceful solution. We are profoundly
grateful to him. Our thanks also go to his collaborators,
Mr. Ralphe Bunche and Mr. Rolz-Bennett, whose experience and skill have been repeatedly apparent in this
development.

25. Today, six months later, let us set what headway has
since been made and what is the present situation in
Cyprus.
26. On these two points, we find much light in the report
of the Secretary-General which states:
“I am glad to be able to inform the Council that
intercommunal relations in Cyprus have continued to
improve during the last six months and this has
contributed to creating a favourable atmosphere for the
political talks that are now taking place in Nicosia. The
Tu.rlcish Cypriots living in the enclaves, who had been
more or less cut off from contact with their Greek

33. Mr. Osorio-Tafall, the Special Representative in
Cyprus, deserves a special tribute for his valiant efforts. We
are deeply impressed by the constancy and tenacity with
3

’ i

which he has upheld the cause of pacification in Cyprus. A
similar tribute should be paid to General Martola, the Force
Commander,
for his tireless labour and devotion to a
difficult and onerous task.

owe a debt of gratitude to our able Secretary-General and
his immediate collaborators,
as well as his Special
Representative in Cyprus, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, and the
Commander of the UNFICYP, General Martola, whose
untiring efforts have helped the warring factions to return
to the path of reason. Nor could all this have been achieved
without the unstinting aid of the contributing countries
which have brought manpower and financial support, We
give them our whole-hearted thanks.

34. Before concluding, I should like to say how much my
Government appreciates the spirit of solidarity displayed by
the countries which maintain contingents in the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus or are making
material contributions
to the Force. We hope that the
voluntary
contributions
will be continued and even
increased and expanded, in view of the substantial deficit
referred to in the report, My country intends, as in the past,
to contribute generously to the expenses of the Force, in
the belief that that body is carrying out a task of
inestimable value to the cause of peace. The United
Nations, which has had its share of disappointments in
recent years, has grounds for pride in the work of the
Force.
35. The PRESIDENT:
Turkey.

39. Finally, I feel it a duty to express to the Governments
directly concerned with the problem our appreciation for
the restraint and patience which they have shown in these
last few months. It is our earnest wish that we may all
proceed with this purposeful endeavour to crown a most
successful United Nations effort of peace-keeping with an
achievement in peace-making
40. Mr. MENDELEVICH
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I should first like to
express our gratitude to Mr. Borch, the representative of
Denmark, for the competence with which he directed the
work of the Security Council as its President for the month
of November. We now wlecome the President for the
month of December 1968, who is a distinguished
representative of one of the most ancient countries of
Africa, a country which has always stood out as a beacon of
independence in the African continent.

I now call on the representative of

36. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): I have asked to speak merely in
order to express thanks. There is not much that can be said
here and at this stage which could contribute to the
peaceful solution of the Cyprus problem. The report of the
Secretary-General is, as usual, comprehensive and objective.
The sense of cautious optimism which it reflects is fully
shared by my Government, It would therefore be wise to
allow the exploratory intercommunal talks which are now
in progress to continue without injecting any external
elements. It would also be advisable to continue to
maintain on the Island an atmosphere of tranquillity and to
do everything possible to avoid incidents. For that reason,
we are gratified to note that the Secretary-General has
strongly urged that the mandate of UNFICYP be extended
for a period of six months. That will give the negotiations a
chance to proceed without undue haste and pressure. After
all, a few months of grace is not too much to ask when the
two communities on the Island are endeavouring to lay the
foundations of, we hope, many centuries of living together
in peace, security and independence. For the same reason,
we have noted with pleasure the intention of the
Secretary-General
to maintain the present force and
effectiveness of the UNFICYP.

41. The Soviet Union’s position on the Cyprus question is
well known. It has been repeatedly explained in statements
of the Soviet Government and in those of its representatives
in various bodies, including the Security Council. In
connexion with the present renewed discussion of the
Cyprus question in the Security Council, the Soviet
delegation considers it necessary to reaffirm that that
position retains its full force and significance.
42. The Soviet Union’s position was, and is, based on the
view that the question of Cyprus must and can be settled
by peaceful means, in the interests of the Cypriot people,
including both its constituent national communities, and in
the interests of a relaxation of tension in the eastern
Mediterranean. The Soviet Union firmly supports the
Cypriots’ struggle for the complete independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus,
which is a full Member of the United Nations and pursues
in its international relations a policy of peace and
non-alignment with military blocs.

37. To the intercommunal talks on the Island my
Government has always lent its blessing, its encouragement
and when necessary, its help. We shall continue to do so.
We believe that at this stage it is best to allow the
representatives of the two communities to work out the
structure
of the State of Cyprus and its political
institutions.
Once that is achieved we maintain the hope
that it may serve as a basis for a definitive understanding
among all the parties concerned, so that the Island of
Cyprus may cease to be a trouble-spot in the eastern
Mediterranean and begin to reap the fruits of progress and
prosperity which are in store for it,

43. The settlement of the domestic problems of the
Republic of Cyprus is a matter for the Cypriots themselves;
they must settle their domestic affairs themselves without
external intervention. The legitimate rights of the Greek
and Turkish communities of Cyprus must be fully respected
by everyone.
44. The Soviet Union categorically opposes any attempts
to infringe the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus, any
plans-and these are not alien to the thinking of Certain
States-to resolve, the Cyprus question behind the back of
the Cypriot people, to the detriment of its basic interests
and for the benefit of the imperialist designs of certain
States members of NATO. We categorically oppose all

38. We have come a long way from the years of strife,
bloodshed and impending calamity. We may now be seeing
the light at the end of the tunnel. For this we have many
personalities and Governments to thank. Principally, we
4

-

r

atte:mpts to subordinate the fate of the Cypriot people to
military plans in the
the furtherance of NATO’s
Mediterranean.

the British Empire. In all such questions, one can now also
see the hand of NATO and of those Powers which play a
leading part in that military alliance,

45. The Soviet delegation notes from the SecretaryGeneral’s report that negotiations are now proceeding in
Cyprus between the representatives
of the Greek and
Turkish communities with a view to resolving th.e problems
of tlheir mutual relations. The representative of Cyprus has
just spoken of these negotiations in hopeful terms. We wish
every success to the participants in the talks between the
two communities which make up the people of the
Republic of Cyprus, Our position is that these talks are a
dom.estic concern of the Republic of Cyprus.

51. All countries which genuinely cherish the interests of
freedom and security of the peoples must draw the logical
conclusions from the lessons taught them by the
colonialists’ policy. They must make every effort to thwart
the plans for settling international problems behind the
backs of the peoples, to the advantage of imperialist
interests.

I

I

_

52. This is why the Soviet delegation considers it
necessary to emphasize once more its deep conviction that,
if the independence and integrity of the Republic of Cyprus
is to be fully ensured, all foreign troops must be withdrawn
from its territory, and the foreign military bases there must
be dismantled.

46. The participants in the talks between the two
communities
of Cyprus clearIy
have to surmount
considerable difficulties on the way to their designated
goal. These difficulties, like the difficulties in the way of a
solution of the Cyprus question as a whole, are a
consequence of eighty years’ domination of Cyprus by
foreign colonialists, who sought to suppress the liberation
struggle of the Cypriots by the well-tried colonialist method
of “(divide and conquer”.

53. The Soviet delegation would also like to point out
that, under the Security Council resolution 11861 of
4 March 1964, all StatesMembersof the United Nationsare
required to refrain from any action likely to worsenthe
situation in Cyprus. This means,in particular, that it is
necessaryto ensurea peacefulatmospherein the regionof
Cyprus, and in the whole Mediterraneanregion.The Soviet
Union, for its part, is doing everythingin its powerto turn
the Mediterraneaninto a “seaof peace”.

47. As we know, the General Assembly discussed the
Cyp.rus question at its sessions for a number of years until,
finally, the United Kingdom was obliged to agree to the
proc.lamation of an independent Republic of Cyprus on
1 August 1960. However, before proceeding to that step,
the United Kingdom imposed on Cyprus one-sided
agrelements for the retention on the Island of United
Kingdom military bases, for the siting of which the Cypriot
people was deprived of very fertile land.

54. Today the Security Council has before it the
Secretary-General’s
report on the United Nationsoperation
in Cyprusfor the period 8 Juneto 2 December1968,which
recommendsin paragraph90 that the stationing of the
United Nations Force in Cyprusshouldbe extendedfor a
further period of six months.

48. While the United Kingdom colonialists sought to use
intercommunity strife in Cyprus-strife
they themselves had
instigated-as their main tool for strengthening United
Kingdom rule during the period of the Cypriots’ struggle
for independence, the policy of the leading circles of the
NATO bloc is now wholly concerned with aggravating the
relations between the Turkish and Greek communities on
Cyprus, their aim evidently being to take advantage of the
disturbed situation on the Island to turn it into an
“unsinkable nuclear rocket carrier” of the North Atlantic
milil:ary alliance.

55. In this connexion we are bound to draw attention to
the fact that it is now over four years sincethe United
Nations Force arrived in Cyprus.It cannot be regardedas
normal that it should have remainedin Cyprus so long.
Although the Soviet delegationis not now raisingthe
question of the withdrawal of the United NationsForce
from Cyprus, it expresses
the hope,that its stationingthere
will be brought to an endin the nearfuture.
56. We should also like to state very clearly and
categorically that, shouldany Statetry to establishanylink
between the scale of the United Nations operation in
Cyprus and the measures
which the Soviet Union is taking
asa Black SeaPower, andhenceasa MediterraneanPower,
to strengthen peace in the Mediterranean region-and
certain reports in imperialistpropagandaorgansrecently
suggestthat certain parties would not be averseto airing
such an idea, if it may be so described-if, we repeat,
matters were to move in that direction, the Soviet Union
would obviously have no alternativebut to considerthe
whole situation in a newlight.

49. This is precisely why the Cyprus question has thus far
remained constantly on the Security Council’s agenda-in
the same way, incidentally, as certain other questions, such
as that of Southern Rhodesia, which is an unusual legacy
bequeathed to the international community by the United
Kingdom colonialists when the British Empire collapsed
under the blows of the national liberation movements.
50. The United Kingdom representatives in various United
Nations organs often refer to the alleged benefits conferred
by the United Kingdom on the peoples of its former
emp.ire. But in order to see the situation as it really’& one
need only take a glance at the agenda of the United Nations
organs, It is quite legitimate to say that more than half of
all the international conflicts with which the United
Nations is called upon to deal were engendered by United
Kingdom colonialism during the period of the collapse of

57. With regard to the draft resolutionsubmittedfor the
considerationof the Security Council,the Soviet delegation
considersit necessary,first of all, to point out that this
proposalconfirms Security Council resolution186(1964)
of 4 March 1964, as well as the other decisionsof the
Council on the Cyprusquestion.
5

position. The Presidentis given few weaponsof defence,
Perhapsthe Ambassadorof Denmark will permit me to
quote from Hamlet, Prince of Denmark. These words of
Shakespearemight well be remembered by dl our
Presidents:

58. And although. from the outset the Soviet Union has
considered the stationing of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus to be unwarranted and still adheres to that view, it
will not obstruct the extension of the stationing of that
Force in Cyprus for a further period of six months, in view
of the fact that such an extension corresponds to the wishes
of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus and the other
interested parties. This is, of course, subject to the
unqualified condition that this extension is effected in full
accordance with the provisions of the aforementioned
Security Council resolution of 4 March 1964, so that the
present functions of the United Nations Force in Cyprus
are maintained as well as the existing mode of financing
it, i.e. on a voluntary basis.

“Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice;
Take eachman’scensure,but reservethy judgment.”
(Hamlet, Act 1, sceneIII.)
6.5. With those words of affectionate greeting and
respectful guidanceI turn to explain the vote I cast just
now when the resolutionwas adoptedunanimously.
66. We have very good reason to be grateful to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/8914] and for his
unfailing influence for good. No one, I think, would ever
accusethe Secretary-Generalof being recklesslyoptimistic
when he reports to us on disputesand conflicts. We know
that he is never complacent. I sometimeswish that I could
imitate and emulate his calm detachment and his
unassailable
impartiality.

59. The PRESIDENT: I should like to thank the
representative of the Soviet Union for the very generous
references he made to my country and to myself.
60. There are no other representatives who wish to speak
before the Security Council proceeds to vote on the draft
resolution. I therefore now put the draft resolution to the
vote. The text was read out a little while ago by the
Under-Secretary-General.

67. In presentinghis latest report to us a few days agohe
had allowed himself to speak with confidence and hope
and, knowing his wise restraint, we cannot disguise our
delight that he should be able to report to us with such
encouragement.I cannot rememberhow many times we
have met in this Council in recent years to consider the
situation in Cyprus. We have often been despondent and
alwaysanxious as we have done so. It hasbeen many years
sincewe could say, asthe Secretary-Generalhassaid to us
now, that “the last six months havebeengood for peacein
Cyprus” [ibid., para. 871. Such wordsare musicin our ears,
and so were the wiseand salutary and encouragingspeeches
to which we have listened from the representativesof
Cyprusand Greeceand Turkey this morning.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 3
61. The PRESIDENT: 1 shall now call upon those
representatives who have asked to address the Council after
the vote. The first speaker on my list is the representative
of the United Kingdom.
62. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): First let me
pause, Sir, to pay my respects to you and to extend my
congratulations on your Presidency of our Council. In my
own Parliament we sometimes hear it said that a member is
a good House of Commons man. It is a phrase known from
the days of William Pitt to those of Winston Churchill. It is
used to pay tribute to a member who is jealous of the rules
and traditions and reputation of the House, and devoted to
the cause of making the House an effective instrument in
the service of democracy. Similarly here at the United
Nations we well know that the best ambassadors are those
who are not merely carrying out their national instructions
but are also constantly concerned to make the United
Nations an effective instrument-an
instrument in the
service of international understanding and international
co-operation and international development, So to you, Sir,
I can pay no higher compliment than to say that we honour
you as a good United Nations man. In that role your
fairness and your courtesy and your devotion have earned
our respect and our admiration.

68. I only wish I could say the sameof the speech to
which we have just listened from the representative of the
Soviet Union. It seemsto me a pity that on this occasion,
when we are so much in agreement,he should have felt it
necessaryto introduce such a discordantnote. The fact is,
unfortunately, that he feels it isincumbent upon him to be
belligerent on the most pacific occasion. He made
allegationswhich I do not think we shallseekto or needto
reply to here today. It would be bet.ter if the sectionsof his
speechto which I refer were happily forgotten and we
could continue to pursue our purpose. Our purpose is to
reachthe maximum agreementand to encouragethe effort
which is now being madefor a peaceful settlement of the
problemsof Cyprus which have been before us for so Iong.
69. I am surethat the Secretary-Generalwould be the first
to agreethat there are real difficulties still to be overcome
and serious dangersto be avoided, But there are solid
reasonswhich can reinforce the hope we now begin to feel.

63. The same can be said of your predecessor, the
Ambassador of Denmark, for he, too, with his dedibated
perseverance and his steadiness of judgement has well
qualified for the title of a good United Nations man.

70. Not least amongstthose reasonsis the part played by
the United Nations Force, which hasnever flaggedor failed
in its peace-keepingduties. It was good to read in the
Secretary-General’sreport that;

64. I need not remind you that the Presidency of this
Council is not an enviable eminence. It is a very exposed

“The over-all discipline, understandingand bearing of
the officers and men of the United Nations Force have

‘3 See resolution 261 (1968).

6

continued to be of a high order, and reflect great credit
on the contingent commanders, their staffs and the armed
forces of the contributing countries” [ibid., para. Id/.

found, and we recognize that what is needed now is a
period of unimpededstability to allow the communaltalks
to go forward to success.

We s:zlute all who serve in the Force under their fine
Commander, General Martola. They honourably discharge
their duty and set an example of international co-operation
in the field which earns the admiration of everyone.

77. I amhappy therefore to confirm that my Government.
will support a further extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Force as recommendedin the resolution
which we have just passed.We are prepared to continue to
provide our troop contingent, which is the largestmilitary
contingent in the Force, at its present strength for the
period of the renewed mandate, and we shall continue to
pay for its full cost.

71. lilnother most valuable asset in the progress to
peaceful settlement is the quality of the Secretary-General’s
Speciial Representative in the Island, Ambassador OsorioTafall. I speak very respectfully of all concerned, and with
some experience, when I say that to deal with Cypriot
leaders calls for the highest capacities of patient
diplomacy-and in that general compliment I include, most
certainly, the Ambassador of Cyprus-and I can think of no
one more capable of matching their skill than Ambassador
Osorilo-Tafall, who brings to his mission such steadiness and
such confidence and such persistence.

78. In addition, we are ready to make a voluntary
financialcontribution of 2.312,500 sterling towards the cost
of the Force during the next quarter beginning on 16
December,That will bring our total contribution towards
the cost of the Force, since it wasfirst established,to just
over $20 million.
79. The contribution we have made
. . and continue to make
givesus confidenceto express the hope that others who
have not so far made contributions will come forward to
assist in this joint United Nations endeavour. The
Secretary-Generalhas pointed out in his report that the
financial situation in regard to the United Nations Force is
not improving. In spite of recent reductions in the size of
the Force the heavy deficit remainsserious,It is a reproach
to the United Nations that we the Members fail to give to
the Secretary-Generalthe financial meansto carry out the
task which by our votes-all our votes-we have required
him to undertake.

72. 14t the same time we know very well that whatever
assistance comes from outside and whatever help is
forthcoming from those who wish Cyprus well, the solution
of the problems of the Island must come not from without
but from within. Salvation from the animosity of the past
must come from the good will and the good sense of the
people of Cyprus. I was long enough in Cyprus to know
that they have good will and good sense and good humour
in good measure.
73. So it is that while we believe that Greece and Turkey
and the United Nations and the countries which support
the United Nations endeavour can make a contribution to
the maintenance of peace, it is the people of the Island
themselves who must resolve to escape from the bitterness
and bloodshed of the past. They must work out for
themselves in mutual trust and respect a way of life for the
future which will bring permanent peace and prosperity to
an island blessed with so much natural beauty and so much
human capacity.

80. Finally, I should say that while we support the
recommendationof the Secretary-Generalfor the extension
of the mandate of the Force for a further period of six
months, we were ourselves inclined to favour a shorter
period. We are prepared to accept and support the
recommendationfor an extension of six months in the
hope and on the understanding that every effort will be
madeto pursuethe promising advancealready begunwith a
full sense
of urgency.

74. That is why we have so much welcomed the reports of
the ta.lks which have taken place in Nicosia during the past
six months between Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktash,
outstandingly able representatives of their communities. We
are anxious to see the momentum of those talks maintained
and indeed increased, and we are glad that they are to be
resumled early in the new year. All of us wish these leaders
well, and all of us realize how much depends on their
efforts based, I am sure, on full sincerity of purpose and on
equal determination to succeed.

81. It is becausewe are so greatly concerned that the
momentum of the efforts to find a sound basisfor a
permanentsettlement should not be lost but should be
acceleratedthat we considered that it would be well to set a
shorter period than six months. And it is for that reason
that in companywith some other delegationswe think that
it would be valuableif the Secretary-Generalwould submit
a report in three months’ time on the progressachieved.
Our view at present is that a report after three months
would bemorelikely to hasten than hinder negotiations. So
we trust that the Secretary-General will be good enoughto
bearthat possibilityin mind.

75. I said that all of ussowish, and with referenceto what
was said to us just now by the representativeof the Soviet
Union I would repeatthat every country, in my belief and
to my knowledge,is anxious to encourageand to promote a
peaceful settlementin Cyprus-just asI hope andtrust that
every country wishes to ensure that the Mediterranean
should remaina seaof peace.

82. We believe that conditions now exist which should
makeit possibleto go forward to a lasting settlement, and
we pray that thesefavourable opportunities will not be lost.
83. The PRESIDENT: I am sure my predecessorjoins me
in expressingto Lord Caradon our very sinceregratitude for
the very friendly, very eloquent and very generouswords he
addressed
to us.

76. ‘While others are ready to help, my Government is
prepared to continue to play a full part in creating
conditions in which a peacefulandlastingsettlementcanbe
7

i

”

84. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): May I at the outset thank the
representatives of the Soviet Union and the United
Kingdom for the generous words, that they have addressed
to me. May I perhaps, with your permission, Mr. President,
be allowed, in the light of the United Kingdom
representative’s remarks about me personally, to tell him
that one of my great experiences during my participation in
the deliberations of the Council has been the collaboration
and co-operation with the British Mission and in particular
with its chief, whose energy, imagination and resourcefulness are an always available source of strength to us, but
above all whose belief in the United Nations is an example
to us all.
85. Turning now to the question of Cyprus I should like
to say, in the words of the Secretary-General, that “the last
six months have been good for peace in Cyprus”. Those are,
as I have said, the words employed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report which is now before the Council, and I
can think of no better wayiof summing up the situation
than as it is described in that report. In the period covered
by the report [5’/8914/, that is from 8 June to 2 December
1968, there has been no bloodshed, nor has there been one
serious incident. On the contrary, the emphasis seems at
last to be shifting from military confrontation
to
negotiation, and the parties are engaged in a determined
effort to emerge from the deadlock resulting from the
positions adopted in the past.
86. Such a trend was already perceptible when the Council
dealt with the question of Cyprus in March and June of this
year. Its further course has certainly been most gratifying,
particularly against the background of the agonies, the
tragedies and the bitterness which have afflicted Cyprus for
so long.

87. In the present circumstances the task of the United
Nations is to offer the best possible assistance to the parties
in order to preserve and develop the existing momentum,
and to consolidate and accelerate the progress already
achieved. In this respect the good offices of the
Secretary-General, through his Special Representative in
Cyprus, are of the greatest importance and we wish once
more to commend the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Osorio-TafaII, for their untiring efforts,
and to assure them of our full support in their future
endeavours.
88. Of the greatest *importance also is the continued
presence of UNFICYP in Cyprus. It offers an assurance to
the parties that an atmosphere conducive to the
negotiations now initiated may be allowed to prevail. In
this connexion we wish to commend also the Force
Commarider, General Martola, for the excellent manner in
which he is performing his difficult task.
89. From the report of the Secretary-General, as well as
from other sources, we realize that even though there has
been progress in the intercommunal talks there has as yet
been no break-through and that the talks are bound to
continue for some time. We trust however that the parties
will pursue with determination their earnest efforts towards
a solution of the complicated problem of Cyprus, and we
therefore accept the strong recommendation by the

Secretary-General that the stationing of UNFICYP in
Cyprus be extended for a further period of six months,
until 1.5 June 1969. My delegation consequently voted in
favour of the resolution just adopted by the Security
Council.
90. Mr. IGNATIEFF
(Canada): Mr. President, before
making a brief statement in explanation of vote, may I on
behalf of the Canadian delegation express’my most sincere
satisfaction that you, a most distinguished and outstanding
man of the United Nations-as YOU have so rightly been
called-should be presiding over our affairs, and may I also
express our indebtedness to your predecessor, the most
competent and able Ambassador of Denmark. Shakespeare
has already been quoted. It’is he who first talked about
“gilding the lily”. I would not wish to improve on
Shakespeare, but I should like to say that there are no two
colleagues whose comradeship I have more valued in two
years of service than yours, Sir, and your predecessor’s,
91. In reading the Secretary-General’s report on the
situation in Cyprus I think we were all struck by the
contrast between the present situation and the one existing
just a year ago. The clouds of conflict seem to be receding,
to be replaced by a brighter and more hopeful atmosphere
in which co-operation and conciliation are, as several
speakers have mentioned, beginning to come into play. The
Government of Canada warmly welcomes the continuing
relaxation of tension and the gradual normalization of life
in the Island.
92. We know that the best hopes for an eventual
settlement now seem to rest with the intercommunal talks,
My delegation hopes that the existing patience, good will
and statesmanship being displayed by the two negotiaters
and their principals will continue and enable the deadlock
of the past finally to be overcome.
93. Meanwhile it is the Secretary-General’s view, which
my delegation fully respects, that the stationing of
UNFICYP should be extended for a further period of six
months until 15 June 1969; and, of course, we note and
respect the views of the three Governments most directly
concerned, which have signified their agreement to that
recommendation. The recommendation is apparently based
primarily on the consideration that the intercommunal
talks, while promising, will require further time before
tangible results can be realistically expected, and that it is
therefore important not to disturb the momentum of these
talks earlier than necessary. My delegation appreciates the
validity of this approach while still believing that the
Security Council has a responsibility to keep itself informed
and alert to developments in Cyprus, whether of a positive
or of a negative kind, which may have a bearing on the
achievement of a settlement. While wishing the intercommunal talks well, with previous experience in the area
in mind we realize that there are no grounds for
complacency.
94. The Canadian delegation accordingly believes that the
submission by the Secretary-General of an interim repoti
would be a useful additionalstep for him to take, according
to his judgement and in the light of the prevailing
circumstances, after approximately another three months

have passed. The exact timing of such a report would, of
course, depend on the situation in the Island, particularly in
respect of the intercommunal talks. But by means of such
a report, the members of the Security Council, and indeed
all interested Member States, could learn of the progress
made and have, a clearer idea of the prospects for the
future, including the future of UNFICYP. I for one would
welcome any comments on this suggestion which the
Secretary-General himself may wish to make,

country which he represents, its civilization, its past and its
history. Our personal experience has also acquainted us
with the qualities he has brought to all his work in the
United Nations and we are sure that, under his presidency,
the Council’s work will proceed in a propitious, calm and
satisfactory atmosphere.
100. The Security Council has just decided to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus for a further six months. The French delegation
would like to explain briefly the significance of its vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

95. Canada, which has been a major participant in
UNFICYP from the outset, takes considerable satisfaction
from the Secretary-General’s observations regarding the
continued usefulness and admirable performance of the
Force. We welcome the fact that improving conditions in
the Island have made possible a reduction in the Force,
noting the Secretary-General’s assurance that this reduction
has not affected “the efficiency of the Force in carrying
out its mandate” (ibid., para. 71. The deficit, however, in
UNFICYP’s budget continues to be of alarming proportions-a matter which might be taken particular note of by
Member States which have so far had no occasion to
contribute either men or money to UNFICYP.

101. My delegation took note with satisfaction of the
Secretary-General’s latest report. The encouraging prospects
which took shape in Cyprus six months ago have in fact
been confirmed during the period that has just elapsed by
the absence of any serious incident, The improvement in
the relations between the two communities cannot but help
to create an atmosphere conducive to the political talks
now taking place at Nicosia.
102. On the other hand, despite the results already
achieved on the road to a solution, we have to note, with
the Secretary-General, that no breakthrough on fundamental issues has yet been announced. That is nevertheless
the objective which we must untiringly pursue, no matter
how convenient it may be to prolong an arrangement that is
essentially provisional.

96. In conclusion I should like, of course, to extend our
warmest thanks to the Secretary-General; to his UnderSecretaries, Mr. Bunche and Mr. Rolz-Bennett; and to
Mr. Osorio-Tafall and General Martola for the important
work they are doing on behalf of a peaceful settlement in
Cyprus. Since Canada is leaving the Security Council at the
end of this year and this is likely to be the last occasion on
which I shall be in a position to speak on this subject in the
Council, I should like also to take the opportunity to pay a
most sincere tribute to the officers and men of UNFICYP
for the excellent work they have done since the Force was
established in March 1964. UNFICYP has indeed in a
number of ways been a model peace-keeping operation and
we can learn much from its experience in considering the
future of United Nations peace-keeping. UNFICYP is an
enterprise of which the United Nations has really good
reason to be proud as a significant contribution to peace,
and Canadians are proud of the officers and men of the
Canadian Armed Forces who have taken part and still take
part in this Force in Cyprus.

103. The French delegation did not object to a further
limited extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus within the framework of the
resolution [186] of 4 March 1964. In our view it would be
desirable to prepare to end these periodic extensions of the
mandate of the Force or at least to provide for a substantial
reduction in its size. The parties concerned must be aware
that there is now a pressing need to reach agreement.
104. It was in this spirit that the French delegation voted
in favour of the draft resolution which has just been
unanimously adopted.
105. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I should
like to thank the representative of France for his statement
and for the very kind words which he addressed to me and
also to my predecessor.

97. The PRESIDENT: Speaking again not only for myself
but also for my predecessor, I should like to thank the
representative of Canada for the very generous references
he has made to both of US.

106. I understand that the Secretary-General would like to
make a statement at this stage, and I now give him the
floor.

98. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): 1
should like to join those of my colleagues who have
alreiady, at this meeting, expressed their thanks and
congratulations to the representative of Denmark for the
manner in which he conducted the deliberations of the
Council during his presidency last month. It is said that
happy peoples have no history. We are gratified that,
despite the clouds that overhung the Council, the
representative of Denmark succeeded in maintaining a calm
and. untroubled atmosphere.

107. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The representatives
of the United Kingdom and Canada have suggested in their
statements that the Secretary-General submit an interim
report to the Security Council three months from now,
should the circumstances of the situation concerning
Cyprus warrant such a step. I understand the motivation
behind. these suggestions, and I just want to assure the
members of the Council that I shall submit reports to the
Council at any time this may prove necessary or advisable,
as I have always done in the past.

99. It is with great confidence that we have embarked
upon the month of office of the present President. Our
confidence is born of the high esteem in which we hold the

108. The pRESIDENT: There are no other names on the
list of speakers. Before I adjourn the meeting, I should like
9

to take the opportunity
Ethiopia.

relaxation of tension has continued and that a shift of
emphasis from military confrontation to negotiation has
become the order of the day. It is equally gratifying to read
in the report of the Secretary-General of the absence of
conflict and breaches of the cease-fire, as well as of
improvements in intercommunal relations and of other
positive developments which are essential prerequisites for
the creation of an atmosphere in which the important talks
that have begun between leading members of the Greek and
the Turkish Cypriot
communities can be continued
amicably.

of speaking as the representative of

109. Speaking in my capacity as the representative of
ETHIOPIA,
I should like to express my delegation’s
gratitude and appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
unfailing efforts and for the candid report he has placed
before us in document S/8914, and through him I should
also like to thank the Field Commander of UNFICYP,
Lieutenant-General A. E, Martola, and the Secretary
General’s Special Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, and
indeed all those gallant servants of the United Nations who
are engaged in the noble task of maintaining peace in the
great Island of Cyprus.
110. The seriousness of the situation in Cyprus during the
last fifty-seven months or so, its consequence on the lives of
the inhabitants of the Island as a whole, and above all its
serious implication for international peace and security
cannot be over-emphasized. It is with this view in mind that
we attach special significance to the peace effort being
made in this regard.

112. We should like to join the Secretary-General and the
members of the Council in paying a tribute to the two
negotiators and their aides for the spirit of statesmanship
that they have displayed in this noble undertaking. It is the
fervent hope of my Government that these talks will soon
produce the fruitful results that the whole community of
nations has been praying for, so that in this, as in so many
of its vital endeavours for international peace and security,
the’united Nations effort will be crowned with that success
which, after all, is the success of us all.

111, We have noted with great interest the Secretary
General’s observation that during the period under review

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price: $W.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

35801-October

1972~-2,050
