132

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Security Council, in particular resolution 385 (1976)
of 30 January 1976;
19. Demands that South Africa put an end to extending apartheid in Namibia and to its policy of "bantustanization" of the Territory, aimed at destroying the
national unity and the territorial integrity of Namibia;
20. Demands that South Africa release all Namibian
political prisoners, including all those imprisoned or
detained in connexion with offcnces under so-called
internal security laws, whether such Namibians have
been charged or tried or are held without charge and
whether held in Namibia or South Africa;
21. Declares that, in order that the people of Namibia shall be enabled freely to determine their own
future, it is imperative that free elections under the
supervision and control of the United Nations be held
urgently in the whole of Namibia as one political entity;
22. Demands that South Africa accord unconditionally to all Namibians currently in exile for political
reasons full facilities for their return to their country
without risk of arrest, detention, intimidation or imprisonment;
23. Reiterates that the illegal occupation of Namibia
and the war being waged there by South Africa constitute a threat to international peace and security;
24. Declares that the continued illegal occupation
of Namibia by South Africa constitutes an act of aggression against the Namibian people and against the
United Nations as the legal authority to administer the
Territory until independence;
25. Urges the Security Council to take up again
the question of Namibia, which is still on its agenda,
and, in view of South Africa's failure to comply with
Council resolution 385 (1976), to impose a mandatory
arms embargo against South Africa;
26. Requests all States to cease and desist from any
form of direct or indirect military consultation, cooperation or collaboration with South Africa;
27. Requests all States to take effective measures
to prevent the recruitment of mercenaries for service in
Namibia or South Africa;
28. Requests all States to take steps to ensure the
termination of all arms licensing agreements with South
Africa and to prohibit the transfer to South Africa of
all information relating to arms and armaments;
29. Requests all States to cease and prevent:
(a) Any supply of arms and ammunition to South
Africa;
(b) Any supply of aircraft, vehicles or military
equipment for the use of the armed forces and paramilitary or police organizations of South Africa;
(e) Any supply of spare parts for arms, vehicles
or military equipment used by the armed forces and
paramilitary or police organizations of South Africa;
( d) Any supply of so-called dual-use aircraft, vehieles or equipment which could be converted to military use by South Africa;
(e) Any activities in their countries which promote
or are calculated to promote the supply of arms, ammunition, military aircraft or military vehicles to South
Africa and the supply of equipment or materials for the
manufacture and maintenance of arms and ammunition
in South Africa and Namibia;

(f) Any co-operation or activities by public or
prívate corporations in conjunction with South Africa
in the development, directly or indirectly, of nuclear
technology, including the development of a nuclear
capability by the racist régime in South Africa;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976

:H/147.

Programme of work of the United
Nations Council for Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for N arnibia 84 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 85
Recalling its resolution 2248 ( S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia as the legal administering authority of Namibia
until independence,
Reatfirming that the Territory and people of Namibia
are the direct responsibility of the United Nations and
that the Namibian people must be enabled to attain
self-determination and independence within a united
Namibia,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the United
Nations Council for Namibia in the discharge of the
responsibilities entrusted to it by resolution 2248 ( S-V)
and subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly
relating to Namibia,
l. Approves the report of the United Nations Council for Namibia, including the recommendations contained therein, 86 and decides to make adequate financial
provision for their implementation;
2. Decides that the United Nations Council for
Namibia, in the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 2248 (S-V), shall, among other functions
required for the full implementation of its mandate,
continue to exercise the following functions and responsibilities:
(a)
Asan organ of the United Nations, it shall:
(i) Review annually the political, military, economic and social conditions affecting the struggle of the Namibian people for self-determination, freedom and independence in a united
Namibia, and submit reports on the above
with appropriate recommendations for consideration and action by the General Assembly;
(ii) Represent Namibia to ensure that the rights
and interests of Namibia are protected, as
appropriate, in all intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, bodies and conferences;
s4 Official Records aj the General Assembly, Thirty-first Sessio11, Supp/ement No. 24 (A/31/24).
85 Jbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chaps. 1, II,
IV-VII and IX.
8 6 !bid., Supp/ement No. 24 (A/31/24 ), vol. I, paras. 272
and 273.

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Consult with Member States to encourage
compliance with United Nations resolutions on
Namibia;
(iv) Co-ordinate aid for Namibia provided by
United Nations agencies and other bodies
within the United Nations system;
(v) Actas trustee of the United Nations Fund for
Namibia and in this capacity administer and
manage the Fund;
(b) As Administering Authority for Namibia, it
shall:
(i) Examine periodically the deleterious consequences of the illegal South African administration in Namibia;
(ii} Formulate projects and programmes of assistance to Namibians;
(üi} Consult with the South West Africa People's
Organization, as appropriate, in the formulation and implementation of its programme of
work;
(iv} Propase to the United Nations Development
Programme projects of assistance to Namibians in accordance with the resources made
available through the indicative planning figure
for Namibia;
(v) Review and approve the annual budget of the
United Nations Institute for Namibia at Lusaka, to be submitted to the Council by the
Senate of the lnstitute, and make recommendations on the general direction of its work;
(vi) Formulate a policy of intensive dissemination
of information on Namibia, in consultation
with the Office of Public Information of the
Secretariat;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, to strengthen the Units which service the
Council in accordance with its requirements so that
it may fully discharge all additional tasks and functions
arising out of the new situation conceming Namibia;
4. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to authorize the United Nations Commissioner
for Namibia to appoint a resident representative of the
Commissioner in Botswana in order to enhance the
effectiveness of assistance to Namibians by the Council.
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
(iii)

31/148.

Intensification and co-ordination of
United Nations action in support of
Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia87 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 88
87 /bid.,
88 lbid.,

Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24).
Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chaps. I, 11,
IV-VII and IX.

133

Recalling its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, as well
as subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly relating to Namibia,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
despite the relevant decisions of the United Nations and
the advisory opinion of the Ioternational Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, "' continue to maintain diplomatic,
economic, consular and other relations with South Africa, purporting to act on behalf of or concerning Namibia, as well as military or strategic collaboration, all
of which has the effect of supporting or encouraging
South Africa in its defiance of the United Nations,
Strongly condemning the support which the illegal
South African administration continues to receive from
those foreign economic, financia} and other interests
which are collaborating with it in its exploitation of the
human and natural resources of, and in the further entrenchment of its illegal and racialist domination over,
the international Territory of Namibia,
l. Calls upon those States which have not yet done
so to comply with the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council concerning Namibia and the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971;
2. Urges those States which have not yet done so
to break off economic relations with South Africa that
concem Namibia and to take measures with a view to
compelling the Government of South Africa to withdraw immediately from Namibia in accordance with
resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V) as well as subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly relating
to Namibia;
3. Requests once again ali Member States to tak:e
all appropriate measures to ensure the full application
of, and compliance with, the provisions of Decree No. 1
for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,
enacted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on
27 September 1974,90 and such other measures as may
be necessary to assist in the protection of the natural
resources of Namibia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare u~
dated lists of foreign corporations operating in Namibia,
accompanied by a summary of the major operations, including an historical note on their involvement in
Namibia;
5. Commends the inauguration of the United Nations
Institute for Namibia at Lusaka and requests all States
and the specialized agencies and other organizations
within the United Nations system to make adequate
financia! contribution to the United Natíons Fund for
Namibia so that the United Nations Council for Namibia can meet the additional costs of the Institute;
6. Authorizes the Uníted Nations Council for Namibia to hold hearings and to continue to seek information regarding the exploitation and purchase of Namibian uranium and to report on this matter to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session;
7. Authorizes the United Nations Council for Namibia to notify the Governments of States whose
sn Legal Conscqucnces for States of the Continued Presence
of South A/rica in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Counci/ Resollllion 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion.
/.C.J. Reports /971, p. 16.
no Official Records of thc General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supp/eme-nt No. 24A (A/9624/ Add.l), para. 84.
