S/2015/903

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 November 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 23 November 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to paragraph 14 of Security Council resolution 2241 (2015), the
Secretariat has conducted an assessment of security planning for Juba during the
transition and the appropriate role that the United Nations should play in securing
key infrastructure in order to protect freedom of movement in the capital. The
assessment was undertaken in consultation with the Government. United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) troop- and police-contributing countries were
also consulted.
Security arrangements planned for the transition
The parties agreed to permanent ceasefire and transitional security
arrangements during two series of negotiations in Addis Ababa in September and
October. The arrangements are designed to address the security requirements of the
leaders of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement in Opposition (SPLM in
Opposition) and the former detainees when they return to Juba and minimize the
risk of security incidents in the capital. The parties agreed upon the composition of
the forces that would remain in Juba during the transition in a follow -up meeting on
3 November.
According to the permanent ceasefire and transitional security arrangements,
the government forces (the Sudan People’s Liberation Army) would withdraw to
areas 25 km outside Juba, leaving only a sufficient number of soldiers to guard key
government infrastructure. The Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan also provided for the withdrawal of foreign forces from
South Sudan, except for Western Equatoria State, within 45 days of signature,
implying that the Ugandan troops deployed in Juba since early in 2014 should be
withdrawn.
The parties agreed that 4,830 armed personnel (3,420 for the Government
and 1,410 for the opposition) would remain in the capital. These would include
1,000 presidential guards, responsible for protecting the President, the Vice -Presidents
and other key officials; an administrative and logistical battalion, numbering 750
and 840 personnel, respectively; 1,320 guards for the shared unified command to be
established by the parties; 500 military police officers; and 170 armed national
security officers who would be allowed to carry only small arms.
The remaining personnel, whose number is unspecified, would have to hand
over their weapons to the armouries. Members of the wildlife services, firefighters
15-20413 (E)

271115

*1520413*

S/2015/903

and prison officers, whose numbers are also unspecified, would be allowed to
remain in Juba, but their arms would also be kept in armouries, for use only when
on official duty. Pursuant to the agreement signed on 3 November, the shared
unified command will decide on the status, encampment and deployment of the
guards and the military police. A total of 3,000 joint integrated police officers,
comprising 1,500 personnel from each side, will be responsible for the security of
the public and civilian installations in Juba, working under the national police
decentralized structure. A ceasefire transitional security arrangements monitoring
mechanism will verify the numbers and deployment of the above forces in Juba and
the state of their armaments.
At the time of writing, the shared unified command, the joint integrated police
command and the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism had yet to be constituted in Juba and no further operational plans with
regard to the specific deployments and organization of and division of labour
between those forces had been agreed upon. According to public statements by key
ministers, the Government would redeploy its excess forces in the vicinity of the
seven major access routes to Juba. The joint integrated police units would most
likely be responsible for ensuring freedom of movement in the capital. However, the
precise security arrangements for key civilian inf rastructure are yet to be
determined. The parties have also jointly appealed to the members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development-plus group and other regional and
international partners to meet urgent financial and resource needs associated wi th
the implementation of the agreement.
Most likely security environment during the transition
The current security arrangements in Juba are under the control of the
Government through the deployment of military and police forces. With most of
those forces deployed outside Juba, however, the Government will continue to
control access to the capital. No external threat to Juba is foreseen during the
transition period.
The Ugandan army has now withdrawn from Juba, in accordance with the
peace agreement. The support provided by the Ugandan forces to the Government
during the conflict reinforced the perception of security in the capital. Their
withdrawal has not had a noticeable impact to date. The security functions that they
performed in Juba, including maintaining a deterrent presence at some key sites,
have been assumed by the government forces. This will have to be addressed by the
shared unified command and the joint integrated police. SPLM in Opposition is not
believed to have retained organized military units in Juba.
However, several thousand Nuer police officers and soldiers fled the fighting
and sought safety and shelter at UNMISS sites for the protection of civilians. Some
remain at the sites today, albeit unarmed and in civilian clothes.
It is expected that some of the opposition security personnel present at the
UNMISS site in Juba will join the opposition’s authorized contingent in the capital,
but these details are yet to be worked out by the parties.
The agreement does not address the presence of other South Sudanese
ex-combatants, including an unknown number of militiamen affiliated with the

2/5

15-20413

S/2015/903

Sudanese armed forces who were left behind after the civil war and after South
Sudan gained independence, potentially with their weapons.
Most recently, the significant rise in crime has been the main source of
insecurity in Juba. This is evident in the increased number of break -ins affecting
international non-governmental organization compounds and instances of street
crime. Armed robberies are perpetrated both in daylight and at night. While
previous compound robberies appeared to be planned and executed by organized
criminals, a pattern of more random and opportunistic incidents has emerged. There
has also been an increase in the number of incidents in which force is used.
Perpetrators sometimes wear the uniforms of security forces. They also present
identification cards from security agencies to gain access to compounds. Street
crime outside restaurants and hotels frequented by foreigners, who are often
carrying foreign currency, is also on the rise. While crime targeting international
compounds is well documented, that affecting South Sudanese neighbourhoods is
more difficult to measure.
The rising crime is at least partially attributable to the rapid deterioration of
the economy. The economic slowdown and hyperinflation have contributed to low
incomes, an escalating cost of living and high rates of unemployment. The
economic forecast for the transition suggests that there will be no improvement.
Crime is, therefore, likely to remain a recurrent source of insecurity and will need to
be addressed by the joint integrated police units.
Security incidents in Juba also stem from intercommunal tensions, notably
between victims of the conflict and other internally displaced persons assembled at
the UNMISS protection sites, as well as other communities perceived to be in
support of, or sympathetic to, the Government. Currently, some 28,000 internally
displaced persons are residing in two sites inside and a djacent to the United Nations
House in Juba.
Tension in and around the sites is visible. Surrounding neighbourhoods, many
of which host security personnel and their families, are feared by the internally
displaced persons. At the same time, the residents of those neighbourhoods live in
fear of the perceived desire for revenge on the part of the displaced. Both sides
suffer from the activities of criminal gangs, many of which include former
combatants in possession of crude weapons and small arms. UNMISS c onducts
frequent and thorough searches to uncover any weapons, but the vastness of the
sites and their relatively porous perimeters make it exceedingly difficult to uncover
weapons hidden inside them or in their vicinity. Several instances of violence
between gangs within the sites illustrate that the sites can be extremely unruly and
difficult to manage.
In addition to the joint integrated police units, three institutions in particular
will play a critical role in maintaining security in Juba during the transition: the
Joint Operations Centre, the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission. The
Centre is designed to be the nerve centre for coordinating the movements of
authorized security forces, including VIP escorts, providing 24 -hour monitoring of
developments in the capital and dispatching joint integrated police units to respond
to incidents. It should benefit from the constant reporting provided by the monitors
and observers from the Mechanism, who will be deployed at key locations and carry
out patrols throughout the city. The monitors will be responsible for verifying

15-20413

3/5

S/2015/903

compliance by the parties with the security arrangements and reporting regularly on
the state of armouries and the positions of military units and their equipment. In the
event of any incidents, in addition to deploying police units, Mechanism leaders will
be able to call for political support from the members of the Commission to contain
violence and restore law and order.
The success of the joint integrated police units will depend largely on their
initial training, command and control, level of resources and the amount of
operational space given to them by the other security forces present in Juba. They
will require significant international support. The parties have already requested
UNMISS to assist in having the units set up and made operational, as they have
done for the Joint Operations Centre, the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission. I have made recommendations to this effect in my special report on
the review of the UNMISS mandate (S/2015/899), including the deployment of up
to 100 additional trainers to enable the Mission to perform these support tasks,
which would include mentoring, planning assistance and command coordination
through co-location. UNMISS could also provide some operational support to the
units. Other partners will need to assist with equipment, communications, logistics
and administrative support.
In accordance with its mandate to protect civilians, UNMISS conducts joint
military and police patrols in Juba to maintain a deterrent and confidence -building
presence during the day. Plans are being formulated to also conduct night -time
patrols, in an effort to mitigate the risk of incidents and deter crime. UNMISS
should continue to police and protect the protection sites and United Nations
personnel and assets, in line with the status-of-forces agreement and its existing
mandate.
The Mission is also prepared to deal with possible crisis scenarios. It updates
its contingency plans regularly and prepares for the extraction and rescue of
civilians in need, within its capabilities. If the need arose, UNMISS would assist in
concentrating international personnel in key locations, protecting them before a
possible evacuation and securing access routes as necessary.
Consultation with the Government
As requested by the Security Council, the Secretariat sent a team to Juba from
4 to 6 November to consult the Government on the above-mentioned issues. The
Minister of Defence and Veterans’ Affairs and the Minister of the Interior expressed
their full commitment to the implementation of the peace agreement.
They stressed that there was no risk or intention of political violence from
their side against the leaders of SPLM in Opposition, the former detainees or
internally displaced persons. They said that they would imple ment the peace
agreement in good faith, even though they did not like it. They also stated that the
opposition leaders could come with or without their bodyguards or even seek a
third-party protection force if that made them feel more comfortable.
They said that the protection forces were welcome, although unnecessary. In
their view, the only insecurity that would affect Juba during the transition would be
crime, which was as a result of poverty, economic underdevelopment and the legacy
of the civil war. They appealed to the United Nations to support the establishment of

4/5

15-20413

S/2015/903

the joint integrated police units and address the root causes of poverty through the
development of infrastructure. They emphasized that UNMISS should have no role
to play in securing Juba other than supporting the units and the Transitional
Government of National Unity.
Conclusions
The institutions foreseen in the permanent ceasefire and transitional security
arrangements have not yet been established. It is therefore extremely diffi cult to
assess the strengths and weaknesses of their plans to tackle the above -mentioned
security threats or determine an appropriate role for the United Nations in securing
key infrastructure in order to protect freedom of movement in the capital.
There is undoubtedly a risk that there could be violence in the capital during
the transition. However, the peace agreement contains a range of mechanisms
designed to mitigate this risk. It is essential that they be properly supported, trained
and equipped and receive the full cooperation of the parties. The security of Juba
during the transition will ultimately depend on the parties ’ commitment to the
implementation of the agreement, their ability to resolve disputes peacefully and,
most importantly, their readiness to put the conflict behind them.
In the event of a severe crisis, UNMISS will do its utmost, within its
capabilities, to support efforts to respond and protect civilians, United Nations
national and international staff and other international perso nnel under imminent
threat of physical violence. It will not, however, be in a position to tackle such a
crisis alone and will need the full support of partners in the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development-plus group.
UNMISS is already mandated to support the mitigation mechanisms proposed
in the peace agreement. With the additional resources requested in my special
report, it should be in a position to contribute significantly to making those
mechanisms operational. The support of other partners will also be necessary to
guarantee that the mechanisms perform their agreed functions efficiently and
professionally. Troop- and police-contributing countries have been consulted on this
assessment and concur with its conclusions.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

15-20413

5/5
