General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

72

J

35/153.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/83 B of 11 December 1979,
Expressing its satisfaction that the Committee on Disarmament has made progress in respect of the improvement of its organization and methods of work,
Affirming that the establishment of ad hoe working
groups on substantive disarmament issues will promote
the negotiating role of the Committee on Disarmament,
Expressing its concern that, despite improvements in
its methods of work, the Committee on Disarmament
has not thus far been able to achieve concrete results on
disarmament issues which have been under consideration for a number of years,
Convinced that the Committee on Disarmament, as
the single multilateral negotiating body on disarmament, should play the central role in substantive negotiations on priority questions of disarmament and on the
implementation of the Programme of Action set forth in
section III of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 47
Stressing that negotiations on specific disarmament
issues conducted outside the Committee on Disarmament should not in any way constitute an impediment to
the negotiations on such questions in the Committee,
I. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to continue or undertake, during its session to be held in 1981,
substantive negotiations on the priority questions of disarmament on its agenda, in accordance with the provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly and the other relevant
resolutions of the Assembly;
2. Invites the members of the Committee on Disarmament involved in separate negotiations on specific
priority questions of disarmament to intensify their
efforts to achieve a positive conclusion of those negotiations without further delay for submission to the Committee and, at the same time, to submit to the Committee a full report on their separate negotiations and the
results achieved in order to contribute most directly to
the negotiations in the Committee in accordance with
paragraph I above;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament, at its
session to be held in 1981, to continue negotiations on
the elaboration of a comprehensive programme of disarmament, and to submit the programme in time for
consideration by the General Assembly at the second
special session devoted to disarmament;
4. Also requests the Committee on Disarmament to
intensify its work on priority questions of disarmament,
so that it may be in a position to contribute, through
concrete accomplishments, to a favourable climate for
the second special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarw.ament:
5. Further requests the Committee on Disarmament
to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly
at its thirty-sixth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Disarmament''.

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or
Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/152 of 19 December 1977,
33/70 of 14 December 1978 and 34/82 of 11 December
1979,
Reiterating its conviction that the suffering of civilian
populations and of combatants could be significantly reduced if general agreement could be attained on the prohibition or restriction for humanitarian reasons of the
use of specific conventional weapons, including any
which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to
have indiscriminate effects,
Reaffirming its belief that positive results as regards
the non-use or restriction of use for humanitarian reasons of specific conventional weapons would serve. in
addition, as encouragement in the broader field of disarmament,
Recalling that, by its resolutions 32/152 and 33/70, it
decided to convene in 1979 the United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects and established the mandate of the Conference.
Further recalling that. by its resolution 34/82, it endorsed the recommendation of the Conference to hold
another session in September /October 1980. with a view
to completing negotiations in conformity with resolutions 32/152 and 33/70,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the Final Report
of the United Nations Conference on Prohibitions and
Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or
to Have Indiscriminate Effects, held at Geneva from I0
to 28 September 1979 and from 15 Septc·m bcr to I O October 1980; 5 "
2. Welcomes the successful conclusion of the Conference, which resulted in the adoption. on 10 October
1980, of the following instruments:
(a) Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects:
(b) Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I):
(c) Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the
Use of Mines. Booby Traps and Other Devices
(Protocol II);
(d) Protocol lm Prohibitions or Restrictions on the
Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol Ill):
3. Takes note of article 3 of the Convention, which
stipulates that the Convention shall be open for
signature on 10 April 1981:
4. Commends the Convention and the three annexed
Protocols to all States, with a view to achieving the
widest possible adherence to these instruments:
5. Notes that, under article 8 of the Convention,
conferences may be convened to consider amendments
to the Convention or any of the annexed Protocols. to
consider additional Protocols relating to other categories of conventional weapons not covered hy the ex,, A/CONF.95, I 'i and Corr 1.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

isting Protocols, or to review the scope and operation of
the Convention and the Protocols annexed thereto and
to consider any proposal for amendments to the Convention or to the existing Protocols and any proposals
for additional protocols relating to other categories of
conventional weapons not covered by the existing
Protocols;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, as the Depositary
of the Convention and its annexed Protocols, to inform
the General Assembly from time to time of the state of
adherence to the Convention and its three annexed
Protocols;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "United Nations
Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects".

94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980

35/154.

Conclusion of an international convention on
the strengthening of the security of non-nuclearweapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons

The cJeneral Assembly,
Convinced of the need to take effective measures for
the strengthening of the security of States and prompted
by the desire shared by all nations to eliminate war and
prevent nuclear conflagration,
Taking into account the principle of non-use of force
or threat of force enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and reaffirmed in a number of United Nations
declarations and resolutions,
Noting with satisfaction the desire of States in various
regions to prevent nuclear weapons from being introduced into their territories, including through the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, on the basis
of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of
the region concerned, and being anxious to contribute to
the attainment of this objective,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is
achieved on a universal basis, it is imperative for the international community to develop effective measures to
ensure the security of non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons from
any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure the nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons can constitute a positive contribution
to the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons,
Mindful of the statements and com:derations made by
various States on the strengthening of the security of
non-nuclear-weapon States,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of
p_aragraJ?h 59 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Sess10n of the General Assembly, 57 in which it urged
the n~clear-weapon States to conclude, as appropriate,
effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Recalling its resolutions 33 /72 of 14 December 1978
and 34/84 and 34/85 of 11 December 1979,
"Resolution S-10/2.

73

Noting the consideration by the Committee on Disarmament in 1980 of the item entitled "Effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons" and the setting up of an ad hoe working group to
continue the negotiations on this problem,
Recalling the drafts of an international convention
submitted on this item to the Committee on Disarmament in 1979,
Taking note of the report of the Committee on Disarmament, including the report of the Ad Hoe Working
Group,"
Noting with satisfaction that the idea of a convention
has received widespread international support,
Wishing to promote an early and successful completion of the negotiations on the elaboration of such a
convention,
Noting further the examination by the Committee on
Disarmament of the suggestion that, upon the recommendation of the General Assembly, the Security Council might consider the question of concrete measures to
assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons which, as an interim
arrangement, should not be a substitute for the indispensable renewed efforts to reach agreement on a common approach acceptable to all which could be included in an international instrument of a legally
binding character,
I. Welcomes the conclusion of the Committee on
Disarmament that there is continuing recognition of the
urgent need to reach agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons:
2. Notes with satisfaction that in the Committee on
Disarmament there was no objection, in principle, to the
idea of an international convention;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to continue on a priority basis, during its session to be held in
1981, the negotiations on the question of strengthening
of security guarantees of non-nuclear-weapon States;
4. Calls upon States participating in talks on the
question of providing guarantees to non-nuclear States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons to
make efforts for the speedy elaboration and conclusion
of an international convention on this matter;
5. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to make
solemn declarations, identical in substance, concerning
the non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear
~tates having no such weapons on their territories, as a
first step towards the conclusion of such an international convention:
6. Recommends that the Security Council should examine declarations which may be made by nuclear States
regarding the strengthening of security guarantees for
non-nuclear States and, if all these declarations are
found consistent with the above-mentioned objective,
should adopt an appropriate resolution approving them:
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Conclusion of an
int~rnational convention on the strengthening of the security of non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons".
94th plenary meeting
12 December l 980
'' See Official Records of the General Assemblr. Thirty-fijih Session.
Supplement No. 27 (A 35/27). paras. 4'i-49.
