S/2021/436

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 May 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 6 May 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by His
Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with
the video-teleconference on “The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina” convened
on Tuesday, 4 May 2021. Statements were also delivered by the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia as well as by the Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 by
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council

21-06089 (E) 070521 070621

*2106089*

S/2021/436

Annex I
Briefing by the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Valentin Inzko
It is my sincere honour to address this distinguished body once again. Having
in mind that this may very well be my last address as High Representative before the
Security Council, I regret that we are unable to meet in person due to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which continues to wreak havoc in much of the
world. As always, I hope all of you and your respective countries and citizens are
doing well.
I extend my sincere condolences to the representative from India for the
situation your country currently faces. With vaccines slowly becoming more widely
available, I hope that there is some light at the end of the tunnel for you, and for all
of us. I am pleased to inform you that today, a few hours ago, European Commission
Enlargement Commissioner Olivér Várhelyi and Austrian Foreign Affairs Minister
Alexander Schallenberg were in Sarajevo to deliver vaccines. Austria was
instrumental in the logistic legwork, which made this delivery possible today.
When I arrived in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2009, the international
community was entering a new phase of engagement, in which it emphasized local
ownership over international intervention. Local ownership is a great ideal, but
with ownership comes responsibility, and the level of discourse today in Bosnia and
Herzegovina could politely be described as irresponsible. More bluntly, it is reckless
and dangerous.
Last year, 2020, was a year of hope and reflection for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The country marked 25 years of peace as a result of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, initialled on 19 November 1995 in Dayton, Ohio, and signed
on 14 December 1995 in Paris. It was a time for reflection on the achievements, as
well as the shortcomings, of the ensuing two and a half decades, while also looking
towards the future.
This is reflected in the joint statement of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the initialling of the Agreement,
which read, in part,
“Today is a unique opportunity to send a message to rightly underline the
importance of strengthening trust, peace and mutual respect among all peoples
and citizens in Bosnia and Herzegovina, all its parts, entities, Brcko District
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, cantons, cities and municipalities.”
On that occasion, best wishes were also delivered to Bosnia and Herzegovina from
former United States President Clinton, the Presidents of Austria and Slovenia, the
Secretary General, the Prime Minister of Spain, the Foreign Ministers of Germany
and France and a large number of dignitaries.
As laid out in my report (see S/2021/409), as part of a long-standing policy
of challenging the fundamentals of the General Framework Agreement for Peace,
including the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as the decisions and authority of the High Representative, with the aim of
rolling back reforms and reclaiming competencies from the State, the Republika
Srpska authorities — led by Milorad Dodik — adopted a set of concrete conclusions
in this regard in March. As I reported, these conclusions envisage discussions among
domestic political actors on the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina, leaving open the
option for so-called “peaceful dissolution” of the country.
There is no real need to explain the destructive long-term policy of the current
Republika Srpska authorities, as it was explained to this very body by Mr. Dodik
2/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

in the Arria Formula meeting held last year in November. I believe it was clear to
everyone what kind of irrational, destructive policy and mindset we are dealing with.
You will recall, he called me a “monster” and the late Lord Ashdown “a criminal.”
Only yesterday, Mr. Dodik was again in the media, claiming he recently
told a foreign diplomat that peaceful dissolution is the only option that is bound
to happen anyway, and that the diplomat had “nothing against it.” If you or I or
anyone else stood up and said we want to split up our country, we would be called
traitors, secessionists or seditionists, and possibly arrested. To put in blunt terms:
it is unthinkable in our countries that the President would want to destroy the very
country of which he is President.
Furthermore, Mr. Dodik’s party, the Union of Independent Social Democrats
(SNSD), recently posted several videos as part of an online campaign promoting
“peaceful dissolution,” which will also run as advertisements to YouTube viewers in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In April, leaders of the Republika Srpska ruling coalition parties met at a
mountain resort near Banja Luka, where Mr. Dodik announced that the Republika
Srpska would form teams for negotiating with the Federation on the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and that the Republika Srpska National Assembly would adopt
a platform as the basis for negotiations in this regard. The draft platform makes it
clear that, if the direction and outcome of such discussions are not to the Republika
Srpska authorities’ liking, the Republika Srpska “reserves the right to finally decide
on its future status”.
As to be expected, these developments have stirred up the Federation-based
parties, particularly the Bosniak parties, most of which dismissed the possibility of
a “peaceful dissolution” of Bosnia and Herzegovina and some of which predicted a
war in case the Republika Srpska attempted to secede from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As High Representative, I want to be clear: Dayton does not give the right to
entities to secede. So, once again, the political atmosphere is poisoned and progress
on reforms is side-lined. And it is extremely unfortunate that the Republika Srpska
authorities have chosen this moment, when the entire country is still in the grips of
the COVID-19 pandemic.
It is also the moment when the Republika Srpska authorities had to borrow
€300 million via a bond sale on the London Stock Exchange to cover its budget
deficit, because they would not accept the easy money and reforms proposed by the
International Monetary Fund.
During my mandate as High Representative, we have seen the goalposts
move — shifts in the red line of what the international community is willing to accept.
We have seen a shift from rhetoric to action challenging the State competences,
institutions and decisions, and we are now also witnessing a shift from rhetoric to
action challenging the State sovereignty and territorial integrity, and with this the
peace implementation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
To be clear, there is now a concerted effort to formalize and implement the
conclusions adopted by the Republika Srpska National Assembly. At best, the goal is
to roll back the many reform achievements of the past 25 years, which threatens the
State, its competences, its institutions and their ability to take and enforce decisions.
That would impact ongoing reforms, including those covered by the 14 priorities
of the European Union (EU), many of which build on reforms brought about by the
High Representative’s interventions. At worst, it is a set-up, with ultimatums that the
political leaders of Republika Srpska know are impossible to achieve. The Republika
Srpska leadership would then use that to claim that the Republika Srpska is forced to
unilaterally decide on its future status, which would mean secession.
21-060893/42

S/2021/436

Let us also be clear. Even if it is a best-case scenario, the aim is a perpetually
dysfunctional Bosnia and Herzegovina, which we already see in the near-paralysis
of its highest institutions, including the Presidency, the Council of Ministers and the
Parliamentary Assembly, not to mention in the Federation, which the Independent
Union of Social Democrats’ partner, the Croat Democratic Union of Bosnia and
Herzegovina (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina), has succeeded in grinding to a halt.
That will have negative consequences for the Western Balkans region and the rest
of Europe, as a debilitated Bosnia and Herzegovina is not in a position to effectively
deal with the challenges of organized crime, corruption, migration, climate change,
et cetera.
If such negative trends continue, the question for the international community
will soon be how long that kind of destructive behaviour can be tolerated and how
long Mr. Dodik and his allies in the Republika Srpska and elsewhere can be regarded
as partners.
On the other hand, we have seen movement around the electoral reform process,
which has been at a stalemate for years. It could be an opportunity to tackle a key
long-standing set of rights-based reforms, including removing the discrimination
identified in rulings of the European Court of Human Rights, while also improving
the transparency of the election process.
Unfortunately, there is fear and mistrust among citizens and civil society
that the international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina would seek to appease
the demands of the HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina to further ethnicize the electoral
system by redefining electoral constituencies in the Federation on the basis of
ethno-territorial division or the ethnic declaration of voters. That concept of ethnodemocracy would certainly conflict not only with the implementation of the Sejdić
and Finci group of cases, but also with the specific goals of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, including the overall aim of the Agreement to re-establish the
multi-ethnic society that existed prior to the war.
I must reiterate that we must not allow that process to lead to further ethnic
or territorial divisions. I am fully convinced that a possible third electoral unit —
real or virtual, temporary or permanent — is considered by the HDZ Bosnia and
Herzegovina as just another step towards the third entity. In a best-case scenario, a
third electoral unit would cement the political dynamic in the Federation in a way
that the HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina leaders would feel absolutely no impetus
to cooperate with the Bosniaks. For easier understanding, I will draw a parallel
with the Republika Srpska, which is also one electoral unit. We have seen how its
positions have radicalized over time when there is no incentive to reach out to other
ethnic groups.
Apart from the implementation of the Sejdić and Finci decision and related
ones, the priority should be the implementation of the recommendations of the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and the Group of States
against Corruption, which would not only eradicate discrimination but also increase
transparency and prevent electoral fraud.
When I last addressed the Security Council in November (S/2020/1103, annex
I), I repeated my call on the Republika Srpska authorities to remove the plaque
dedicated to convicted war criminal Radovan Karadžić from the student dormitory
in Pale. I am pleased to report that the plaque was officially taken down in December.
On 27 January, I addressed a letter to the Speaker of the Republika Srpska National
Assembly (RSNA), asking it to rescind within three months decorations awarded
in 2016 to three convicted war criminals, among them Radovan Karadžić. The
three months passed in April, and I have received no formal response, nor have the
decorations been rescinded. The RSNA was to discuss the issue on 28 April but
4/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

postponed it. We will see what happens, but for now I am informing the Council that
the situation has not been rectified.
The behaviour of political leaders most unfortunately encourages similar
behaviour among the public. In addition to some examples mentioned in my report,
only in the past few weeks a huge mural of convicted war criminal Ratko Mladić
appeared in the Republika Srpska town of Foča, which is well known as a place
where unspeakable war crimes occurred.
In the absence of more responsible behaviour, first and foremost on the
part of political leaders, that again points to the need for the criminalization
of the glorification of war criminals, as well as genocide denial. I must note
my disappointment that a few such efforts in that regard before the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliament failed. As a result, I am increasingly called upon by
various groups of citizens to impose such legislation. In any case, here I would
again recall the European Commission opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU
membership application, which unequivocally states, “Revisionism and genocide
denial contradict the most fundamental European values”.
There are some areas where I remain hopeful, such as the case of Mostar.
After 12 years, the city of Mostar finally held local elections, ultimately electing a
new mayor, Mr. Mario Kordić, whom I have met, and I am impressed by his energy
and enthusiasm. So far, there seems to be a great amount of goodwill in the new
Mostar City Council, and I am confident that it will make an honest effort to address
the many issues that have accumulated over all the years without a City Council. But,
at the same time, mentioning Mostar as a success is an indication of how desperate
for any success we have become. Mostar is, in fact, a work in progress.
I should note as well that the Sarajevo City Council also recently elected a new
mayor, a young and enthusiastic woman, Benjamina Karić, whom I recently met and
who is from a multicultural family. Citizens in Banja Luka directly elected a new
mayor, a member of the Republika Srpska opposition, Draško Stanivuković, only 27
years old, who so far has taken a transparent approach to his work.
The date 7 December 2020 marks the fiftieth anniversary of the so-called
Warsaw genuf lection, where, in the Second World War, thousands of Jews lost
their lives under their German oppressors. After laying the wreath, Chancellor
Brandt fell to his knees before the memorial. It was an historical and astonishing
act of atonement.
That is what leadership looks like and what is sorely needed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina today. In that context, I would like to call on the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency to live up to its statement from the twenty-fifth anniversary of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace and in 2021 to organize and participate in a joint
commemoration for all victims of the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I believe that
such an act would be healing for all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, even among
the Presidency members themselves.
In my previous address in November, I urged the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to implement the third national action plan for resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, which runs until 2022. I would particularly
like to emphasize the important role of women in trust-building and political
leadership. There have been a few steps forward, such as the efforts of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Ministry of Defence to increase the role of women in peacekeeping
missions. However, despite being on the front lines of the COVID-19 response,
women disproportionately suffered the consequences of the ensuing economic crisis.
Women were often the first to be laid off and the authorities cut social protection in
emergency budgets. During the pandemic, we also saw a 30 per cent increase in the
number of women seeking help after violence.
21-060895/42

S/2021/436

I would like to note the many Bosnian women refugees who have ascended to
prominent political office outside the country, including Austrian Minister of Justice
Alma Zadić, born in Tuzla; the Right Honourable Baroness Arminka Helić in the
United Kingdom House of Lords, born in Gračanica; Hannah Sumeja Atić, member
of the Norwegian Prime Minister’s Cabinet, born in Bugojno; former Swedish
Minister of Higher and Secondary Education Aida Hadzialic, born in Foča; and
Mayor of Kalmar, Sweden, Dzenita Abaza, also born in Foča.
That affirms that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s greatest asset is its human
potential but, due to the unstable situation, that asset is growing as an export. The
women whom I mentioned fled the country in a time of war. Young, educated people
are now leaving the country in search of opportunities elsewhere, not because of the
economy, but because of nepotism and corruption in the health-care sector, a general
lack of the rule of law and, increasingly, political instability.
We, as the international community, must strive to help Bosnia and Herzegovina
conserve its greatest assets and resources. That can be achieved only by preserving it
as a stable, peaceful and prosperous State that functions and provides for the needs
and best interests of all of its peoples, fully integrated with the European Union
and other Euro-Atlantic structures. The political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
must finally learn to really lead or get out of the way.
In conclusion, it is possible that this is my last address to the Security Council
as High Representative. I therefore want to use the opportunity to reflect on some of
the lessons of the past 12 years.
Living and working in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been one of the great
pleasures of my life. By and large, the people are among the nicest and most caring
I have ever met. Neighbours look after neighbours. It is certainly not the case that
people cannot live together, but the politicians spend too much time emphasizing
what divides them rather than what unites them. After years of unchecked divisive
rhetoric, we need to see politicians who can truly unite and lead.
Today I would have hoped that I could declare the job completed. Unfortunately,
and much to my regret, today’s Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country with largely
ineffective governance structures, mired by continuous political deadlocks, where
corruption is widespread and the rule of law is weak. At a time when the political
situation is destabilized by calls for the dissolution of the State and Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still a long way from lasting political stability, the engagement of the
international community remains crucial.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains de facto a frozen conflict, where political
leaders continue to pursue wartime goals and generate divisive narratives and
nationalistic political agendas. The multi-ethnic and diverse society that existed
prior to the conflict has all but disappeared, while it is becoming more difficult to
defend the preservation of multi-ethnic spaces and resist the creation of mono-ethnic
ones. Hate speech, the glorification of war criminals and revisionism or outright
genocide denial, despite the verdicts of international judicial bodies, remain very
common in the political discourse.
The refusal to accept the authority of the State and to comply with the rule
of law, defying or ignoring the Bosnia and Herzegovina legal and constitutional
framework and not cooperating with, or actively undermining, State-level judicial
and law enforcement agencies and the defiance of the authority and decisions of
High Representatives are some examples of today’s most immediate challenges. I
have consistently alerted the international community of the dangers of allowing
that course of action to continue unchecked in my previous reports to the Council.
6/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

As I said at the outset, when I arrived in Bosnia and Herzegovina as High
Representative in 2009, the mantra was “local ownership”. With only a very few
exceptions quite early on, we have tried that, and it is not working. Here we are a
dozen years later talking about peaceful dissolution. Bosnia and Herzegovina should
be firmly on the EU path, but today one of its political leaders is openly advocating
dividing the country, disparaging and mocking the EU in the process.
We have had a period of robust interventionism — which has garnered some
criticism, but, let us be honest, helped to propel Bosnia and Herzegovina a long way
on its path — and a longer period of local ownership, during which a step forward
has often been followed by two steps back. Perhaps it is time to consider a different
approach, somewhere in the middle. In any case, the international community needs
to take a decisive stand to stop such centrifugal tendencies, which are taking the
country further into a downward spiral. That could have political and security
implications not only for the country but also for the region and the rest of Europe.
Until there is a genuine, demonstrated commitment to peace and stability and
the durable stability and inviolability of Bosnia and Herzegovina are ensured, the
international community must retain all the instruments at its disposal to address
any potential threat, including the executive powers of the High Representative, the
maintenance of international judges in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court, the international mechanisms in Brčko district and the international military
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Personally, I have the impression that we are very far from a situation that
would allow changes to the post-Dayton arrangement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Instead of rushing to a decision, we should come to terms with the fact that peace
stabilization takes time. That was also the opinion of Karel Schwarzenberg, Foreign
Minister of the Czech Republic, the EU presidency country in 2009, who supported
my candidacy as High Representative and said to me: “We must have a long-term
approach on Bosnia Herzegovina.” We should also acknowledge that the pace of
progress has slowed because we decided to change our robust approach to Bosnia
and Herzegovina too quickly.
Unfortunately, we have to be honest with ourselves that the growing gaps
in the wider international community do not help the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the region to improve. Therefore, I again appeal to the international
community to remain united and decisive and to work together on offering solutions
and solving problems. Bosnia and Herzegovina is a unique country, which calls for
a unique approach.
I am increasingly inclined to believe that the current post-war political elite,
mostly alienated from reality, is neither ready nor equipped to deal with contemporary
challenges and address the real needs of the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
tend to believe that they are not our genuine partners in moving the country forward.
We therefore need to find way to deal with them in a firmer way and, at the same
time, move past them, also by finding new partners.
The good news is that there are progressive forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina
with whom we can partner that want to normalize their country. History shows
that we can be incredibly successful. Let us not forget that in 2005 Bosnia and
Herzegovina was the poster boy for post-conflict resolution — a country delivering
structural reforms and advancing towards constitutional change. If we were able to
forge a single army from three armies that fought each other a decade earlier, we can
certainly do what remains to be done.
But I must be blunt. Both the international community and progressive actors
in Bosnia and Herzegovina are making a fundamental mistake if they assume that
21-060897/42

S/2021/436

things will somehow work out, because time is working in our favour. This is a
fundamental mistake as long as the forces of disintegration are stronger than those
of reintegration. For time to be on our side, we must get back to a dynamic of reform
and reintegration.
I would like to thank you for your cooperation and attention for all these years.

8/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
I thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing. I would like to make the
following three points.
First, China welcomes the continued stability of the overall situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. On the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, the presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina has reiterated
its commitment to the agreement. Local elections have been held smoothly as
scheduled, and the reform of the Brčko district progressing steadily. These are
all positive developments worthy of our recognition. At the same time, nationbuilding in Bosnia and Herzegovina still faces many challenges. We encourage
all parties to set store by the interests of the country and its people, strengthen
dialogue and consultation, enhance mutual trust, promote ethnic harmony, resolve
disputes and reconcile differences and promote solutions to the outstanding issues
in nation-building.
Secondly, China hopes that all ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina will
work together to cope with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which
is yet to be brought under effective control. We encourage all parties to stay united
and coordinated to protect the safety and health of people of all ethnicities and seize
the opportunity to enhance mutual trust and reconciliation and achieve harmonious
coexistence. The international community should scale up support for Bosnia and
Herzegovina in fighting the pandemic. China has donated protective equipment
and test kits and organized several groups of medical experts to share experiences
and practices with their Bosnia and Herzegovina counterparts. Recently, we have
provided COVID-19 vaccines made in China.
Thirdly, China calls on the international community to take a fair and
balanced approach on the Bosnia and Herzegovina issue. We encourage the High
Representative to maintain constructive dialogue and cooperation with all Bosnian
parties. The appointment of the High Representative should be handled in accordance
with the Dayton Peace Agreement and past practices.
Since the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement 25 years ago, the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina has undergone great changes. The international
community should examine, in the light of the developments on the ground, ways
to render concrete support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in implementing the Dayton
Peace Agreement to better accommodate the needs of its people. China respects
the sovereignty, independence, national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and believes that its people have the ability and the wisdom to
address their own issues. China will continue to work with all countries to support
the national reconciliation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and safeguard peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Western Balkans.

21-060899/42

S/2021/436

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank you, High Representative Valentin Inzko, for your
comprehensive briefing today. We really commend your work, in particular, as
you are tackling close to 100 per cent of your tasks although your team’s size and
budget have substantially decreased over the years. We fully support a robust and
effective Office of High Representative, which is necessary in order to fulfil its
mandated responsibilities and mitigate risks to stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Inzko, your analysis of the situation in the country in your latest regular report
to the Secretary-General (see S/2021/409) is excellent, and we encourage you to also
include the elements of the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in future reporting.
Estonia strongly supports Bosnia and Herzegovina’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity and is certain that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future is adjoined
with the Euro-Atlantic path, in line with the legitimate aspiration of its citizens.
We welcome the local elections held in the city of Mostar on 20 December last year
for the first time since 2008, and the adoption of the revised National War Crimes
Processing Strategy, which both represent important steps forward for the country
on its European Union (EU) integration path.
We call on the presidency leaders to seize the opportunity of 2021 as nonelectoral year to show concrete progress on the implementation of the rest of the
key priorities of the European Commission’s opinion, in particular the electoral and
constitutional reform to ensure the equality and non-discrimination of citizens and
advancing the rule of law. We also encourage them to promote youth employment
and education, as well as gender equality, and to implement the women and peace
and security agenda in an inclusive manner.
We reiterate our full support to the European Union Military Operation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR-Althea) and its mandate, as the mission is a strong
contributor to the country’s efforts in maintaining a safe and secure environment,
which is particularly crucial in the current complicated political climate in the country.
The rise of nationalistic and divisive rhetoric in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
deeply concerning. Spreading provocative rhetoric, denying war crimes, glorifying
convicted war criminals and downplaying the Srebrenica genocide in any way is
unacceptable.
We urge the political parties in the country to engage in dialogue and foster
an environment conducive to unity, consensus and constructive engagement in the
interest of the citizens. Republika Srpska should stop advocating secession and
refrain from any actions or policies that could destabilize the country. It is high
time to put aside differences, focus on easing political tensions and promoting
reconciliation, and concentrate on forming the Government in the Federation.
A functioning Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court is of vital
strategic importance for the country, and we fully support its international judges.
All political parties in the country have to implement important judicial decisions of
the Constitutional Court and the European Court of Human Rights.
As we have learned from the High Representative’s latest report, the
coronavirus disease pandemic has seriously disrupted Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
economy. Estonia stands in strong support of the EU’s solidarity with the Western
Balkans and its addressing the immediate health needs, as well as the long-term
social and economic impact resulting from the pandemic. We commend the work
10/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

and support of all others, such as the United Nations Resident Coordinator and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), who have provided assistance to
Bosnia and Herzegovina during the pandemic.
We also commend UNICEF, UNDP and UNESCO for implementing
the Dialogue for the Future project, which seeks to enhance the local dialogue
platforms — bringing together local leaders, as well as civil society, youth, religious
leaders and women’s organizations.
To move forward, all political leaders of the country should deliver concrete
results and implement fundamental reforms. We call on the leaders to work in
solidarity and unity.

21-0608911/42

S/2021/436

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: French]
I, too, wish China every success in its presidency of the Security Council in
May and congratulate Viet Nam on its successful presidency last month.
I thank the High Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing and
commend his tireless commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past 12
years. I also welcome the presence here today of the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia and the European Union.
At a time when some people in Bosnia-Herzegovina are choosing to play
the card of division and the exacerbation of tensions, France, as a signatory to the
Dayton Agreement, strongly reaffirms its unwavering support for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and calls on all signatories to
these agreements to continue to uphold them. Divisive, nationalistic and secessionist
rhetoric, or rhetoric that raises the possibility of war, is not acceptable.
France calls on the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to focus on the
real challenges facing the country. There are many: the fight against the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which the European Union has supported, the
adoption and implementation of the reforms necessary for its development, and its
rapprochement with Europe.
We welcome some recent achievements, such as the holding of local elections
in 2020, in particular in Mostar for the first time since 2008, as has been mentioned
several times, and we call on the newly elected municipal authorities to undertake
concrete, inclusive local actions for the benefit of all their citizens. However,
much more needs to be done to implement the 14 key priorities of the European
Commission’s opinion. The year 2021, with no electoral deadline, is an opportunity
to make progress in implementing those reforms. We call for progress to be made in
the effective functioning of democratic institutions, namely, at the central State level,
and in strengthening the rule of law, especially with regard to the independence of
the judiciary and the fight against corruption. Electoral reform must be implemented
in accordance with the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights and the
recommendations of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Venice Commission.
The full and effective participation of women in political life must also be a
priority. We also continue to call for the formation of Governments in the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as in all the cantons that still do not have one,
and for the normal functioning of the country’s institutions.
As we commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide
on 11 July 2020, France reaffirms its strongest condemnation of the glorification
of war criminals convicted by the courts and the denial of genocide, which are
incompatible with the values of the European Union. The national and international
justice systems have done a remarkable job of prosecuting and convicting those
responsible for the atrocities committed during the conflict of the 1990s and their
decisions must be respected. The victims of sexual violence must be recognized.
France reaffirms the importance of justice, reparation and guarantees of nonrepetition for those crimes. Transitional justice and reconciliation processes remain
the only solid basis for the future of the country.
Given the tense political situation and, in particular, the resurgence of rhetoric
that challenges the existence of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a State, we reaffirm our
12/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

conviction that both the Office of the High Representative and the European Union
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina Operation Althea, to which France has
recommitted itself, must be maintained. We call on the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to overcome their divisions and to redouble their efforts to implement
the reforms recommended by the European Union, as well as the 5+2 agenda, which
is a condition for the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
Lastly, I would like to reaffirm France’s full support for the European prospects
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Western Balkan countries more broadly. For that
to happen, greater reform efforts and a firm rejection of divisive rhetoric are more
necessary than ever.

21-0608913/42

S/2021/436

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, Ravindra Raguttahalli
Let me begin by extending our best wishes to the Chinese delegation on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month, and I wish it all
success. I would like to thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his useful
briefing and for this comprehensive and detailed report (see S/2021/409).
The Dayton Peace Agreement remains the cornerstone for building enduring
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. To this day, Dayton continues to
define the framework to find solutions related to inter-ethnic conf lict settlement
through dialogue of the parties on the basis of equality and mutual respect,
compromise and consensus.
The Office of the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, as an adhoc international institution mechanism, has been overseeing the implementation
of the civilian aspects of the agreement. Towards this end, we also recognize the
progress made in the last two and half decades and the important role played by the
European Union Military Operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR-Althea,
and the contribution of the international community. These efforts have brought
about peace and allowed the sustenance of a complex political governance structure.
Of late, there have been some visible frictions though, including avoidable rhetoric
and actions, which have hampered progress in the implementation of the agreement.
We believe it is incumbent on the Office of the High Representative to continue
to work with all parties objectively to build trust to overcome the impediments.
The Office of the High Representative is an ad-hoc mechanism and expeditious
implementation of the 5+2 agenda should continue to remain the top priority. We are
of the view that the issue of Office of the High Representative needs to be resolved
through consensus.
The reporting period has witnessed some positive developments, despite the
negative impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic. The tripartite presidency has
issued a joint statement marking the twenty-fifth anniversary expressing commitment
to respect the provisions of the agreement and Constitution. The elections to the
assembly in Brčko district and local assemblies in cities and municipalities in both
the Federation and Republic of Srpska have taken place. This is a welcome trend
reflecting people’s faith in democracy. The Council of Ministers, as mentioned by the
High Representative, has met regularly and the presidency has also taken decisions
within its competencies. At the same time, as mentioned in the report of Office
of the High Representative, several areas remain where progress has been little or
less than satisfactory, including bringing an end to ethnic-based discrimination and
improving coordination among the State and entity-level institutions.
The increasing number of illegal migrants transiting Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a matter of serious concern, given its impact on internal security and the potential
of radicalization. India stands ready to extend support in capacity-building to address
this challenge.
We pay homage to those who lost their lives during the 1990s. Having
witnessed genocide in our own neighbourhood 50 years ago, we are convinced that
the attempts to seek justice for those who were massacred or went missing must
actively continue. In this regard, we welcome the adoption of the Revised National
War Crimes Processing Strategy.
While there has not been much progress on implementing 5+2 agenda, we
should not lose sight of positive developments, such as elections to the assembly in
14/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Brčko district. Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way in building a multiethnic, multilingual, multicultural and multireligious country. The problems that
the country is facing are typical and bound to be encountered on the path of nationbuilding, especially when inhabited by people of different faiths, ethnicities and
languages. We hope the Bosnian parties will continue their engagement in a spirit of
compromise and maturity to address all outstanding issues.

21-0608915/42

S/2021/436

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
Like others, I want to wish you well, Sir, at the beginning of your presidency
and again to thank our Vietnamese colleagues for the excellent month we have just
concluded.
This is the first time, as a new member, that Ireland has had an opportunity
to address the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina in discussion, so I want to begin
by underlining our strong support for a single, sovereign, united and multi-ethnic
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also want to express our support for the Office of the
High Representative and the European Union-led Operation Althea, in which Ireland
is proud to participate.
I would like to thank the High Representative, Mr. Inzko, for the clear and
detailed assessment he has just given us of the current situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I also want to welcome among us the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia.
While the report (see S/2021/409) before us sets out some serious issues of
concern, I want to start by welcoming some of the positive developments of recent
months. I am referring to the holding of local elections in Mostar last December,
for the first time in 12 years, which is particularly welcome. The same goes for the
adoption of the revised war crimes strategy. Ireland also very much welcomes the
progress on strengthening the rights of survivors of wartime-related sexual violence.
Conflict-related sexual violence remains a scourge in conflicts today, right around
the globe. It really is encouraging to see that steps are finally being taken to make
long-overdue redress to women in Bosnia and Herzegovina who have suffered from
such heinous crimes.
Ireland fully supports Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European Union (EU)
perspective. We encourage the country to make full use of this year to move ahead
decisively in this regard. Concrete progress on the reform of the electoral framework
is needed, and we urge Bosnia and Herzegovina to be ambitious. Such reforms
should include constitutional and electoral changes to meet European standards and
guarantee that all citizens can exercise their political rights. We know that achieving
these much-needed reforms will require all sides to show leadership and to engage
in a sincere and constructive way.
In addition, progress on the 14 key reform priorities set out in the European
Commission opinion is required, in particular on the rule of law. This is needed to
restore citizens’ trust in the judicial system. Bosnia and Herzegovina will move
forward on the EU path only when it delivers on this critical mass of reforms. In
this regard, Ireland commends the work of EU Special Representative Sattler and
his team.
Like all of us, Bosnia and Herzegovina has faced serious problems as a
result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I want to express Ireland’s
sympathy for the loss of life. We also welcome the disbursement of the EU’s
€80 million aid package to help Bosnia and Herzegovina address the pandemic’s
immediate consequences. We are pleased that the first deliveries of vaccines through
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility have now begun — today, I believe.
The EU’s 2020 economic and investment plan for the Western Balkans will address
longer-term strategic challenges facing the country.
Ireland remains greatly concerned by the divisive, negative rhetoric, in
particular the glorification of war criminals, which serves only to deepen existing
16/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

divisions and diminishes the prospects for reconciliation. We call on all parties to
repudiate such rhetoric, and instead to work towards common goals, address the
challenges created by COVID-19 and step up the pace on implementing the reforms
needed for EU accession.
This means addressing the needs of all citizens. We call on all parties to uphold
and respect equality and inclusion as key principles, which will surely underpin a
stable, prosperous future for Bosnia and Herzegovina. This path will also enable
women to participate on a full, equal and meaningful basis in decision-making in all
its dimensions. We would appreciate if sharper focus on the issue of gender equality
could be included in reporting by the Office of the High Representative.
In conclusion, it is clear that Bosnia and Herzegovina now needs to take
decisive steps towards overcoming the dismal legacy of the past. There is much
challenging work ahead, and we sincerely hope to see decisive steps taken in that
direction and achieved this year.

21-0608917/42

S/2021/436

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I wish you, Sir, a successful month as President of the Security Council, and I
congratulate Viet Nam on its successful leadership in April.
I thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing.
Kenya commends the Office of the High Representative for its efforts
to seek progress on the five objectives and two conditions that remain the basis
for the attainment of long-term stability for Bosnia and Herzegovina. We call on
the authorities to work together to make progress on these five objectives and
two conditions, as well as to ensure full compliance with the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Kenya notes the joint statement by the members of the tripartite Presidency
to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the initialling of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We urge them to take tangible
action to fulfil their commitment to respecting the provisions of the Agreement and
the Constitution and to creating a society inclusive of all its peoples and citizens.
Kenya believes these are the minimum requirements for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to chart its own way to a stable and functioning democracy, and that
unity of purpose, especially at the leadership level, is critical to laying a firm
foundation for successful governance.
We strongly urge the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to avoid any actions
that might divide the people along ethnic or religious lines. Any attempt to do so
would put at risk the peace that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina deserve.
Kenya insists that any resistance to inclusion and respect for diversity among leaders,
particularly in a post-conflict multi-ethnic country, endangers the peace.
For Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has been subject to violent conflict to
the extent of demanding the intervention of the international community, and the
Security Council, any statements or policies by leaders that embrace separation and
ethnic nationalism must be closely watched and responded to robustly in order to
prevent renewed conflict.
Like many countries across the world, Bosnia and Herzegovina is grappling
with the continuing negative effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The pandemic is a common challenge that calls for unified efforts to control it.
However, it is regrettable that political differences have stood in the way of unified
and coordinated pandemic response action. Kenya urges all leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to put aside their differences and work together.
In conclusion, Kenya urges the authorities to strengthen their counterterrorism strategies. These should include undertaking more efforts to prepare the
legal and disengagement capabilities to handle repatriated and returning fighters
who had travelled abroad to fight for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams. There
should also be operationalization of a robust terrorism-prevention strategy that
finds inspiration in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
Kenya also encourages collaboration among the parties to create an
environment conducive to the return of refugees and displaced persons to their homes
and places of origin, including by ending divisive rhetoric and the glorification of
war criminals.
18/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
I wish you every success this month, Mr. President, and congratulate Viet
Nam once again.
I thank High Representative Inzko for his report (see S/2021/409), and I take
this opportunity to express the support of my country for the work of his Office.
I also recognize the presence of the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, Serbia and the European Union.
The citizens’ mandate to their elected leaders and the formation of a
Government must be apriority. The formation of a federal Government must not be
held hostage to political calculations or revenge. More than two years on from the last
general elections, the formal formation of a Government cannot be postponed. To
that end, all political factions must respect and protect the institutional architecture.
That is the guarantee and safeguard of stability and national unity. Hence our call to
move swiftly on pending appointments.
We recognize the vital role of the Central Election Commission, which, in
the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic and despite the constant attacks
against the institution, organized both the 2020 local elections in the Federation and
in Republika Srprska, as well as the Assembly elections in Brčko district. Likewise,
we are pleased that the citizens of Mostar participated in the first elections in the
city since 2008.
However, we regret the lack of progress in the implementation of the “5 plus
2” agenda of five objectives and two conditions, mandated by the Security Council,
which is a requirement for the closure of the Office of the High Representative. We
call on the parties to move ahead in this regard, which is also a crucial component of
their path to European integration.
The rule of law is the cornerstone of institutional stability. Narratives seeking
the expulsion of foreign judges from the Constitutional Court undermine the rule of
law. We therefore reaffirm the importance that the binding decisions of the judiciary
and the provisions of the Constitution be respected at all times. The delay in the
appointment of the four remaining judges to the Federal Constitutional Court has a
direct impact on the important work of that judicial body, which is why we urge that
the process be completed as soon as possible.
We are also following with concern the attacks against the Constitutional Court,
the destabilization of the Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the request of the Republika Srprska to carry out a “peaceful dissolution”. One
of the guiding principles of the Dayton Accords is that the signatories would refrain
from any act contrary to the territorial integrity or independence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, both of which cannot and should not be negotiable. This is a principle
of international law that is also enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations itself.
It is essential to protect and preserve the political balance guaranteeing respect for the
country’s legal framework, and thereby the rights and equality of all groups involved.
Reconciliation, cohesion and inclusion must be the guiding principles. There
is no room for hate speech, the glorification of war criminals, divisive rhetoric or
historical revisionism. We call on the leaders of the various political factions to
focus their efforts on seeking common ground and what unites them and to reject
narratives that drive ethnic tensions and exploit disinformation, while keeping the
well-being of their citizens always in mind.
21-0608919/42

S/2021/436

In conclusion, my delegation makes a specific request to the Office of the
High Representative to share information on the political representation of women
in the country, in particular in the context of last November’s elections.

20/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his informative briefing.
My delegation welcomes the holding of local elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, especially those in the city of Mostar, where none had been held
since 2008.
However, this positive momentum should not obscure the institutional
dysfunctionality linked to, among other things, the absence of a Federation
Government, resulting from the non-implementation of the results of the 2018
federal elections. It is therefore crucial that key reforms be carried out, in particular
the establishment of a transparent and inclusive electoral system as well as efforts to
strengthen the rule of law.
Moreover, we urge the authorities to agree on a unified and coordinated
approach in response to the coronavirus disease so as to mitigate its negative
socioeconomic impact on the population.
The lack of significant progress in the implementation of the “5 plus 2” agenda
of five objectives and two conditions is a major concern that requires appropriate
responses. In that regard, we urge the parties to strictly respect the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as abide by the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in particular with regard to the future
of the Office of the High Representative.
We continue to accord great importance to the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons. We therefore call on stakeholders at all levels to work
towards a sociopolitical climate favourable to voluntary returns and the reintegration
of returnees into their communities.
In conclusion, my delegation encourages the parties to demonstrate
constructive political commitment to harness the positive momentum following the
recent local elections, to promote dialogue and to refrain from any rhetoric or actions
that might jeopardize peace and stability.

21-0608921/42

S/2021/436

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
We fully support the Office of the High Representative and its ongoing work
on the implementation of the “5 plus 2” agenda of five objectives and two conditions.
And let me thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing today. We also appreciate
his report on the current situation, outlining the challenges Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to face (see S/2021/409). It shows there is still considerable work to be
done before we can see the full implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Norway also welcomes the continued work of the European Union-led
Operation Althea. Its contribution to maintaining stability and a safe and secure
environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina is important. And let me confirm that we
fully support the sovereignty, territorial integrity and fundamental structure of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single, sovereign State comprising two entities.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been greatly affected by the coronavirus disease
crisis, experiencing significant negative socioeconomic and political impacts. There
are worrisome trends of increasing unemployment, loss of income, setbacks within
the health and education sectors and an increase in domestic violence. We express
our support to, and sympathy with, the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina during
these daunting and exceptional times.
However, it is a sad reality that neither the Government of Bosnia of
Herzegovina nor other levels of Government have been able to cope adequately with
the crisis and mitigate the challenges now faced by the population.
That said, we would like to commend the holding of local elections last
year. The year 2021 now constitutes a window of opportunity for reforms, as it is a
year with no elections planned. We urge political actors to use this momentum for
dialogue and to make a genuine commitment to democratic principles, towards a
common agenda.
Appointing a new Government in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
should be a high priority, as two and a half years have already elapsed since the most
recent general elections. Continued reforms are necessary to ensure the stability
and welfare of the people. Reforms are also a prerequisite for further European
cooperation and integration. All parties must prioritize the implementation of
comprehensive reforms in a manner benefiting all citizens. That will require political
will and strong leadership.
We also encourage the Government to make further efforts to strengthen the
rule of law. Upholding standards of judicial impartiality and integrity and of police
independence and accountability is essential to ensure that Bosnia and Herzegovina
develops as a State based on the rule of law. Among other things, that means that it
must abide by its international commitments on human rights and implement all the
relevant judgments of the European Court of Human Rights.
We also welcome the decision by the Council of Ministers to establish
the Commission for Cooperation with NATO. By endorsing the new programme
of reforms with NATO for 2021, Bosnia and Herzegovina will make progress on
necessary reforms within its armed forces and secure increased interoperability with
the alliance.
Women are key to peace. We therefore continue to call on all parties to ensure
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in all aspects of peacebuilding,
22/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

and we encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully implement its national action
plan on women and peace and security. We would welcome an update on this issue
in the next report.
Let me conclude by reiterating that Norway will remain an active partner
in supporting reforms and promoting European cooperation and integration with
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

21-0608923/42

S/2021/436

Annex XI
Statement by Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
Let me congratulate you on the start of your presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May and wish you every success in that capacity. Let me also thank
the delegation of Viet Nam for its able presidency of the Council in April.
I would like to express our regret over the format chosen for this meeting.
We believe that, given the improving health safety environment and the growing
number of vaccines administered in New York, video-teleconference meetings of
the Security Council seem somewhat unnecessary. We believe the Security Council
needs to be courageous and return to Headquarters, with social distancing and other
relevant recommendations in place. The Chamber is fully equipped to ensure that the
necessary safety measures are observed. The in-person meetings that convene in the
General Assembly Hall almost every day show that our proposal is very realistic. We
call on the Chinese presidency to take the lead and promote the Security Council’s
return to its regular modus operandi.
We regret to state that the report of High Representative Inzko (see
S/2021/409) is again very unbalanced and does not reflect the real situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Mr. Inzko presents biased, hand-picked information taken out of
context and arbitrarily interprets that data so as to make it fit his version of events.
The report also implies that Bosnian Serbs and Croats are to blame for every
obstacle to national reconciliation and that the only way forward is to strengthen
the central authorities by reducing the constitutional rights of peoples and entities.
Deliberate scaremongering can only create an illusion that the Office of the High
Representative is the magic wand that is needed to quickly and efficiently solve all
the problems. The self-serving conclusion is that Mr. Inzko is responsible for all
positive changes, whereas the constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina are but
a sad impediment to this process.
The report reflects a trend towards greater direct interference by the Office
of the High Representative in local affairs, as well as a twisted interpretation of
historical events, which is very worrisome. Such actions stoke tensions and do
not contribute to inter-ethnic dialogue. That can be clearly seen from the Office’s
instructions and ultimatums issued to the Bosnian authorities, as well as from
insinuations regarding the Serbian people’s collective responsibility for the tragic
events that unfold during armed conflict.
We strongly recommend that the High Representative refrain from
interpreting his mandate too broadly, in particular with regard to the Euro-Atlantic
agenda. The Office of the High Representative is not mandated to address Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s cooperation with NATO and the European Union. Under
the constitutional regulations, those issues are a prerogative of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities.
We suggest that Mr. Inzko stop acting as a self-proclaimed governor, putting
himself above the law and the democratic institutions of a State that upholds the
rule of law. It is entirely unacceptable, as the High Representative does not have any
special tools for that purpose. We propose that our colleagues consider the report of
the Government of the Republic of Srpska as a good alternative to the report of the
Office of the High Representative.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is rather stable and poses no threat to
international peace and security. We are not inclined to succumb to the panic that the
24/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

High Representative deliberately generates around the considerations of some people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina regarding the future of their State. We do not think that
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, also known
as the Dayton Agreement, is in jeopardy. What is concerning are the efforts of certain
Bosnian political forces to reshape the Dayton architecture to make it more unified.
Such approaches are promoted from without, including by the High Representative.
We are convinced that full responsibility for the country’s development and
future should rest with the legitimate authorities, acting within their respective
powers and duties. There is no alternative to internal, mutually respectful dialogue
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and compromise and consensus are the only ways
to resolve the country’s outstanding challenges. If the Dayton accords are to be
amended, such changes must result from an agreement reached freely among the
three constituent peoples and two entities in the country. External interference
in the country’s sovereign affairs and unilateral sanctions against the legitimate
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina are unacceptable.
For the sake of clarity, let me stress that the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are the bearers of the country’s sovereignty. It is they, rather than the High
Representative or any external actor, who must define the future of the country and
its path of development.
We therefore see no added value in involving the Office of the High
Representative in the domestic process of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Indeed, the
Office’s activity runs counter to the principles of a democratic State governed by the
rule of law, and the Office is not accountable to any national or international court.
Besides, two of the three constituent peoples are very critical about the activity of the
High Representative. That can be seen in the fact that, on 10 March, the Parliament
of the Republika Srpska adopted a resolution demanding the closure of the Office of
the High Representative and that its authority be delegated to the governing bodies
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That position cannot be ignored.
We reaffirm our position regarding the closure of the Office of the High
Representative as soon as possible, as the Office is an anachronism of a protectorate
over a sovereign European country. The terms and criteria of the closure should
reflect the realities on the ground.
We would like to assure the Council that Russia fully supports the basic
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
equality of the three constituent peoples and the two entities with broad powers. The
1995 peace agreement remains fully relevant today. It envisages a balance of interests
that is still fully effective and, what is more, has no alternative. The desire to destroy
such a system could have dangerous consequences, not only for the Balkans but also
for Europe as a whole.
In response to the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, since the
discussion with Mr. Inzko convenes regularly, including in the Security Council, I
will be brief.
Let me just address one point that he raised in his statement regarding EuroAtlantic prospects for Bosnia and Herzegovina. As you rightly stated, this is not part
of your mandate. Besides, you cited some consensus in Bosnia and Herzegovina
regarding this prospect, which I would consider as a distortion of facts. I am afraid
that claims that the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina is in support of accession
to NATO are not quite true.

21-0608925/42

S/2021/436

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah DeShong
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing, as well as his team’s
commitment to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We begin by expressing our deep concern over the impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic on the economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as
the population. We appeal to the international community to lend support in any way
possible, and we underscore the importance of prioritizing the health and safety of
the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is critical that relevant authorities set aside
political differences and create, with the greatest sense of urgency, a coordinated
framework and unified response to counter the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic
and ease its impact on the population.
The rule of law remains a key characteristic of any society determined to
secure stability, peace and good governance. It is important to combat divisive
rhetoric and policies and corruption and to quell any conduct inimical to the overall
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the wider region. To this end,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines urges all the relevant authorities and leaders to
strengthen the rule of law.
In addition, we recognize the significance of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including as it relates to the creation
of an environment conducive to the voluntary return and reintegration of refugees
into communities. It is concerning that the most recent report (see S/2021/409) of on
the implementation of the Peace Agreement documents the continued glorification
of war criminals, divisive rhetoric and targeted attacks on religious property, all of
which make the dignified return of refugees challenging.
This is evidence that efforts towards implementing the General Framework
Agreement must be strengthened in order to move the country forward in a
sustainable manner. We call on all parties to respect their obligations under the
Agreement and fulfil in earnest their commitments made under international law
and to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Wanton disregard for the rule of law
and international commitments will only operate to undermine progress and move
Bosnia and Herzegovina further away from reconciliation and durable peace.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines affirms its support for the stability, political
independence and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the role of the
Office of the High Representative. It is important that all the relevant actors and
stakeholders work to implement the Peace Agreement in good faith and have an open
dialogue about where implementation is falling short.

26/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Viet Nam once again on its successful
presidency of the Security Council for the month of April and sincerely wish China
every success in its assumption of the presidency this month.
I thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his valuable briefing and report on the implementation of the Peace Agreement,
and I welcome the representatives of the European Union, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia and Serbia, who are participating in the meeting in accordance with rule 37
of the rules of procedure.
My delegation welcomes the holding of the 2020 local and municipal
elections, which included the first elections to be held in the city of Mostar since
2008. We commend the Central Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
its success in organizing the elections in spite of technical difficulties, particularly
those imposed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Given the many
problems that arose during the elections, which are documented in the report, my
delegation calls on the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to move forward with
the reform of the electoral system and to implement the technical recommendations
made by the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights following the
2018 elections, in addition to the recommendations that were previously made by
the Group of States against Corruption and the Venice Commission of the Council
of Europe.
My delegation remains concerned that negative ethnic rhetoric persists and
that such rhetoric could deepen existing divisions, thereby hindering reconciliation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that regard, I reaffirm the full support of Tunisia for a prosperous, stable and
peaceful Bosnia and Herzegovina. The sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina must be preserved, and any actions that would sabotage reforms
and threaten the unity and stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina must be avoided.
We also urge all parties to refrain from making divisive calls that deepen
ethnonational rifts, imperil stability and the overall peacebuilding process and
undermine the improvements and progress to which the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina aspire.
My delegation continues to support the efforts of the Office of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in accordance with the Dayton Peace Agreement, the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the mandate of the European Union-led Operation Althea in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in order to reinforce the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to maintain a safe and secure environment. We call on all parties to join forces to
implement the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With regard to the agenda of the five objectives and two conditions for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
encourage all parties to fulfil their commitments in order to render the country
fully autonomous.
Although the Dayton Peace Agreement was concluded a quarter of a century
ago, these periodic reports clearly highlight the continuing stalemate. We would
21-0608927/42

S/2021/436

like to remind all political leaders to avoid the conflicting objectives and interests
that are a constant source of crisis and tension, to make the national interest of all
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina a priority and to pave the way for the younger
generation to build a better future, a future rooted in ethnic and cultural unity.
Moreover, I express our solidarity with the authorities and the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in their fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, in view of the recent
increase in the number of cases and the difficulty in securing vaccinations. We once
again call on all parties to unite and coordinate their efforts to combat the pandemic
and mitigate its repercussions on people and the economy.
In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates that it fully supports all efforts to stabilize
Bosnia and Herzegovina and bring about reconciliation among its various ethnic
groups. Tunisia stands ready to work with various partners to support lasting peace
and security, achieve sustainable development and fulfil the aspirations of the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina for a better future.

28/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Annex XIV
Statement by the Deputy Counsellor of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Alice Jacobs
I also would like to congratulate China on its assumption of the Security
Council presidency for this month and wish it all the best. I would also like to thank
and congratulate Viet Nam on its excellent stewardship of the Council in April.
And I also thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing and his most recent
comprehensive report (see S/2021/409).
As we have heard, like many other countries, Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the
grip of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Now more than ever, is the
time for political leaders across the country to come together to fight the pandemic,
to lead the country in its recovery and to take the necessary collective steps to ensure
a future that benefits all citizens.
We urge all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to reinvigorate action to agree
on and implement required electoral and limited constitutional reforms. There needs
to be real political will and compromise from all sides in order to find a lasting
solution. We urge the authorities to work closely with the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and with the Venice Commission. The authorities should redouble their
efforts to address the outstanding judgments of the European Court of Human
Rights, most notably the rulings in the Sejdić-Finci set of cases.
Successes are possible. We welcome the holding of local elections, especially
in Mostar, where elections were last held in 2008. And we congratulate the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Central Election Commission for successfully organizing two
consecutive elections under challenging circumstances. We also congratulate the
Office of the High Representative on its work in Brčko district on good governance,
infrastructure development and private-sector growth.
What is unhelpful, and indeed a real threat to peace and stability, is the current
political rhetoric around the “peaceful dissolution” of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
poses a serious threat to peace and stability, and therefore undermines the peace the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Instead, the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina need their political leaders and representatives to
focus their efforts on urgently combating the COVID-19 pandemic, strengthening
the rule of law and implementing economic and other reforms that would move the
country forward on its European path.
We reaffirm our unequivocal commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a single, sovereign State comprising two entities, with all three
constituent peoples equal in their rights and in the rights of others.
The United Kingdom continues to support reconciliation efforts in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and in the Western Balkans more widely, including through
our project programming and our role in the Berlin process and the Peace
Implementation Council.
We would like once again to remember the many thousands of victims and
acknowledge the suffering on all sides of the Balkans conflicts. It is only through
meaningful reconciliation across communities that we can fully overcome the
painful legacies of the past. We once again call for an end to the glorification of
convicted war criminals and the denial of the Srebrenica genocide. This definition
has been officially recognized by two international tribunals as well as domestic
21-0608929/42

S/2021/436

judicial bodies, and denial merely serves to reinforce the deep societal divisions that
threaten to block Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress.
Finally, as is clear from the High Representative’s report (see S/2021/409),
the international community’s role remains vital. In particular, the Office of the
High Representative continues to have an essential role in maintaining the civilian
aspects of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, and its work is central to
supporting action by the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including through
the implementation of the “5 plus 2” criteria, to create that future. The Office of the
High Representative and its use of executive powers, should the situation require it,
continues to have the United Kingdom’s full support.

30/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I would like to congratulate China on its presidency of the Security Council
for this month and wish it the best of luck. I would like to once again thank our
colleague from Viet Nam for an extraordinary month in April. In addition, I would
like to thank High Representative Inzko for his tireless service in the months since
his previous briefing to the Security Council (see S/2020/1103) and over the tenure
of his service.
The position of the United States on the Dayton Peace Agreement and on
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future as a single State destined for the Euro-Atlantic
community remains unchanged. We are committed to the principles of Dayton — that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a democratic, multi-ethnic, sovereign and independent
State with unquestioned territorial integrity. There is no future for either of the
entities outside of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United States supports the essential role of the High Representative in
monitoring and supporting the implementation of the civilian aspects of the Dayton
Peace Accords. Bosnia and Herzegovina must meet the specific criteria established
by the Peace Implementation Council — the “5 plus 2” agenda — in order to
graduate from international supervision. Now is the time for renewed focus and
action towards completing that agenda. That means, first and foremost, tackling
rampant corruption, which threatens the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Right now, corrupt politicians, a judiciary under political influence, public
offices that promote personal or party interests and State-owned enterprises that
prioritize patronage all enable corruption to thrive. The result is that the country
is losing its talented young people, as we heard from the High Representative this
morning. They are immigrating to countries where they have greater opportunities,
where they will be rewarded for their hard work and where Governments can be
counted on to protect their rights and be responsive to their needs.
The only solution is for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s politicians to strengthen their
institutions and laws that fight crime and safeguard human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Bosnia and Herzegovina must be willing to adopt international legislative
standards to ensure that agencies are sufficiently funded and are autonomous.
Specifically, we agree with the High Representative that the adoption of the Brčko
District Law on the Prevention of Conflict of Interest can serve as a model.
After corruption, the second main obstacle to progress is politicians who
focus narrowly on ethnonationalist goals. The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
should question why major party leaders are more focused on rhetorical battles
than achievable reforms like fighting corruption and discrimination or improving
the economy and the electoral process. There are no scheduled elections in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in 2021. As Secretary of State Blinken noted in his letter to the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, that presents an opportunity to make necessary
electoral and constitutional reforms.
It is time to move Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to European Union
standards while also addressing the rulings by the European Court of Human Rights.
The United States, along with others in the international community, will do all
we can to promote compromise on a package deal among the parties in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Finally, in order to prepare for elections in 2022, we are urging officials in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to address the election-integrity recommendations of the
21-0608931/42

S/2021/436

Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Group of States against Corruption.
Everyone deserves to know that their vote counts. That includes the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore agree with the High Representative that the
Federation Government should be formed without delay and look forward to the full
satisfaction of previously established objectives and conditions for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative.
Let me end by once again thanking Mr. Inzko for his extraordinary efforts and
commitment to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

32/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to begin by extending our congratulations and best wishes to
China on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council in this month
of May. Our thanks and appreciation also go to all members of the Council for the
strong support and close cooperation they showed during our presidency in April.
I thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing and welcome the
presence of representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia, as well
as the Head of the Delegation of the European Union, at today’s meeting.
We take note of recent developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina as highlighted
in the High Representative’s report. While there have been positive developments
over the past six months, including the holding of local elections in November
and December 2020, we remain concerned about the political instability, divisive
rhetoric and lack of much-needed cooperation among the entities and communities
in the country.
We are further worried that the coronavirus disease pandemic, having reached
an all-time high recently, further complicates existing tensions. The situation
continues to undermine the full implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. It
is also regrettable to learn that the 5+2 agenda has made little progress, and was even
rolled back, during the reporting period.
We strongly believe that the interests and well-being of the people must be
placed at the centre of all efforts. In this regard, we urge all parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to work together to overcome their differences, strengthen efforts and
engage in constructive dialogue and confidence-building measures in a sustained
manner. National reconciliation will be a driver of long-term stability and sustainable
development towards a united and peaceful country for all its people. Focus should
be given to, inter alia, socioeconomic development, enhancement of the rule of law
and public administration reform.
Throughout this process, national ownership is essential. Primary
responsibility lies with Bosnia and Herzegovina, its communities and peoples. At
the same time, support from the international community, including from related
countries, is no less important. We call for meaningful international support for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in accordance with international law and the aspirations
of the country and its people. Mediation and reconciliation efforts should focus
on bridging the differences among parties and on bringing them together in joint
endeavours for a future of peace and development.
Before concluding, we would like to reiterate the importance of respect for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the implementation of relevant treaties and Security Council resolutions. We
call on all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to find a people-centred, lasting and
peaceful solution.

21-0608933/42

S/2021/436

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the United Nations, Sven Alkalaj
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the President on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May, and to wish him and his
delegation every success. We also welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and have taken note of his report on the situation in the
country covering the period from 16 October 2020 through 15 April 2021.
Let me first address the most urgent issues concerning the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. The authorities have been undertaking all measures necessary
to getting the sufficient number of vaccines for immunizing our population. It is
important to underline that our authorities are not satisfied with the pace of delivery
of the prepaid vaccines from the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility system,
which is unreasonably slow. In that regard, it is essential to highlight the crucial role
of the World Health Organization (WHO) in securing equitable access to COVID-19related health products and vaccines. We would like to take this opportunity to thank
our international partners China, Turkey, Serbia and Slovenia for their generous
donations of COVID-19 vaccines.
In the meantime, our doctors, nurses, first responders and many others
have undertaken indispensable efforts, risking their lives in the fight against this
ferocious and highly contagious disease. Our hospitals, medical and other relevant
institutions have done a tremendous job in combating this invisible enemy. During
the COVID-19 outbreak, health services were provided to all persons in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including migrants and asylum seekers, irrespective of citizenship or
health-insurance status.
In addition to affecting the health-care system, the pandemic has also
had a strong impact on our economy. According to recent figures, Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s gross domestic product in 2020 declined by 4.6 per cent. Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s authorities have introduced some essential measures to mitigate
the negative effects of the pandemic. Urgent financial packages have been created
to help those suffering the most. For this reason, the assistance of international
financial institutions, in particular the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank, would be welcome, so as to overcome the negative economic and social effects
of the COVID-19 pandemic. In that regard, the role of the United Nations will be
indispensable through the United Nations country team and, of course, the United
Nations Development Programme, the WHO and UNICEF, among others.
Let me now turn to some points relating to other aspects of the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The security situation in the country continues to be
peaceful and calm, which has been regularly reflected in the reports of the European
Union military operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country’s authorities
are fully committed to overcoming challenges and implementing the reforms
required for full-fledged integration into the European Union (EU). The authorities
will be working towards implementing reforms and meeting EU requirements for
attaining candidacy status this year. In accordance with the plan for implementing
the recommendations set forth in the opinion of the European Commission, the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the rules of procedure
of the Stabilization and Association Parliamentary Committee between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the European Union, which is an important step forward in the
European integration.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued to actively participate in regional
cooperation through the South-East European Cooperation Process, the Western
34/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Balkans Fund and the Central European Initiative, inter alia, and maintains goodneighbourly relations with countries of the region. The fostering of friendly and
constructive cooperation among the countries of the region on issues of mutual
interest remains a top priority in the country’s foreign policy. The cooperation of
the Western Balkan States within the framework of the Berlin process remains a
key driver of their integration into the European Union and of stability in the region.
During the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued to
fulfil its international obligations with respect to countering terrorism and violent
extremism. We would like to underline that the Ministry of Security of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in cooperation with other institutions in the country, is finalizing a
new, revised strategy for preventing and combating terrorism. EU experts have been
working together with Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities to implement the 20182022 action plan for the prevention of money-laundering and financing of terrorist
activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The rule of law is one of the highest priorities on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
reform agenda. In this regard, it is necessary for existing law under rulings of the
High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina be accordingly
revised. The judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to process
individuals involved in fighting on behalf of terrorist organizations, as well as those
who facilitate the recruitment of terrorist fighters. With regard to processing war
crimes in domestic courts, we would reiterate that fighting impunity is vital for
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a complex and multi-ethnic State.
The country also continues to pursue a very important planning, monitoring
and evaluation process in the field of social and economic development that is fully
in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In that regard, let me
express our gratitude to the United Nations country team in Bosnia and Herzegovina
for its outstanding contribution to and tireless efforts in assisting our institutions in
fulfilling our development agenda. On 20 May 2021, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the United Nations will sign a new five-year agreement, for the period from 2021
to 2025.
The international migrant crisis continues to pose a substantial challenge
to the States of the region and their economies. For some time now, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has experienced a significant increase in refugees and migrants on its
territory, most of whom crossed the borders illegally. Bearing in mind our lack of
national capacity, as well as the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina is not the final
destination for most migrants, our authorities need stronger international support.
In this respect, for a comprehensive response, the country’s institutions need much
greater support from the EU, as well as from the relevant United Nations agencies.
In these challenging times, Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to contribute
actively to international peace and security by deploying its military and police
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping missions. Currently, we have approximately
45 personnel serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide.
I would like to reiterate that Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the United
Nations peace and security efforts in conflict situations and has endorsed the call
of Secretary-General António Guterres for a global ceasefire, in order to silence the
guns, stop violence and speak out for peace. There is nothing more important than
an immediate ceasefire in all corners of the globe to strengthen diplomatic action,
help create conditions for delivery of life-saving aid and bring hope to places that
are among the most vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic. Bosnia and Herzegovina
stands ready to cooperate with States Members of the United Nations and the broader

21-0608935/42

S/2021/436

United Nations family on this critical issue, which is among the most pressing the
world is facing today.
Finally, we would like to express the readiness of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
authorities to continuing their work to secure a better and more prosperous future
for its citizens, as well as our gratitude to our international partners for supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina on that path.

36/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Croatia to the
United Nations, Ivan Šimonović
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States (annex XX). I would like to make some further
remarks in my national capacity.
I thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing today and for his recent
comprehensive report. Croatia remains committed to closely working with the Office
of the High Representative.
Six months ago we marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton-Paris
Peace Agreement. Its major achievement was ending the war and achieving lasting
peace and the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Today, 25 years after Dayton, we believe the country is finally turning the page,
embracing more ambitious peacetime goals and engaging with more determination
in the reforms necessary for its Euro-Atlantic integration path. We see this process as
crucial for the long-term stability, security, prosperity and democratic transformation
of the country. It is a challenging process, but it offers numerous benefits.
Croatia remains a staunch supporter of and advocate for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. A few weeks ago, the Croatian Minister for Foreign and European
Affairs, Mr. Gordan Grlić-Radman, visited Bosnia and Herzegovina as a show
of Croatian help and support for Bosnia and Herzegovina both in meetings with
political and religious leaders and in public appearances. He also announced that
Croatia will donate anti-coronavirus vaccines to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The stability and functionality of the country also greatly depend on the
equality of all its citizens and of its three constituent peoples — Bosniaks, Serbs and
Croats. If equality is not fully respected, it has the potential to be a source of tension,
functional gridlock and political crisis.
The equality of all citizens and constituent peoples can be ensured through
the much-needed reform of the country’s electoral law. A reformed elections law
needs to be adopted prior to the 2022 general election in order to ensure equality of
all citizens and among constituent peoples and remove all forms of discrimination in
the electoral process. It is therefore clear that the vast opportunity that the year 2021
presents needs to be seized.
Given that the process is time-sensitive, an inter-agency working group must
be promptly formed to tackle changes to the elections law that implement Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s Constitutional Court rulings and to address rulings of the
European Court of Human Rights. Furthermore, credible and impartial electionsadministration institutions are crucial for conducting free and fair elections. There
is clearly a need to restore the confidence of citizens in elections, which will
also positively contribute to the legitimacy of electoral outcomes. In addition, it
is imperative to ensure that future elections are conducted in line with European
standards and on the basis of relevant recommendations of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe’s Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights and the Venice Commission.
Ongoing attempts to shift focus from much-needed comprehensive reforms
contributes to a deepening of the challenges in Bosnia and Herzegovina. What the
country needs today is much more cooperation and far less division. Unfortunately,
in recent weeks, we have been witnessing dangerous and unacceptable attempts
to destabilize the country’s already fragile political landscape. Speculation about
21-0608937/42

S/2021/436

border changes that create new fears of instability, ethnic division and possible war
should be strongly and unanimously condemned.
The responsibility for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future primarily lies in the
hands of its peoples, political leaders and institutions. We should encourage them
to reach compromises that will result in a more stable and functional country. It
is time for the country to take ownership of crucial reforms and show that it is
capable of successfully tailoring its own destiny. Looking backward and keeping the
unsatisfactory status quo is prompting thousands of young people to emigrate. The
successful completion of electoral reforms and the relaxation of political tensions
can serve as a good foundation for shifting the country’s focus to building sound
political, economic and demographic perspectives.
In conclusion, Croatia strongly supports Bosnia and Herzegovina in fulfilling
the 14 priorities defined by the European Commission and therefore its achievement
of candidate status for EU membership. We also welcome the recent establishment
of the Commission for Cooperation with NATO, which we see as evidence that
solutions can be found and important steps made with regard to the country. As
a member of the EU and NATO, Croatia will continue to strongly support Bosnia
and Herzegovina in its ambition to integrate. In the process, we will extend our full
political support for and technical expertise and assistance to the country.
A prosperous future for Bosnia and Herzegovina must be grounded on
democracy and equality within its multinational society, on the rule of law and
good governance, and on strong guarantees that human rights and freedoms will be
enjoyed by all. In pursuing that noble cause, Bosnia and Herzegovina will always
have friend and partner in neighbouring Croatia.

38/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Annex XIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Serbia to the
United Nations, Nemanja Stevanovii
Regrettably, yet another Security Council meeting on the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is being convened against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
For more than a year now, the world, including the Western Balkans, has
fought the invisible enemy. During this time of global hardship, Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and their people, have demonstrated strong friendship and
solidarity between them. Our two countries have cooperated intensely in fighting
the pandemic and its catastrophic consequences. They have secured, among others,
a functional “green corridor” within the Central European Free Trade Agreement
region to facilitate the flow of goods, particularly of products humanitarian in
nature, and adopted measures for a free movement of citizens without the obligation
to take PCR tests.
It is with pride and pleasure that I point out that, at the time of its own
vaccination efforts, my country never hesitated in its resolve to help its neighbours,
including Bosnia and Herzegovina, by sending them substantial quantities of
vaccines. On 2 March, President Vučić flew to Sarajevo Airport to personally
deliver 10,000 doses of vaccines. Following his meeting with all three members
of the country’s Presidency on that occasion, the Government of Serbia granted an
additional 20,000 doses on 8 April, to be administered to the people of Sarajevo
canton in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. During the last week of March,
citizens of our neighbouring countries were presented with an opportunity to get
vaccinated in Belgrade, Novi Sad and Niš free of charge, without prior registration,
and the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina expressed great interest in this option.
Serbia’s vaccine donations to Bosnia and Herzegovina, largest by far among its
donations to other countries, continue unabated and are reflective of my country’s
readiness to support and contribute, through active engagement, to that country in
its fight against COVID-19. In addition to alleviating the problems and the gravity
of the challenges, our cooperation in these testing times will help us strengthen and
develop our work together as good neighbours in the days to come.
As we have shown repeatedly, Bosnia and Herzegovina is a very important
partner for my country. We continue to support the process of strengthening our
bilateral relations and good-neighbourly cooperation, just as we do with other
countries of the region. We are committed to political dialogue and the building
of trust and solidarity. The high-level dialogue has been intensified and a number
of visits by high-ranking officials of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina has taken
place lately. The cooperation between our two countries is most fruitful in the field
of economy. This is manifested, in particular, in the investment field. Serbia is
the third-largest investor in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are indeed appreciative
of the progress made with regard to infrastructure projects and pleased that work
commenced therein has not been halted during the pandemic. One such project is the
construction of the highway between Belgrade and Sarajevo.
We trust and believe that regional cooperation is not only necessary but
also achievable only if we all demonstrate our readiness to work together on the
realization of the strategic vision of a better region for all in the spirit of goodneighbourly relations. Through its constructive and active engagement within the
region, Serbia is making every effort to positively influence the pursuit of common
interests and prove, in the process, that sharing common values will help us reach
the same goals — that is, bring us closer to the membership of the European Union.
21-0608939/42

S/2021/436

We support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s European integration processes and welcome
each and every step it takes in that direction.
Serbia’s priority is to maintain peace and stability and, in that context, I would
like to reiterate that, as a guarantor of the Dayton Peace Agreement, my country
respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, its
three constituent peoples and two entities, the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Republika Srpska, with which Serbia has special relations under the Dayton
Agreement. It will continue to develop good and active cooperation with the central
and entity authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina alike. Sovereign equality of States,
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, peaceful solution of disputes and the
respect of differences are the principles that Serbia upholds in its relations with all
States. To that end, it supports all agreements that may be reached between the two
entities and among the three constituent peoples and, in that context, welcomes the
holding of local elections on 15 November 2020, as well as those in Mostar on 20
December 2020.
The agreement in Dayton was reached by compromise and reflects a delicate
but hard-won balance among opposing concepts of the constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Each and every attempt, therefore, to put one model prevalent more
than 25 years ago ahead of another is less than conducive to the full and lasting
stabilization of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is of paramount importance
that we ensure peace and prosperity in the region, and we are opposed to any action
that is contrary to the principles of the Dayton Agreement. We therefore recall that
the mechanism to alter the agreement is well known; it calls for relevant agreement
by the two entities and the three constituent peoples. The Republic of Serbia cannot
accept interference or the imposition of solutions by anybody within or outside of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Serbia fully respects the right of every country to conduct its foreign policy
independently, including to join military-political alliances. Yet, it is equally
respectful of their right to conduct such individual activities as may or may not lead
to the membership of those alliances. As a guarantor of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Serbia will support every agreement or arrangement reached by the two entities and
the three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina in a legitimate way.
Serbia calls on all actors in the political processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina
within the country, as well as on the representatives of the international community,
to demonstrate an ever-greater level of responsibility. In that connection, Serbia
considers that dialogue within the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the
only way to heighten the level of confidence and achieve a compromise solution
for issues relevant to the future development of the country and, by the same token,
to the stability of the entire region. What is needed is to continue the policy of
dialogue, good-neighbourly relations and cooperation, which have no alternative. As
it did in the past, my country will continue to render its maximum and constructive
contribution to these endeavours.

40/42

21-06089

S/2021/436

Annex XX
Statement by Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, in its capacity as observer
[Original: English and French]
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 27
member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro
and Albania align themselves with this statement.
Let me first join others in thanking High Representative Valentin Inzko and
reiterating the EU’s continued support to his mission.
In December 2019, the Council of the European Union urged executive and
legislative bodies at all levels of government to start addressing the 14 key priorities
identified in the Commission Opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s application
for membership of the European Union, in line with the interests of all citizens to
advance towards the European Union.
Last year, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities took some steps to address the
Opinion’s key priorities, including by the holding of local elections in Mostar for the
first time since 2008, the adoption of the revised National War Crimes Processing
Strategy and of the strategic framework on public administration reform at all levels
of government, as well as the preparations for convening the Stabilization and
Association Parliamentary Committee.
We call on the authorities of the country to build on this momentum and to
seize the opportunity of this year 2021, which is a non-election year, to continue to
engage on reforms, thereby giving tangible proof that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
willing to do what it takes to become a member of the EU. Only by delivering on
reforms will Bosnia and Herzegovina advance towards the EU.
This year in particular, we expect Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure that
future elections are conducted in line with European standards by implementing
the relevant recommendations of the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
of the European Commission for Democracy through Law, and by ensuring the
transparency of political party financing. Taking into account the institutional
mechanisms that were set by the Dayton Peace Agreement, Bosnia and Herzegovina
needs to undertake further constitutional and electoral reforms to ensure equality
and non-discrimination among its citizens, notably by addressing Sejdić-Finci case
law of the European Court of Human Rights.
The EU regrets that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Constitution remains noncompliant with the European Convention on Human Rights, as per the ruling in the
Sejdić and Finci v. Bosnia and Herzegovina and related cases. The EU underlines
that a number of Constitutional Court decisions have yet to be fully enforced. The
EU calls for an inclusive process of electoral reform, through genuine dialogue and
in line with European standards, that would eliminate all forms of inequality and
discrimination in the electoral process. In this regard, we underline that no legislative
or political steps should be taken which would make the implementation of the
Sejdić-Finci and related European Court of Human Rights rulings more challenging.
We also expect Bosnia and Herzegovina to work with determination on the
implementation of the other 14 key priorities, in particular towards strengthening
the rule of law, in particular the independence and integrity of the judiciary,
fighting corruption and organized crime, countering radicalization, guaranteeing
21-0608941/42

S/2021/436

the independence of the media and the safety of journalists, promoting youth
employment, education and gender equality, and renewing their efforts towards
socioeconomic reforms.
We regret that the year 2020, which celebrated the 25th commemoration of
the Srebrenica genocide and the anniversary of the Dayton/Paris peace accords,
was marked by the persistence of nationalist rhetoric aimed at creating a climate of
division, including from public authorities and politicians.
This year, 2021, we expect political leaders to take strong and concrete actions
demonstrating their deep commitment to promoting reconciliation in the country.
Revisionism, notably the minimization or denial of the Srebrenica genocide, and the
glorification of war criminals contradict the values ​​of the European Union and are
incompatible with the prospect of integration into the European Union.
Despite our repeated calls for the establishment of an effective migration and
asylum management system, authorities were unable to prevent or promptly address
a serious humanitarian crisis last December, when several hundred migrants and
refugees were left without decent shelter in the dead of winter. Tangible measures
have since been taken by the authorities to address the most pressing humanitarian
needs. These efforts must be continued, also taking into account the need for an
equitable sharing of responsibilities between the entities and the cantons with regard
to accommodation capacities, as well as the work aimed at strengthening border
management capacities.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, like the rest of Europe, continues to be severely
impacted by the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In these difficult
times, the EU remains firmly engaged in assisting Bosnia and Herzegovina to address
the immediate health needs and long-term social and economic impact resulting
from the pandemic. The Commission’s 2020 Economic and Investment Plan and
the delivery of vaccines — launched on the basis of recently-signed Instrument for
Pre-Accession grants to cover the cost of vaccine resold to the Western Balkans
by EU member States — as well as the important support being provided by Team
Europe to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility, once again
demonstrate the EU’s strong commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina and all the
Western Balkans partners.
Lastly, with regard to the political and security situation on the ground and
the importance of maintaining a safe and secure environment, the European Union
reiterates its firm support to the EU-led military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
EUFOR Althea, and to the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council. The
EU urges all political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina to abandon the divisive
and secessionist rhetoric rooted in the past. We wish as well to reiterate the EU’s
unequivocal commitment to the sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and multiethnic diversity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is our firm and unchanged position.
The EU and its member States fully and firmly support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
EU perspective as a single, united and sovereign country.

42/42

21-06089
