170

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding assistance to the front-line States;
2. Strongly urges the international community to continue to provide in a timely and effective manner the financia!, material and technical assistance necessary to enhance the individual and collective capacity of the frontline States and other bordering States to withstand the effects of economic measures taken by South Africa, or by
the international community against South Africa, in accordance with their national and regional plans and strategies;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue mobilizing organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system so that they may respond to such requests for
assistance as might be forthcoming from individual States
or the appropriate subregional organization, and further
urges ali States to respond favourably to such requests;
4. Appeals to ali States and appropriate intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support
the national and collective emergency programmes prepared by the front-line States and other bordering States to
overcome the critica) problems arising from the situation
in South Africa;
5. Notes with appreciation the assistance being rendered to the front-line States by donor countries and intergovernmental organizations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
42/202.

Special assistance to Maldives for disaster relief and the strengthening of its coastal defences

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned by the damage caused to the archipelago of Maldives by unexpected tidal waves in April,
June and September 1987,
Acutely aware of the threats posed by such tidal action to
the low-lying islands of Maldives and to their inhabitants,
Mindful of the need to commence urgent protective
measures to minimize the hazards of such tragic events,
Noting that Maldives is one of the least developed countries, with severely limited natural endowments and a narrow-based economic backbone,
Recognizing the efforts of the Government and the people of Maldives to improve and accelerate the socioeconomic development of their country,
Taking note of the emergency relief operations undertaken by the Government of Maldives to assist those affected in the episodes of April, June and September 1987,
and of its determination to strengthen its defences against
such disasters in the future,
Convinced that long-term solutions are imperative,
l. Expresses its gratitude to those States and organizations which rendered support and assistance to the Government of Maldives in its relief and subsequent rehabilitation work;
2. Draws the attention of the international community
to the fact that additional resources are required to carry
out the envisaged plan for preventive action, and that the
assistance already provided or pledged falls short ofthe requirements;

3. Requests agencies and organizations of the United
Nations system to contribute to the formulation and implementation of a planned programme of action;
4. Strongly appeals to the international community to
contribute generously to that goal;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 41/192 of
8 December 1986, to mobilize international support and
assistance in favour of the efforts of the Government of
Maldives to implement the plan of action;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
42/203.

Assistance to El Salvador

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 41/2 of 14 October 1986,
concerning emergency assistance to El Salvador, and
41/194 of 8 December 1986, in which it appealed to ali
States and appropriate organizations of the United Nations system to contribute to the reconstruction and development of El Salvador,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987/16 of 26 May 1987, in which the Council urged
Governments, organizations ofthe United Nations system
and governmental and non-governmental organizations to
continue to contribute generously to the reconstruction of
El Salvador,
Having considered the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral on international humanitarian assistance activities for El Salvador,98
Con cerned that the serious effects of the earthquake that
occurred on 10 October 1986 have not been overcome despite the efforts ofthe Government and people ofEI Salvador and the international assistance received,
Concerned also that the efforts made by the Govemment
of El Salvador have been restricted and hindered by the
existence of serious economic and financia! problems that
have increased as a result of a substantial fati in agricultura! export production and unfavourable conditions in
international markets,
Convinced of the outstanding importance of intemational assistance and co-operation in the processes of national reconstruction following the damage caused by
natural disasters,
Reiterating the continuing need for the intemational
community to adopt suitable measures for effective assistance and co-operation to promote the rehabilitation,
recovery and development of Member States that have
suffered natural disasters,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General for
the efforts and measures undertaken to provide intemational assistance to El Salvador;
2. A/so expresses its gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Intemational Relief
Activities in El Salvador and bis team for the work done
and activities conducted in connection with assistance to
El Salvador;

98 See A/42/442, sect. V.B.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Expresses its gratitude to the States and organizations that have contributed to the reconstruction ofEl Salvador;
4. Notes with concern that the contributions from bilateral and multilateral donors provided during 1987 were
not sufficient to meet the urgent needs facing the Government of El Salvador, so that additional assistance is required;
5. Urges Governments, organizations of the United
Nations system and governmental and non-governmental
organizations to continue to contribute generously to the
reconstruction of El Salvador, especially through grants
and low-interest, long-term loans, in view ofthe country's
needs and limited resources;
6. Requests ali Governments and concerned organs
and organizations to provide voluntary contributions as a
matter of urgency, directly or through the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in order to alleviate
adequately the consequences of the earthquake in El Salvador;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take any measures that he may deem necessary to promote the implementation of the present resolution so as to accelerate
the process of reconstruction in El Salvador, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third session.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
42/204.

Special economic
America

assistance

to

Central

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/1 of 7 October 1987 entitled
"The situation in Central America: threats to international peace and security and peace initiatives", in particular paragraph 6, in which it urged the international community to increase technical, economic and financia}
assistance to the Central American countries and requested the Secretary-General to promote a special plan of
co-operation for Central America,
Bearing in mind the need to contribute etfectively to
peace, co-operation, respect for human rights, the implementation of genuine democratic and pluralist processes and economic and social development, which are
indispensable for ensuring the well-being of the peoples of
the Central American region,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Central America, 99 in particular with regard to the need to implement an emergency plan for the
reconstruction and large-scale economic development of
the region, which in turn will facilitate the resolution of
the political and security crisis facing the region,
Recalling the terms of the recent agreement on "Procedures for the establishment of a firm and lasting peace in
Central America", too signed at Guatemala City on
7 August 1987 by the Central American Presidents, which
stressed the need to adopt agreements that would accelerate development in order to create more egalitarian societies that are free of poverty,

99 A/42/127-S/18686. For the printed text. see Official Records ofthe
Security Counci/, Forty-second Year, Supp/ement for January, February
and March 1987, document S/18686.
too A/42/521-S/19085, annex. For the printed text, see Official
Records ofthe Security Council, Forty-second Year, Supplementfor Ju/y,
August and September 1987, document S/19085, annex.

171

Con vinced of the urgent need to improve the standard of
living of the Central American peoples,
Emphasizing the importance of appropriating additional
resources for development and ofthe full use ofhuman resources, as recognized in the lnternational Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, 27 and recognizing the economic co-operation efforts being made to this end by the European Economic
Community and others with the countries of the region,
Commending the concerted etforts being made by the
countries of the Central American region to deal with adverse economic and social conditions through economic
and social integration and co-operation,
Convinced that peace and development are inseparable,
1. Supports the implementation of mechanisms essential to achieving the economic and social objectives agreed
to by the Governments of Central America in the Document of Objectives of 9 September 1983, sponsored by the
Contadora Group; 101
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the United Nations Development Programme, to send a technical mission to the Central American countries for the purpose of determining, in
consultation with each of the Governments of the region,
the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean and such integration bodies as the Permanent
Secretariat of the General Treaty on Central American
Economic Integration, the Central American Bank for
Economic Integration, the Latin American Economic
System and the Action Committee for the Support ofEconomic and Social Development in Central America, the
economic and social priorities of the countries of the region;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of the
priorities identified, to formulate, in close consultation
with the Governments of the region and the appropriate
organs and organizations of the United Nations system, a
special plan of co-operation for Central America to be submitted, in view of the immediate needs, no later than
30 April 1988 for consideration by the General Assembly
during its current session;
4. Urges the international community to increase technical, economic and financia) assistance to the Central
American countries, as a way ofbolstering their etforts to
achieve peace and development;
5. Appeals to the organs and organizations of the
United Nations system to co-operate in implementing the
special plan of co-operation for Central America and to
continue and expand their assistance programmes;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

1º1Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-eighth Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1983, document
S/16041, annex.
