United Nations

S/PV.6298

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6298th meeting
Wednesday, 14 April 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Takasu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Long Zhou
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-31334 (E)

*1031334*

S/PV.6298

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Malaysia,
Morocco, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 12 April 2010 from His
Excellency Mr. Zahir Tanin, in which he requests to be
invited, in his capacity as Vice-Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Zahir Tanin.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 8 April 2010
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2010/182
and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the Security Council open debate that will be
held on Wednesday, 14 April 2010, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Tanin to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with, the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lynn Pascoe. I now give the floor to
Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: Since the Secretary-General briefed
the Council on 24 March, efforts aimed at bringing
about the conditions for a resumption of IsraeliPalestinian talks have continued, including through a

10-31334

S/PV.6298

meeting between President Obama and Prime Minister
Netanyahu in late March. The situation on the ground
remains fragile and a crisis of confidence between the
parties has so far prevented the resumption of talks.
The United Nations will continue to engage with its
Quartet partners to ensure that the circumstances which
made it possible to agree to launch the proximity talks
be respected.
The Secretary-General attended the League of
Arab States summit on 26 and 27 March, at which he
briefed Arab leaders on the meeting of the Quartet in
Moscow and his visit to Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory. He met with Secretary General
Amre Moussa, with whom he discussed the full range
of issues of mutual interest to the United Nations and
the Arab League. In his address to the summit, the
Secretary-General encouraged Arab leaders to continue
to support Palestinian participation in talks on the goal
of the creation of an independent Palestinian State
living side by side in peace and security with Israel and
its other neighbours. He emphasized that this goal can
be brought about only through a return of the parties to
the negotiating table and testing their commitment in
that framework.
The summit condemned Israeli actions on the
ground, in particular in East Jerusalem, and
conditioned continued Arab support for Palestinian
participation in proximity talks on the outcome of the
United States efforts to create conditions conducive to
the success of negotiations. In their concluding
statement, Arab leaders reconfirmed their endorsement
of the Arab Peace Initiative and pledged $500 million
to support the Palestinian population in East Jerusalem.
The Secretary-General also held discussions with
Palestinian President Abbas in the margins of the
League of Arab States summit. He reiterated to the
President his own and the Quartet’s support for
negotiations on all core issues.
Turning to the situation on the ground, the Israeli
Government’s
partial
restraint
on
settlement
construction in the West Bank remains in effect and, as
previously noted, has led to a reduction in construction
activity despite some violations. Although these
developments are welcome, this policy falls short of
Israel’s Road Map obligation to a full settlement freeze
and excludes settlement activity in East Jerusalem. The
Secretary-General has reiterated that all settlement
activity is illegal and must stop. He urged that the

10-31334

restraint be expanded into a comprehensive freeze of
all settlement activity.
As a result of the transfer of Israeli settlers into
the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Sheikh Jarrah,
there were further incidents of violence between
Palestinian residents and the settlers. We note that there
have been no house demolitions carried out in East
Jerusalem since January this year. We hope that this
positive development will continue.
In the West Bank, there were almost daily clashes
between settlers and Palestinians during the reporting
period, as well as incidents of stone-throwing at Israeli
vehicles. These incidents caused four Palestinian
injuries; two further Palestinians were injured and a
Palestinian youth was killed in three incidents of
Palestinians being hit by vehicles driven by settlers.
Citing security concerns, Israeli security forces carried
out 58 incursions into West Bank towns and villages,
and 112 Palestinians were arrested. Forty-one
Palestinians and seven Israelis were injured during the
reporting period. On 7 April, Palestinian prisoners in
Israeli prisons and detention centres held the first in a
planned series of coordinated one-day hunger strikes in
protest at the conditions of detention.
In Jerusalem, Palestinian Christian access to
Easter celebrations was limited due to an extraordinary
closure of checkpoints between the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, which lasted from 25 March to 6 April. On
28 March, a protest by Christians in Bethlehem against
Israeli access restrictions resulted in the detention of
11 Palestinians, including Fatah Central Committee
member Abbas Zaki. There were also instances of
restricted access to Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount for
Muslim prayer. Demonstrations against the route of the
barrier continued, in particular where it is constructed
inside the West Bank, in contravention of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice. An
increasing number of senior Palestinian officials have
joined the call for peaceful popular protest against
Israeli occupation.
We note with concern that a street in the
Ramallah district has been named after a Palestinian
militant responsible for the murder of a number of
Israeli civilians. We would like to remind all concerned
that, under the Road Map, the Palestinian Authority has
the obligation to end incitement.
The Palestinian Authority continues to exert
efforts to meet its obligations to maintain law and order

3

S/PV.6298

and combat terrorism in areas under Palestinian control
in the West Bank. There has been continued security
cooperation with Israel during this reporting period.
In a worrisome development, an Israeli military
order that gives the military commander the power to
evict a broad category of individuals whom the Israeli
authorities deem not to be residents of the West Bank
went into effect yesterday, 13 April. This could have
the effect of enabling Israeli authorities to deport these
individuals and has provoked strong Palestinian and
Arab reaction. Special Coordinator Robert Serry raised
the issue with Israeli authorities, and his Office will
continue to monitor this development closely.
Palestinian municipal elections planned for
17 July will be an important democratic element of the
State-building agenda. The Central Elections
Commission has now completed the registration of
over 200,000 new voters in the West Bank. The
nomination of candidates is scheduled to take place
from 1 to 10 June, and campaigning will be between
3 and 15 July. Hamas has not allowed voter registration
to take place in Gaza and has called for a boycott of the
poll. We reiterate our call on Hamas to allow Gazans to
exercise their right to participate in elections. We call
on parties to ensure that the elections are free, fair and
transparent.
Turning to the important Palestinian Statebuilding agenda and United Nations and international
community support for those efforts, the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) met in
Madrid at senior official level on 13 April. The meeting
was chaired by Norwegian Foreign Minister Støre and
was hosted by Spanish Foreign Minister Moratinos
Cuyaubé. The AHLC was also joined by Quartet
Representative Blair, and the United Nations was
represented by Special Coordinator Serry. The AHLC
discussed measures necessary to support the
Palestinian Authority’s budget and institution-building
as part of the State-building agenda aimed at attaining
Prime Minister Fayyad’s goal of readiness for
statehood in 2011.
The AHLC reconfirmed its support to the
Palestinian Authority State-building agenda. During the
meeting, Prime Minister Fayyad said that the
Palestinian Authority was approaching “the home
stretch” in the implementation of its programme and
expressed confidence that the remaining tasks of the

4

programme can be implemented over the period June
2010 to June 2011.
The Palestinian Authority requires an estimated
$100 million a month in external financing for
recurrent budgetary expenditures, but since January,
only an estimated $174 million has been transferred.
Projected shortfalls in the Palestinian Authority’s
budget could undermine its reform and State-building
agenda. Member States are encouraged to commit
funds they pledged, wherever possible through direct
support to the Palestinian Authority. We take positive
note that the Palestinian Authority has requested
budget support of $1.2 billion in 2010, down from
$1.35 billion in 2009 and from $1.8 billion in 2008,
thus reflecting what Prime Minister Fayyad termed an
effort to secure a reduced reliance on the international
community.
The 2010 draft budget projects expenditures at
$3.9 billion, of which half will be allocated to Gaza.
Reflecting positive Palestinian Authority reforms, the
Palestinian Central Bureau for Statistics reported that
real gross domestic product increased by an estimated
6.8 per cent in 2009 as compared to 2008. However, it
is of concern that this figure is driven by the growth in
the West Bank, whilst the Gazan economy continues to
stagnate. The United Nations has aligned its
programming in support of the State-building agenda
and intends to focus its efforts in critical areas,
including Area C, East Jerusalem and Gaza.
Let me turn to progress that is now being made
on entry of materials for a number of approved United
Nations projects since the Secretary-General’s visit to
Gaza on 21 March. As a result of Israeli approval of
the entry of aggregate and cement, work has now
began on the sewage pumping station project at Tel
el-Sultan, and work on the other approved projects,
including the 151-unit Khan Younis housing project, is
expected to commence shortly. The commercial import
of wood and aluminium has been approved and will be
allowed entry this week. There have also been other
positive measures carried out by Israel, such as the
continued exports of cut flowers during the reporting
period and an increase in the amount and type of goods
entering the Strip, including clothing, shoes and further
imports of glass. However, the entry of materials still
falls far short of what is required to address the
immense reconstruction and development needs of
Gaza.

10-31334

S/PV.6298

The approved United Nations housing, water and
sanitation projects are a modest start of what needs to
be done in Gaza. More than half of the population is
under the age of 18, and it is their future that should
concern us most. More schools need to be built in Gaza
to ensure that Palestinian children receive an education
that broadens their horizons and prepares them for a
better future. The quality of health care is also
declining, due in part to the lack in building materials,
equipment and supplies necessary for health facilities.
In all these critical areas the United Nations will
continue to exert its utmost efforts to expedite the entry
of needed materials and to expand the scope of
activities in Gaza to address these needs. In order to
enable these goals and United Nations projects in both
Gaza and the West Bank, the United Nations and the
Palestinian Authority have agreed that a trust fund will
be established at an appropriate time. I would
encourage all donors to consider supporting the work
of the United Nations through that mechanism.
Beyond the entry of materials into Gaza, other
key elements of Security Council resolution 1860
(2009) remain unfulfilled and continue to contribute to
the instability in the Strip. In particular, the
resolution’s calls for the commitment of the parties to a
durable and sustainable ceasefire and intra-Palestinian
reconciliation are yet to be implemented. Without
renewed and determined efforts to implement
resolution 1860 (2009) in all of its aspects, the
situation in Gaza cannot be fully addressed. A more
comprehensive and strategic approach to Gaza is
urgently required.
It is of serious concern that the security situation
in Gaza is again volatile. On 26 March, a clash near
Khan Younis led to the deaths of two Israeli soldiers
and three Palestinian militants. The military wing of
Hamas, the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and a group
called Palestine Taliban, all claimed responsibility for
the action. In another incident on 13 April, two
Palestinian militants belonging to Islamic Jihad were
killed by Israeli security forces, reportedly while trying
to place improvised explosive devices near the GazaIsrael border.
During this period, a total of 35 rockets and
mortars were fired from Gaza, and 16 reached southern
Israel, with no damage or injuries reported. One
Palestinian civilian was killed and 15 others were
injured in the course of 14 incursions and six air strikes
by Israeli security forces. There are reports that Hamas

10-31334

is trying to prevent further outbreaks of violence, and
the major factions in Gaza have agreed with Hamas
that they will maintain calm. However rockets continue
to be fired from the Strip. We condemn the rocket fire
and call for calm to be respected and for international
humanitarian law to be upheld.
Egypt is continuing its efforts to combat
smuggling, and on 31 March uncovered a significant
cache of missiles and shells in northern Sinai, which
were reported to be destined for the Gaza Strip.
Smuggling of all goods, including arms, continues
through tunnels into Gaza and one Palestinian died and
six were injured in tunnel collapses during this
reporting period. It is vital that all legitimate crossings
for imports and exports be opened, as envisaged in the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access, in
accordance with resolution 1860 (2009). There has
been no progress in efforts to secure the release of
Corporal Shalit in exchange for Palestinian prisoners.
The Arab League summit stressed the importance
of Palestinian unity; however, there has been no further
progress in finalizing an agreement based on the
Egyptian proposal. We reiterate the Quartet’s call for
the promotion of Palestinian unity based on the
commitments of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) and the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank
under the legitimate Palestinian Authority.
On 29 March, Hamas took over the bank assets of
a benevolent society in Gaza. Such measures
jeopardize the whole banking sector and aggravate the
humanitarian situation. There are also reports of
increasing human rights abuses. We are concerned at
public statements by Hamas authority figures
indicating the intention to carry out executions of
prisoners.
At the League of Arab States summit, the
Secretary-General held a bilateral meeting with Syrian
President Al-Assad to discuss a range of regional
issues. The United Nations continues to support all
efforts to revive the Israeli-Syrian track and a broader
resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict, as envisaged in
Security Council resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative. In the occupied Syrian Golan, settlement
activity continued, including the approval of 100 new
housing units in the settlement of Nimrod. However,
the situation there remained calm.
In Lebanon, on 9 March, President Sleiman
reconvened the Committee of National Dialogue for

5

S/PV.6298

the first time since the parliamentary elections of last
June. In its new configuration, the national dialogue
now has a total of 20 participants. Participants agreed
to hold the next meeting of the Committee of National
Dialogue on 15 April.
On 30 March the Minister of Interior, Ziad
Baroud, announced that municipal elections will take
place on schedule on four consecutive Sundays in the
month of May. In the meantime, Parliament is still
pursuing its consideration of the draft law for
municipal elections that was submitted to it by the
Government.
On the security front, a few unrelated incidents
took place in various parts of the country during the
reporting period. The most significant was an exchange
of fire amongst Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC) military
personnel, which took place on 8 April at the Kussaya
PFLP-GC military base near the border with Syria,
resulting in one person killed and at least two injured.
Four individuals were later turned in to the Lebanese
Armed Forces.
Continued
support
by
the
international
community for the reconstruction of the Nahr al-Barid
refugee camp remains a priority. Additional funding is
urgently required if progress achieved so far in the
reconstruction of the camp is to be sustained.
The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
remained generally quiet in the period under review.
Violations of Lebanese airspace have continued on an
almost daily basis, mainly using unmanned aerial
vehicles but also occasionally involving fighter planes.
The Secretary-General’s report to the Security
Council on the implementation of its resolution 1559
(2004) will be issued in the coming week.
The Secretary-General has made clear the United
Nations commitment to the goal of a comprehensive
peace in the Middle East. As he outlined last month to
the Council, for that to be achieved, there is no
alternative to the urgent resumption of negotiations on
all core issues for a two-State solution. This must be
enabled by positive developments on the ground. Peace
is in the hands of the parties themselves, but the
international community must continue to play a
crucial role.

6

The situation is critical. We cannot afford to lose
this opportunity to reach an agreement that will end the
occupation that began in 1967 and that will result in
the emergence of an independent, democratic and
viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours in
accordance with Security Council resolutions, previous
agreements, the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his very
comprehensive briefing this morning.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statement to no more than five minutes to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the full text of their statement in
writing and deliver a condensed version in this
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I warmly congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your friendly country Japan on
your presidency of the Security Council. We also
express appreciation to the friendly country of Gabon
for its skilled guidance of the Council’s extensive
agenda in March. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing today.
I would like to extend the condolences of my
delegation to the people and Government of China for
the victims of the earthquake that occurred today.
Since the Council’s last open debate in January,
the situation on the ground in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, has regrettably
deteriorated owing to continuing Israeli acts of
aggression, colonization, provocation and incitement
against the Palestinian people and their land.
International and regional efforts to revive the peace
process and the continued extension of the Palestinian
leadership’s hand in peace have only been responded to
by Israel with intransigence and defiance. To this
moment, Israel persists with its illegal policies,
undermining those peace efforts, stoking tensions on
the ground and inflaming religious sensitivities in the
region and beyond.
In just the short period since that previous debate,
we have conveyed 12 letters to the Council, drawing

10-31334

S/PV.6298

attention to the series of illegal actions that continue to
be perpetrated by the occupying Power and the
consequent negative impact on the ground, including
the following: the continuing Israeli colonization of
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in and
around East Jerusalem, including plans for the
construction of thousands of new settlement units;
continuing confiscation of Palestinian property,
demolition of homes and transfer of settlers, including
in the Shu’fat, Al Bustan, Al Abbasiya and Sheikh
Jarrah neighbourhoods of East Jerusalem, and
continuing settler acts of terror against Palestinian
civilians and their property; the targeting of
Palestinian,
international
peace
activists
and
non-violent demonstrators, including by use of
excessive, indiscriminate force; the provocative Israeli
declaration laying national claim to historic religious
sites in the occupied Palestinian territory in Al-Khalil
and Bethlehem; the storming of the Haram al-Sharif
compound by the Israeli occupying forces, the
targeting of Palestinian Muslim worshippers and the
restriction of access to holy sites in the Old City;
repeated inflammatory statements and incitement by
Israeli officials, including Prime Minister Netanyahu,
particularly regarding East Jerusalem; violent military
raids by the occupying forces and the killing of
civilians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and the
consequent heightened tensions and widespread unrest;
the ongoing traumatic impact of the illegal Israeli
blockade of Gaza on the humanitarian situation, social
and economic conditions and the dignity of the
Palestinian people; the arrest and detention of
Palestinian officials and Christian community leaders
engaged in non-violent protest against restrictions on
worshippers during the Easter holiday and against
other oppressive Israeli practices; the closure of the
West Bank and continued obstruction of the freedom of
movement; the desecration of the Ma’man Allah
cemetery in Jerusalem; and the recent Israeli orders
threatening the deportation of thousands and, I must
add, tens of thousands of Palestinian civilians.

other Quartet members — the European Union,
Russian Federation and United Nations — and by the
League of Arab States, aimed at resolving the IsraeliPalestinian conflict via the two-State solution for
peace. Those collective efforts are constantly being
undercut by the occupying Power’s illegal actions,
wilfully perpetrated and totally contradictory to a
peaceful settlement on the basis of the two-State
solution.

This is just a synopsis of the extremely distressful
situation faced by the Palestinian people and their
leadership at the present time — a situation marked by
the blatant intensification of illegal Israeli settlement
activities and human rights violations against the
Palestinian civilian population. All of this coincides —
and, it appears, not incidentally — with the
intensification of international efforts led by the United
States of America, with the active engagement of the

In this regard, after a long freeze in the peace
process and despite severe reservations owing to
Israel’s continued illegal policies, particularly its
settlement activities, the Executive Committee of the
Palestine Liberation Organization agreed to proximity
talks mediated by the United States. However, within
days of this announcement, the Israeli Government
announced its approval of the construction of yet
another 1,600 new settlement units in occupied East

10-31334

The pattern is clear. It is one in which Israel
continues to act with flagrant impunity, sabotaging
peace initiatives and causing further suffering to the
Palestinian people under its occupation. In word and
deed, it is apparent that Israel is bent on breaching the
Fourth Geneva Convention and creating facts on the
ground that illegally and artificially alter in its favour
the demographic composition, character and status of
the occupied Palestinian territory, especially in and
around East Jerusalem — facts on the ground that
impair all aspects of Palestinian life, imposing constant
humiliation and hardship on the civilian population,
whether in the West Bank or the Gaza Strip.
All of the occupying Power’s illegal policies call
into question its credibility as a peace partner, its
commitment to the two-State solution and its standing
as a member of this Organization, to which it owes its
very existence. Rather than reciprocate the efforts and
gestures made for peace — from the explicit
commitment to peace and the two-State solution based
on the pre-1967 borders made by the Palestinian
leadership, beginning with the Palestinian Declaration
of Independence over 20 years ago; to the Madrid,
Oslo, Taba, Sharm el-Sheikh and Annapolis
commitments; the Arab Peace Initiative over eight
years ago; the road map to Mideast peace and the
Quartet Statement; the diplomatic efforts of the United
States of America and all other concerned nations —
Israel continues to pay only lip-service to the pursuit of
peace, while its actions are actually destroying any
chance for the realization of peace.

7

S/PV.6298

Jerusalem, which was preceded by the approval of
another 112 settlement units in Bethlehem and
followed, despite broad condemnation, by the
revelation of plans for another 20 illegal settlement
units near the Shepherd Hotel in East Jerusalem. Such
flouting of the law and the international demands for a
settlement freeze can only lead to the conclusion that
the current Israeli Government has no interest in
defusing rising tensions and is in fact set on derailing
peace efforts.

punishment of the Palestinian people in Gaza cannot be
overemphasized. Here, we wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his recent visit to Gaza and his firm calls,
along with the calls of many other world leaders, on
Israel to end the blockade, to allow for Gaza’s
reconstruction and to allow the healing of the
population. Upholding the rule of law, including
respect for Security Council resolution 1860 (2009),
and our collective conscience demand immediate
redress of this unjust, inhumane situation.

In addition, Israel recently declared the villages
of Bil’in and Ni’lin in the West Bank, which have been
the sites of weekly non-violent demonstrations against
the Wall and the settlements and have been closed
military zones for six months. The occupying forces
have repeatedly responded with force to those protests
and have carried out arrests of Palestinian peace
activists, adding to the thousands of Palestinians
already being illegally held in Israeli prisons, as well
as arrests of international activists there, clearly aimed
at crushing any attempts at peaceful, non-violent
protest and at denying Palestinians their human and
political rights to freedom of expression and to protest
the occupation policies.

On the other hand, and despite such flagrant
violations, the Palestinian leadership has continuously,
responsibly affirmed its commitment to peace in word
and deed. The Arab countries have also consistently
done so, based on the understanding of the need for a
comprehensive resolution of this conflict and for
regional and international peace and stability, as
reflected by the Arab ministerial follow-up
committee’s agreement to give an opportunity to
proximity talks and the lack of objections at the Arab
Summit in Libya, despite great reluctance owing to
Israel’s ongoing defiance. Yet Israel made it impossible
for the Palestinian side to enter such talks as it
continued to dig in its heels and declare its illegal
settlement intentions, especially in East Jerusalem. We
understand that the United States Administration has
requested clarification from the Israeli Government in
this regard, but as of now it appears that such
clarification has yet to be received.

Moreover, recent Israeli raids in the West Bank
constitute another ill-willed attempt to undermine the
Palestinian Authority and its serious security efforts in
the cities, towns and villages under its control, efforts
that have been recognized by the international
community. And, most recently, new Israeli military
orders have been revealed by which the occupying
Power seeks to further advance its ethnic cleansing
campaign, threatening the deportation of tens of
thousands of Palestinians from the West Bank, and
particularly from East Jerusalem, in violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, human rights law and
relevant Security Council resolutions.
At the same time, Israel continues its illegal
blockade of the Gaza Strip. On 12 March, Palestinians
solemnly marked the thousandth day of the blockade,
under which more than 1.5 million Palestinian
civilians — some 70 per cent of whom are refugees
and over 50 per cent of whom are children — have
endured the merciless effects of a hermetically sealed
border and total isolation from the rest of the
Palestinian territory and the outside world. The
magnitude of the humanitarian and psychological
suffering and despair and the undoing of development
deliberately inflicted by this criminal Israeli collective

8

Although we have repeatedly affirmed our
position, we reiterate today that we can not proceed
with negotiations, including proximity talks, as long as
Israel continues to violate international law, United
Nations resolutions and Quartet positions regarding the
settlements. Israeli settlement activities, including
so-called natural growth, and all other illegal attempts
to alter the character, status and demography of the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, must cease immediately to allow for the
resumption of a credible, meaningful peace process.
What we have witnessed in these last months is a
reaffirmation of Israel’s impunity. Persisting with its
repeated ruses, empty pretexts and arrogant
declarations, Israel refuses to acknowledge that it
cannot reconcile its expansionist agenda and its
oppression of another people with the most basic tenets
of international law that govern our international
system. And it cannot reconcile its criminal behaviour
with a changing international climate that is now

10-31334

S/PV.6298

demanding in very clear terms a cessation of the
human rights abuses and grave breaches that have
severely compounded this conflict, thwarted all efforts
to resolve it, and undermined regional and global peace
and security. It is time for the international community
to act decisively, guided by the rules and principles of
international law and justice, in order to finally bring
an end to the Israeli occupation and enable the
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable right to
self-determination and freedom in their independent
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by
side with Israel in peace and security on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders, and to achieve a just resolution
of the plight of the Palestine refugees in accordance
with international law and United Nations resolutions,
with the full knowledge that both elements are
requisite for the realization of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.
The Security Council, in particular, must assume
its role — a role seriously marginalized in this conflict —
and must take practical measures to compel Israel to
cease all of its illegal settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and finally commit to the pursuit of peace.
Moreover, it is essential for the Council, at the
appropriate time, to adopt a resolution framing the
parameters of the solution to this conflict — a solution
that does not need to be reinvented but rather
originates from clear, established principles based on
international law, United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of
Land for Peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the road map
to Mideast peace, and most recently the conclusions of
the Council of the European Union on the Middle East
Peace Process of 8 December 2009 and the firm
position underscored by the Quartet in Moscow on
19 March 2010, including, inter alia, the goal of
achieving a peaceful settlement within 24 months.
The international consensus in this regard is clear
and must be pursued without delay. We cannot allow
Israel to continue to act above the law, defy the calls to
end its violations from all corners of the globe,
including by its closest allies, and make a mockery of
the urgency of achieving peace and security for our
region and the international community as a whole.
Israel has put us in this situation too many times before
and we have witnessed the disastrous consequences.
For this reason, the international community must no
longer judge Israel on what it says, but rather by the

10-31334

actions it takes, and hold it fully responsible, should it
sabotage the opportunity before us to secure peace
once and for all.
The President: I thank the Permanent Observer
of Palestine for the kind words he addressed to the
presidency.
I now give the
Representative of Israel.

floor

to

the

Permanent

Ms. Shalev (Israel): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for your stewardship of the Security
Council. I would also like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing.
At the outset, I wish to express the deepest
sympathy of the people and the Government of Israel
regarding the recent tragedy in which the Polish
President and the members of his delegation lost their
lives in a plane crash. May the nation of Poland know
no more bereavement.
This debate occurs between two important days
in Israel. On Monday, Yom Ha’Shoah, we
commemorated the Jewish victims of the Holocaust.
And next Monday, Yom Ha’Zikaron, we will
commemorate our soldiers who have fallen in war and
all Israelis murdered by terrorism. Only after these two
remembrance days can we put our hearts into
celebrating our Day of Independence. These two days
of remembrance shed light on our people’s unending
struggle to build a homeland for the Jewish people, a
free, independent and democratic State. Such solemn
days signal our desire to live in peace, prosperity and
cooperation with our neighbours.
Yet in the pursuit of peace in the Middle East, all
parties must realize that they have not only rights, but
obligations as well. The Palestinians and the wider
Arab world must show, in both word and deed, that
they too are committed to the peace process. They
should demonstrate their will not only to demand rights
but also to accept responsibilities. They must take
tangible steps to combat terrorism, to put an end to
incitement, to engage in direct negotiations and to
begin a process of normalization with Israel.
Israel is hopeful that the proximity talks will
serve as a stepping stone towards the resumption of
direct, bilateral peace negotiations. Only through such
negotiations can we hope to reach a comprehensive
peace agreement. Yet the success of such talks — and

9

S/PV.6298

their transition into direct negotiations — depends
upon all in the region taking confidence-building steps.
The Hamas terrorist rulers of the Gaza Strip
maintain Gaza as an epicentre of terrorism. With
support, financing and arms from Iran, Hamas
brutalizes its own people while launching deadly
attacks against Israeli civilians. On 1 April, across the
Egyptian-Gaza border in Sinai, a massive quantity of
weapons destined for Gaza was uncovered. Throughout
February and March, a wave of Qassam rockets and
other terrorist attacks exposed the civilian population
of southern Israel to serious threats and imminent
danger. As a result of these attacks, one agricultural
worker in Israel was killed, while dozens of civilians
were injured. Only yesterday, the Israel Defense Forces
discovered terrorists planting explosive devices along
the Israel-Gaza border.
Given this reality, Israel will exercise its right of
self-defence, pursuant to international law. Israel will
never fail to fulfil its obligation to protect the people of
Israel. Israel appreciates the efforts of the international
community for the support of humanitarian work in
Gaza. We maintain close coordination with the
Secretary-General and relevant United Nations bodies
for the supply of humanitarian aid to Gaza. In 2009
alone, 738,576 tons of humanitarian commodities were
transferred to the Gaza Strip and more than 100 million
litres of diesel were delivered to the Gaza power
station; 10,544 Gazan patients and their companions
received medical treatment in Israel. These numbers
reflect only part of the humanitarian aid provided to
the people of Gaza. Yet Israel is still a convenient
scapegoat for the situation in Gaza. However, the truth
remains self-evident.
The complicated situation in Gaza is a direct
result of the Hamas terrorist occupation. The
complicated situation in Gaza is a direct result of
Hamas’s continued rejection of the obligations laid out
by the international community, namely: recognize
Israel, renounce violence and accept previous
agreements. The complicated situation in Gaza is also a
result of Hamas’s ongoing imprisonment of Gilad
Shalit who is denied his human rights, including access
to international humanitarian personnel.
Beyond Gaza, the West Bank offers an alternative
future. As a direct result of Israeli-Palestinian
economic and security cooperation, life for Palestinians
and Israelis continues to improve. However, obstacles

10

remain. Violence and terrorism are ever-present
challenges. Israel is deeply dismayed to see a street in
Ramallah named in honour of Yehiye Ayash, a Hamas
terrorist-mastermind responsible for the murder of
hundreds of innocent Israeli civilians: men, women and
children. In another disturbing event, a town square
adjacent to Ramallah was renamed in honour of Dalal
Mughrabi, a leader in one of the bloodiest terrorist
attacks against Israel, the Coastal Road massacre, in
which 38 Israeli and American civilians were
murdered. Given that the Road Map for Peace
explicitly states that all official Palestinian institutions
must end incitement against Israel, what message does
the Palestinian Authority send by publicly honouring
terrorists?
At this point, I would like to respond briefly to
concerns that have been expressed regarding recent
measures relating to the prevention of the illegal
infiltration of individuals into the West Bank. These
concerns reflect a misunderstanding of the effect and
purpose of those measures. In fact, such measures
provide significant safeguards and due process
protection for existing legislation; they do not extend
beyond it. Let me be clear: these measures apply only
to unlawful infiltrators in the West Bank and do not
apply to other residents of the area.
Let me turn to the greatest danger facing the
Middle East and the world: Iran. Iran continues to
threaten to wipe Israel off the map of the world while
denying the Holocaust and reigniting anti-Semitism. At
the same time Iran supports terrorism and violence
against Israel and Jews far beyond the Gaza Strip. In
Lebanon, the Hizbullah terrorist organization continues
to amass arms from Syria and from its Iranian patrons,
with the active consent and support of Syrian
authorities. Recently, Syria supplied Hizbullah with
long-range missiles in an overt violation of resolution
1701 (2006). By doing so, Syria actively threatens the
fragile stability in the Middle East.
Yet the most alarming danger is that Iran
continues to pursue nuclear weapons capabilities, while
mocking the diplomatic overtures of the international
community. Such behaviour endangers not only our
region, not merely a specific group of countries: it
endangers us all, and this is recognized by all. The
Council therefore has an obligation to translate this
consensus into timely and effective action. To use the
words of a great poet, “If it were done when ‘tis done,

10-31334

S/PV.6298

then ‘twere well it were done quickly” (Shakespeare,
Macbeth, Act I, scene 7).
The Iranian threat, the menace of terrorism, the
transfer of weapons to terrorist groups, the incitement
and hatred taught to Arab children: these are the true
dangers facing the situation in the Middle East and the
question of Palestine. All in the region have a right to
live without threats, and all in the region have the
responsibility to confront these dangers. If those in our
region recognize the relationship between rights and
responsibilities, we will then be standing at the
threshold of a new era for peace in the Middle East.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I welcome the presence of
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Pascoe
and thank him for his briefing.
At the outset, allow me to convey to the Chinese
people, through the Permanent Mission of China, the
sympathy of the Lebanese people in connection with
this morning’s tragic earthquake.
There has never been greater international
consensus on the parameters of Arab-Israeli peace. Yet,
Israel is more than ever intentionally taking unilateral
illegal actions aimed at predetermining the outcome of
negotiations, changing the reality on the ground and
rendering the two-State solution almost impossible.
The Israeli Government persistently disrupts the peace
efforts of the American Administration, including by
expanding settlements, in particular in East Jerusalem.
That is in addition to the ongoing settlement activity in
the West Bank under the pretext of so-called natural
growth, despite the Government’s claims that it would
stop settlement activities there for 10 months.
On 3 March, Arab States reiterated their support
for American peace efforts. United States Middle East
Envoy Senator George Mitchell has announced an
agreement on proximity talks. Yet, on 9 March, during
a visit to bid for peace by American Vice President Joe
Biden, Israeli authorities adopted a plan to add 1,600
settlement units in East Jerusalem. Words of
condemnation came from all the over the world,
including from the Secretary-General, the American
Administration, the Quartet and many others. However,
the Israeli Government cracked down on peaceful
Palestinian civilian demonstrations in the West Bank
and allowed criminal behaviour by its settlers, which

10-31334

resulted in the deaths of four Palestinians. Moreover,
on 21 March, the Israeli Prime Minister declared that
“settlement activity in Jerusalem will not stop” and
than it was “like building in Tel Aviv”.
Even as the American President was receiving
Mr. Netanyahu in Washington, D.C. on 23 March to
discuss ways to move the peace process forward,
Israeli authorities confirmed another illegal East
Jerusalem project for 20 residential units in the
Shepherd Hotel compound in a neighbourhood
populated mostly by Palestinians. The Israeli
newspaper Haaretz was told by Israeli planning
officials on 11 March that some 50,000 new settlement
housing units in Jerusalem neighbourhoods outside the
Green Line were at various stages of development and
approval. The officials added that Jerusalem’s
construction plans for the coming decades were
expected to focus on East Jerusalem, and that plans for
some 20,000 apartments were already at advanced
stages of implementation.
Israeli designs target not only occupied
Palestinian land in the West Bank, but also Palestinians
themselves. In a bid to open the door to what could be
a new wave of ethnic cleansing of Palestinians from
their homelands, a new Israeli military order came into
force this week. Under that new order, tens of
thousands of Palestinians deemed “infiltrators” will
automatically become criminal offenders liable to
expulsion. Palestinians most likely to be targeted under
the new rules are those whose identification cards bear
home addresses in the Gaza Strip. But the term
“infiltrator” could also apply to Palestinian residents of
Jerusalem. What is most ironic is that the infiltrator
category could also apply to previously displaced or
refugee Palestinians who have been able to return to
their own towns and villages in the West Bank.
Allow me also to draw the Council’s attention to
the suffering of children as a result of Israeli practices.
The Israeli human rights group B’Tselem told the
Associated Press on 9 March that Israeli police were
improperly arresting Palestinian boys during night-time
raids in Jerusalem. In affidavits to B’Tselem, six boys
aged between 12 and 14 described arrest raids
involving around a dozen heavily armed military
police, who surrounded their homes, handcuffed them
and led them to cells, where they were slapped, kicked
and told by interrogators to confess if they wanted to
go home. One of the boys, 12-year-old Ahmad, said in
an affidavit, “I was made to kneel and face the wall,

11

S/PV.6298

and every time I moved, a man slapped me across the
neck”.
Let us also not forget the plight of the more than
10,000 Palestinians in Israeli prisons and detention
centres, most of whom are civilians. In our continuing
efforts to put names to the faces of some of those notto-be-forgotten Palestinians in order to recall their
suffering and perhaps help to put an end to their
captivity, I would today like to mention the name of
Nafez Haraz, a 54-year-old Palestinian from Gaza who
has been in captivity for 24 years and who has been
prevented from seeing some of his children for the past
five years. In that regard, I would like to recall that
thousands of those prisoners carried out a hunger strike
on 7 April to protest the bad treatment they receive
from the occupying authorities. Similar hunger strikes
are planned for the seventeenth and twenty-seventh of
this month.
In Gaza, we are into the second 1,000 days of the
Israeli blockade. In late February, the Foreign Minister
of Ireland — the first such European Union official to
visit Gaza in more than a year — described the
blockade as a “medieval siege” and concluded that
“the tragedy of Gaza is that it is fast in danger of
becoming a tolerated humanitarian crisis, a
situation that most right-thinking people
recognize as utterly unacceptable in this day”.
The Israeli blockade is illegal and immoral. Its
disastrous effects on civilians in Gaza are
reprehensible. The blockade must end now, as must the
indiscriminate Israeli aerial bombing of Gaza, which
continues to cause death and destruction.
We believe that the Security Council should
closely monitor developments pertaining to the report
of the Fact-Finding Mission into the deadly war on
Gaza that Israel launched at the end of 2008
(A/HRC/12/48), which is also known as the Goldstone
report. In particular, we hope it will do so, because we
trust that no Council member would ever tolerate
impunity. In that regard, we welcome the 25 March
decision by the Human Rights Council that called for
independent and credible investigations into the serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law reported by the Fact-Finding Mission and
for the establishment of a committee of independent
experts to monitor the independence, effectiveness and
genuineness of the investigations and their conformity
with international standards.

12

We believe that any future negotiations, under
whatever format, must concentrate on final status
issues — specifically on borders, including in
Jerusalem — in short, specified timeframes, and not
just focus on confidence-building measures. We further
believe that a just, comprehensive and lasting solution
to the Middle East conflict should be based on
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the Madrid
terms of reference, the principle of land for peace, and
the Arab Peace Initiative. In this regard, we welcome
the affirmation by the Secretary-General and that of the
Quartet on 19 March that peace talks should lead in
two years to the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State — that is, by March 2012.
We also reaffirm that all measures and actions
taken by Israel to alter the legal and demographic
status of the territories it has occupied since 1967,
including the Syrian Golan, are null and void and have
no legal effect whatsoever, as per numerous resolutions
adopted by this Council.
As for the situation in Lebanon, we reaffirm our
commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety
and renew our pledge to work closely with the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First of all, let me join my
colleagues in extending our condolences to China after
today’s deadly earthquake.
I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing. We fully support the Under-SecretaryGeneral’s efforts. His recent visit to Israel and
Palestine was important in terms of highlighting the
current issues. As Mr. Pascoe stated, efforts to put the
peace process back on track are still under way. The
Quartet statement of 19 March deserves our full
attention and outlines what should be done in the
period ahead. We look forward to the actual start of the
proximity talks and continue to support United States
efforts towards this end. The talks should start as soon
as possible, since the absence of a functioning peace
process is leading to an increasingly precarious
environment in the region.
The negotiations should lead to a comprehensive
peace based on two States, agreed borders based on
those of 1967, Jerusalem as the capital for both States,
and a just settlement for refugees. Relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Road
Map and the Arab Peace Initiative provide the required

10-31334

S/PV.6298

basis for such an end result. We hope that this time
there will be a chance for peace along these basic lines.
The climate in the region will inevitably have a
direct impact on the success of the talks. Attempting to
change the facts on the ground in order to prejudice the
outcome of the negotiations would yield no result, but
would undermine trust. Therefore, we believe that
Israel must fully and permanently stop its illegal
settlement activities in the occupied territories and
refrain from any unilateral or provocative action,
particularly in East Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is a deeply important issue, not only
for Israelis and Palestinians, but also for Muslims,
Jews and Christians throughout the world. Any attempt
to change the fabric and status of Jerusalem or to take
steps to perpetuate the occupation in defiance of the
relevant Security Council resolutions would pose a
serious threat to stability and peace.
The historical and universal heritage of
Jerusalem, which we are bound to protect and preserve,
represents in itself the values of unity, peace and
harmony. Therefore, instead of being pushed to the
centre of the Middle East conflict, the issue of
Jerusalem should be the inspiration leading the way
towards lasting settlement and cooperation.
The military escalation in the West Bank is also a
cause for serious concern and places the progress made
by the Palestinian Authority in State-building in
jeopardy. At this stage, the focus should be on
empowering the Palestinian Authority. Palestinians
should be able to use more of their land and to enjoy
their fundamental rights. However, restrictions
continue to delay Palestinian economic and social
development. In particular, the new military order
enabling the occupying forces to detain, imprison and
deport Palestinians from the West Bank cannot
contribute to Palestinian State-building and mutual
trust, let alone lasting peace in the region. We call on
Israel to revise these policies, which contradict the
relevant Security Council decisions.
Disunity on the Palestinian side also continues to
be of major concern. It not only hinders the
maintenance of a functional socio-political system in
Palestine, but impedes the resumption of the peace
process. We will continue to urge the Palestinian
factions to resolve their differences.

10-31334

Despite certain steps by the Israeli side, the
situation in Gaza remains mostly unchanged. The siege
continues, with Palestinians inside continuing to suffer
without proper housing, education, infrastructure, job
opportunities or health services. The situation is neither
acceptable nor sustainable. The recent escalation along
the borders of Gaza showed once again that, so long as
the wounds of this humanitarian tragedy are left open,
there can be no mutual confidence or sense of stability
in the area. The full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) holds the key to security and stability in the
region. A return to normal life in Gaza and the onset of
reconstruction and regular economic activity would
have a very positive impact on the overall climate in
the region.
We agree with the Secretary-General that there is
no alternative to negotiations for a comprehensive and
just settlement, and no alternative to addressing all of
the core issues necessary to a two-State solution. At
this critical stage, there is also no alternative but to
focus on the political process, build trust, renounce
violence and push forward with determination and
good will for a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me join others in expressing our deepest
grief to the representative and the friendly people of
China with regard to the tragic earthquake this
morning.
I would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for his update
on recent developments in the Middle East. We also
thank the Permanent Representative of Israel,
Ms. Gabriela Shalev, and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, Mr. Riyad Mansour, for their presence and
contribution to our debate.
Allow me to point out that the delegation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains deeply
concerned over the situation in the Middle East. Recent
events have additionally burdened the already fragile
situation on the ground. We therefore underscore the
need for an immediate resumption of the proximity
talks as a prelude to full Israeli-Palestinian peace
negotiations.

13

S/PV.6298

We take this opportunity to underscore once again
that lasting peace and security can be achieved only on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Road Map and the
agreements previously reached by the parties, as well
as the Arab Peace Initiative. Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains committed to the two-State solution, with the
State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security.
In order to achieve this objective, the parties have
to meet their obligations and commitments. In that
sense, Bosnia and Herzegovina condemns the recent
decision of the Government of Israel to approve the
building of 1,600 new housing units in East Jerusalem,
which came at a time when new hopes for the
resumption of proximity talks were on the horizon. We
reiterate that all settlement activity on occupied land is
illegal under international law and is contrary to
Israel’s obligations under the Road Map. We call upon
Israel to immediately end all settlement activities,
including natural growth, dismantle all outposts erected
since March 2001 and refrain from demolitions and
evictions in East Jerusalem.
Bosnia and Herzegovina does not recognize the
annexation of East Jerusalem and stresses that the
status of Jerusalem is a permanent status issue that
must be resolved through negotiations between the
parties. We also wish to stress that the holy ground of
the three great monotheistic religions deserves mutual
and global respect for peace, freedom of religious
expression and human rights.
Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches high importance
to the determination of the Quartet to remain actively
involved on all tracks and to encourage the pursuit of a
comprehensive resolution of the Middle East conflict.
At its last meeting, held in Moscow on 19 March, the
Quartet underlined that the proximity talks are an
important step towards the resumption, without
preconditions, of direct, bilateral negotiations that
resolve all final status issues, as previously agreed by
the parties.
We also appreciate the efforts of the United States
Special Envoy, Senator Mitchell, and his tenacity in
laying the groundwork for a resumption of
negotiations. Furthermore, Bosnia and Herzegovina
supports the view that the entire international
community must help all the parties to transform the

14

unsustainable status quo into a politically sustainable
negotiating process without further delay, with a view
to reaching a peace agreement at the earliest possible
time.
Bosnia and Herzegovina deeply regrets the lack
of any meaningful steps towards reconstruction and
rehabilitation in Gaza. We reiterate our call for the
urgent and full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) and for the immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza, in accordance with the 2005
Agreement on Movement and Access.
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly condemns all
armed attacks on civilians and wishes to reiterate that
the civilian populations must be protected. We join the
Quartet in condemning the 18 March rocket fire from
Gaza and we urge the Palestinian side to continue to
implement its obligations to end violence. We call once
more for an immediate end to all violence and terror.
We urge all the parties to observe restraint and make
every effort to avoid further escalation.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
meaningful dialogue is the only way forward. Bosnia
and Herzegovina urges both the Israelis and the
Palestinians to immediately resume peace negotiations
as the conditio sine qua non for achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): My delegation, like
others, would first like to express its condolences to
the People’s Republic of China on the natural calamity
it has just suffered.
Austria would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his update on recent
developments in the Middle East. We thank the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their presence here today and
for their contributions to our debate.
Austria aligns itself with the statement that will
be made by the delegation of the European Union on
behalf of the Union.
The renewal of direct negotiations between the
parties on all final status issues is both urgent and
without alternative. To deliver on the peace and
security that Israelis and Palestinians have been
yearning for, leaders on both sides need to engage in

10-31334

S/PV.6298

good faith and come to a settlement which ends the
occupation and implements the two-State solution.
The 24 months stipulated by the Middle East
Quartet should be more than sufficient to agree on final
terms, provided that there is genuine political will on
both sides. Each day without tangible progress
undermines the position of those who argue in favour
of dialogue and strengthens those who advocate
extremism and violence. If there is to be trust in a
renewed peace process, both parties must honour the
obligations they have agreed to under the Road Map
and refrain from any action that may lead to further
violence and confrontation.
As for Israel, that requires an effective halt to all
settlement activities, including natural growth, and the
dismantling of all outposts; the end of the construction
of the separation barrier on all occupied land; and an
end to evictions and demolitions. In this context, we
also wish to express our grave concern about the
negative implications of Military Order No. 1650 for
residency and freedom of movement of Palestinians in
the occupied territories, and we call on Israel to
reconsider its implementation.
We also urge Israel to reverse recent decisions to
build additional housing units in East Jerusalem. We
have taken note of the very clear statement that the
Middle East Quartet has made, including in particular
on this issue. These illegal and illegitimate policies
pre-empt the outcome of final status negotiations and
undercut the viability of the two-State solution.
At the same time, we call on the Palestinian
Authority to continue to make every effort to improve
law and order, to confront violent extremism and to
end incitement. We also look to Palestinian leaders to
actively discourage any attempts to escalate tensions in
East Jerusalem.
The launch of results-oriented negotiations is also
essential to Palestinian efforts to build the
infrastructure and institutions of a future State that will
provide opportunities, justice and security for both its
citizens and their Israeli neighbours. Austria, both
bilaterally and within the overall efforts of the
European Union, will continue to assist Palestinian
State-building. However, these efforts can ultimately
succeed only with the backup of a clear and timebound perspective of a handover of administrative and
security responsibility and with funding generated by
normal economic activity rather than donor

10-31334

dependence. As confirmed by the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund ahead of yesterday’s
meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee in Madrid,
the acceleration of improvements regarding freedom of
movement and access across the West Bank and Gaza
is key to sustained economic growth and hence the
viability of a future State of Palestine. Austria therefore
strongly encourages Israel to decisively remove
remaining obstacles and give positive consideration to
increasing Palestinian access to land and resources in
Area C.
The persistent deprivation of the population of
Gaza of basic commodities underscores once again the
critical need for full compliance with resolution 1860
(2009). That is also true with regard to the, regrettably,
continuing rocket and mortar attacks on southern
Israel. In view of the undiminished urgency of
reconstruction, Austria has positively noted Israel’s
decision to facilitate access for construction materials
for a limited number of recovery projects, including
construction in Khan Younis and the ongoing efforts in
water and sewage treatment. We hope that this
welcome and overdue step will be followed by a
comprehensive positive response to our long-standing
demand to de-block all other United Nations recovery
projects, and to the international community’s
unanimous call for the unimpeded flow of
humanitarian aid and commercial goods to and from
Gaza.
We wish to underline the continued need for
thorough and credible investigations of all allegations
of grave violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law in relation to the Gaza conflict.
There must be accountability and an effective remedy
for victims of such violations.
Regarding Lebanon, we welcome the reconvening
of the national dialogue by President Sleiman. Ahead
of tomorrow’s next round, we call on leaders across the
political spectrum to advance the development of a
national defence strategy. We wish to reiterate that the
monopoly of the Lebanese State regarding the
legitimate use of force must be respected. All arms in
the country must be brought under the sole and unique
control of the Government. Immediate and
unconditional compliance with the embargo on all
transfers of arms outside the authority of the Lebanese
State is also essential to achieve the objective of
exclusive Government control over all arms.

15

S/PV.6298

There is broad consensus in the international
community on the urgency of overcoming the ongoing
deadlock in the search for a just and lasting regional
peace. We wish to underline our continued support for
the efforts of the United States in this regard. In the
framework of the European Union, Austria will
continue actively to look for ways to make a peace deal
possible within the next 24 months and stands ready to
support concrete steps on the path to comprehensive
peace.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I, too, should like to join in condolences to the
Government and the people of China for the
earthquake that they suffered today.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing on the situation in the Middle East, and the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.
Since the Council’s most recent consideration of
the issue at hand, the situation in the Middle East has
continued to deteriorate and tension and violence
between the parties have increased. The situation is
most worrisome and not conducive to the resumption
of dialogue. In these circumstances, the international
community, including this Council, should continue to
encourage the swift resumption of direct peace
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority based on agreements and obligations
previously reached.
We know that this is the only way to achieve a
comprehensive and definitive solution to the conflict in
the Middle East that will reaffirm recognition of
Israel’s right to exist and enable the establishment of a
politically and economically viable Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel within secure and
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions, the Road Map, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. We
therefore support the Quartet’s declaration of 19 March
and welcome the initiative to hold so-called proximity
talks so long as they lead to the unconditional
resumption of direct negotiations within a reasonable
time frame and do not become an exercise in
distraction.
In order to establish conditions conducive to
dialogue, it is indispensable that Israel and the
Palestinian Authority respect the Road Map principles
that form the basis for the resolution of all pending

16

issues in this conflict. Similarly, both parties should
avoid actions that run counter to international law and
international humanitarian law, as well as any
provocative statement or act of violence that could lead
to an escalation of the conflict.
We reiterate once again that the demolition of
homes, evictions and the expansion of settlements in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem, including so-called
natural growth, constitute violations of international
law and represent serious obstacles to the peace
process. We urge Israel to cease these practices as soon
as possible and to revoke recent measures taken in East
Jerusalem so as to open the genuine possibility of
resuming negotiations. Such unilateral actions should
not prejudge the result of negotiations and will not be
recognized by the international community.
We commend the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to meet its commitments in the areas of
security and economic development in the West Bank,
which have now begun to bear fruit. In that regard, we
also note the positive economic and human impact of
Israel’s initiative to partially lift restrictions on the
movement of people and goods in the West Bank. We
hope that these measures will be pursued and lead to
the full and irreversible dismantling of all checkpoints,
which is an indispensable condition for the
establishment of a viable and independence Palestinian
State.
We are convinced that improvement in the living
conditions of the Palestinian people, coupled with
effective security control by the Palestinian authorities
in the West Bank, are fundamental elements in the
achievement of lasting peace in the Middle East. We
therefore support the plan of Prime Minister Fayyad to
build the economic and institutional bases of the future
Palestinian State, and we call on the Quartet and the
international community to actively support that effort.
The deterioration of the humanitarian situation
and the intensification of violence in Gaza and
southern Israel are also sources of serious concern. The
blockade of the population of the Gaza Strip has
proved to be counterproductive because it perpetuates
the illicit trafficking of materials, fuel and food and
opens the door to the illicit traffic in weapons, thereby
jeopardizing the security of the entire region. Proof of
that is the increase in rocket attacks against the civilian
population of Israel, which have generated new
military reprisals, with tragic consequences. We

10-31334

S/PV.6298

condemn such acts of violence and once again urge all
actors to respect the provisions of international
humanitarian law at all times.
The international community must do its utmost
to prevent a new spiral of violence that could lead to
armed confrontation. In these tense times, we call for
general calm and respect for the provisions of
resolution 1860 (2009). We insist once again on the
need to establish an international monitoring
mechanism to guarantee a lasting ceasefire, the
opening of border crossings and the control of illicit
weapons trafficking. We also support the initiatives of
the
Secretary-General
with
respect
to
the
reconstruction of infrastructure in Gaza, and we
welcome Israel’s agreement to permit some of these
projects to begin and to allow certain essential products
to enter Gaza. This is a first step that should lead to the
full opening of the crossing points. We also stress the
importance of completing as soon as possible the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process, supported by
Egypt. It, too, is a fundamental step towards the
construction of the future Palestinian State.
Peace in the Middle East also has a regional
dimension. We are therefore concerned by the ongoing
violations of the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006),
in particular the daily incursions of Israeli armed
forces into the territory of Lebanon; by the discovery
of weapons and explosives in the zone of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon; and by
other incidents under investigation. We call on
Lebanon, Israel and all other actors involved to honour
the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and to refrain from belligerent rhetoric that
could lead to an escalation of violence. It is critical to
this process that the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of Lebanon be
strengthened. We also hope that Israel and Syria will
resume their indirect talks, which could help to begin
to resolve pending questions and foster confidence and
security in both States.
In recent days there have been important
initiatives in the area of arms control and nuclear nonproliferation. And we are only a few weeks away from
the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The Middle
East must not be an exception in this sphere. Mexico is
convinced that the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region of the Middle East should be
part of a broad, comprehensive political understanding

10-31334

that guarantees peaceful coexistence among sovereign
States in that region, including a future Palestinian
State, and that takes account of the legitimate security
concerns of all States.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
extend condolences to the delegation of China on the
disaster that has just struck that country.
I thank Mr. Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing, and the Permanent
Representative of the State of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.
I wish to raise three points. First, our principal
objective today is the urgent relaunch of the peace
process. There is no alternative to the resumption of
negotiations towards the creation of a viable and
contiguous Palestinian State living side by side with
Israel in peace and within secure and recognized
borders, on the basis of Security Council resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative. That is also the position
of the European Union, as the acting head of the
Union’s delegation will indicate in his statement, with
which France associates itself.
On 19 March, the Quartet set out a two-year
deadline for the conclusion of negotiations. But if the
parties continue to be incapable of engaging in
negotiations of some kind, the international community
will have to commit itself to assisting the negotiations
in order to guarantee the terms of a final agreement,
with a view to emerging from this impasse. To that
end, we are working in close cooperation with United
States and Egyptian authorities at all levels to define
the terms for international assistance making possible
the relaunch of the negotiations, something for which
we sincerely hope.
Secondly, parallel to efforts to relaunch
negotiations, developments on the ground are
necessary. Here, I shall touch on two sectors: first, of
course, settlement activity and, secondly, Gaza. As to
settlement activity, we all know that this remains a
major obstacle on the path to a settlement. The Israeli
Government’s decision to impose a 10-month
moratorium on new construction and the issuance of
new construction permits in the West Bank are a step in
the right direction and should be implemented. There
can be no peace without a complete end to construction
in the settlements, which are illegal.

17

S/PV.6298

As the President of the French Republic has
noted, by making the prospect of a Palestinian State
more difficult, settlement activity does not contribute
to Israel’s security. Indeed, it increases the threats.
Such threats — in Jerusalem more than anywhere else —
are a sensitive matter, and we find developments in the
holy city are most alarming. We affirm that all
provocative acts must be avoided in so sensitive a city.
The European Union has therefore condemned recent
Israeli announcements on the construction of new
housing in Ramat Shlomo and in Sheikh Jarrah.
Settlement activities in East Jerusalem, such as
the demolition of houses and other expulsions, are
morally unacceptable and politically dangerous. There
can be no peace without Jerusalem, which as the French
President said in his statement to the Knesset on 23 June
2008, is to become the capital of two States.
For its part, the Palestinian Authority must
continue its efforts to strengthen the security sector, to
establish the rule of law and to fight mercilessly
against terrorism. Those should remain its priorities.
Another matter on the ground to which we must
devote attention is the situation in Gaza. Beyond the
humanitarian issues, it would be a political mistake to
ignore Gaza. We call for full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009), including the immediate
unconditional lifting of the blockade which has
affected the territory in the areas of humanitarian
assistance and the movement of commercial goods and
individuals. At the same time, we call for an end to
weapons smuggling into Gaza.
Israel’s commitment to easing restrictions on
certain United Nations projects following the
Secretary-General’s visit to Gaza is a step in the right
direction. The announced measures must now be
implemented and expanded.
The immediate cessation of all violence,
especially the firing of rockets into southern Israel, is
also necessary. Finally, we call for the immediate
release of Gilad Shalit, which is a matter that France
has been following with close attention.
Thirdly and finally, the international community
must lend strong support to the Palestinian Authority in
order to strengthen Palestinian State institutions. Israel,
for its part, should work with far greater determination
to help in that regard. Steps have been taken on the
ground but remain insufficient. Palestinians must be

18

able to see that developments on the ground are in the
direction of an end to the occupation, including with
respect to movement and access. Here, we reaffirm our
full support for the plan of Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad, which is in line with the outcome of the 2007
Paris conference, which is intended to lead to the
establishment of a Palestinian State in accordance with
an agreed timetable.
Let us not forget the other regional tracks of the
peace process. We are working to create conditions for
the resumption of talks between Syria and Israel.
We are also continuing our efforts with respect to
Lebanon, and we welcome the fact that the situation
there has remained calm. But we must remain vigilant
and continue to urge the parties to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006). Here, there is no lack of
matters of concern. In this context, we reaffirm the
crucial role played by the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon.
The international community and the Security
Council have a major role to play, for the situation in
the Middle East is of concern to us all. France is ready
to play its full role in this effort, and it was to that end
that President Sarkozy put forward the idea of a peace
summit to back United States efforts and to
complement resumed peace talks, and to be prepared in
cooperation with all stakeholders.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
wish first of all to convey sincere condolences to the
Chinese delegation regarding the earthquake that
struck China this morning.
I wish also to thank Mr. Pascoe, the Permanent
Observer of the Palestinian Authority and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.
We have come together once more to assess the
situation in the Middle East in the light of recent
events in the region. Since our previous debate, the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been the subject of
intense diplomatic activity. Meeting in Moscow in
March, the international Middle East Quartet called for
a settlement freeze and established a two-year
timetable for a peace agreement. For their part, Arab
League heads of State and other representatives met in
Sirte, Libya, on 27 March to consider the situation in
the Middle East. They declared that they were
favourable to indirect negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians, in line with a proposal made by United

10-31334

S/PV.6298

States Special Envoy George Mitchell on his most
recent visit to the Middle East in March.
At the highest level, the United States has made
efforts to help the two parties to overcome their
disagreements and begin negotiations. Vice-President
Joseph Biden visited the region, in a rather difficult
context, to advance the cause of peace. President
Barack Obama received Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu in Washington, D.C., for talks aimed at a
rapid resumption of peace negotiations between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority. Gabon welcomes all of
those diplomatic efforts, which give us some reason for
hope, even if the peace process remains at an impasse.
Indeed, recent intransigence in the positions of both
parties is affecting prospects for the resumption of
political dialogue.
Gabon reiterates its position in favour of seeing
the two parties re-engage in peace negotiations and
urges them to follow the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative and to abstain from acts that could undermine
the chances for peace.
In this regard, we fully support the statement
made by the Secretary-General on 24 March 2010 on
the need to lift the Gaza blockade. The effectiveness of
such a decision could contribute to re-establishing a
climate of confidence between the two parties,
enabling proximity talks to be undertaken once again
and re-launching the peace process, which is so vital to
the geopolitical and strategic stability of the entire
region.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to express the condolences of the British
Government to the delegation of China on the loss of
life following the devastating earthquake today.
I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his briefing this morning.
Peace in the Middle East remains a key priority
for the United Kingdom. As long as a sustainable
solution eludes us, the situation in Palestine and Israel
will remain a catalyst for resentment, violence and
extremism. So it is in the interest of this Council,
which is charged with maintaining global peace and
security, and of the rest of the international community
to encourage a rapid resumption and conclusion of
negotiations between the parties, leading to a lasting
peace.

10-31334

The end state is clear — an independent and
viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours. This
objective is shared by almost all of the international
community. There is also broad international
convergence on the parameters of a conclusive
solution: two States, borders based on those of 1967,
Jerusalem as the capital of both States, and a just
settlement for refugees.
But whatever the will of the international
community and whatever its shared goal and common
understanding of the parameters, there can be no peace
until the parties themselves take the necessary steps to
move the process forward. I would like to make four
points on what we believe needs to happen in order to
make progress.
First, peace can be achieved only through
negotiations. We urge the parties to urgently enter into
proximity talks. Both sides should be prepared to use
the talks to discuss all core issues. But indirect talks
are no substitute for direct negotiations, so the aim
must be for proximity talks to rapidly lead to face-toface negotiations. Setting a clear time frame is key. We
therefore welcome the 24-month time frame articulated
in the Quartet’s 19 March statement.
Secondly, both sides must work harder on
creating an atmosphere conducive to peace. That
requires them to abide by their previous commitments
and to avoid provocation and incitement. Israeli
settlement activity in the occupied territories, including
in East Jerusalem, is illegal under international law and
should stop. Last month’s announcement of 16,000
new housing units in the Jerusalem settlement of
Ramat Shlomo was not only illegal, but had an
immediate negative impact on the prospects for
resumed peace talks. We are also concerned by the
recent Israeli decision to change the deportation rules
for Palestinian nationals living in the West Bank. We
urge the Israeli authorities, in accordance with
international law, to respect the freedom of Palestinians
to live in the West Bank and to move freely within the
Palestinian territories.
The Palestinian side must also refrain from
incitement. The recent deaths of two Israel Defense
Forces soldiers in Gaza — and Israel’s response, which
resulted in the deaths of at least four Palestinians —
were a tragic reminder of the risk of a return to a cycle
of violence. It is the responsibility of Hamas, if it

19

S/PV.6298

genuinely wants a peaceful and better future for the
citizens of Gaza, to ensure an end to all violent attacks
emanating from Gaza and to release unconditionally
Gilad Shalit, who has been held without Red Cross
access for nearly four years. The Palestinian Authority
should also avoid any actions that make restarting the
negotiations more difficult. In particular, we find any
form of commemoration or celebration of individuals
who have been responsible for the death of civilians
deeply distasteful.
Thirdly, sustainable peace requires a viable
Palestinian State represented by a united leadership.
We continue to support the Palestinian Authority’s twoyear State-building plan that will lay the foundation of
a future State. This ambitious and impressive effort
needs to be reinforced by a unified leadership.
Fourthly, Israel must ensure that its actions do not
damage the prospects for a viable Palestinian State
under unified leadership. Israel’s de facto blockade of
Gaza only serves to radicalize and isolate its
population, a key stakeholder in any future peace.
Furthermore, it is a failed policy. The tunnels are
becoming more sophisticated, to the point where there
are frequent reports of four-by-four vehicles being
smuggled through them. Consequently, it is almost
certainly more difficult to monitor and control the flow
of illicit weapons into Gaza, and Hamas is profiting,
both financially and politically, from the tunnel
economy.
We welcome the limited Israeli cooperation with
the United Nations Gaza reconstruction initiative and
the easing of restrictions on the flow of some goods
into Gaza, as outlined by Mr. Pascoe. But it is not
sufficient. We urge Israel to open the crossings so
Gazans can access the means to meet their needs
legitimately.
Finally, the region and the wider international
community must play a key role. We fully support the
efforts of the United States Administration to bring the
parties to the negotiating table. Active Arab
engagement and encouragement will also be crucial to
creating an atmosphere conducive to peace and
securing the desired end state. The region, this Council,
the Quartet and the broader international community
must send a clear and unambiguous message about our
shared vision, the parameters of a solution and our
willingness to stand ready to provide practical support,
as required, once negotiations get under way. The

20

world is ready and waiting, but it is up to the parties
themselves to take the first steps.
Mr. Long Zhou (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s open
debate.
(spoke in English)
A strong earthquake struck the Yushu region in
Qinghai province in China today. The earthquake
caused heavy losses in terms of the lives and property
of the local people. The central and local Governments
have responded rapidly and are making every effort to
organize rescue and relief work. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank previous speakers for the
support and sympathy they expressed for the Chinese
people and Government.
(spoke in Chinese)
The current situation in the Middle East remains
serious. The peace process in the Middle East remains
at an impasse. We are seriously concerned and worried
about this situation. An early solution to the Middle
East question is a shared expectation of the
international community. It is also in the common
interests of the various parties and critical to regional
and international peace and security. The international
community should make concerted efforts for the early
settlement of the issue. We hope that this meeting will
provide new impetus to the Middle East peace process.
It is the consistent view of China that political
negotiation remains the only way to solve the problem.
We hope that the parties will maintain their faith in
peace talks and demonstrate the political will to create
favourable conditions for an early resumption of the
talks. Israel’s declaration that it would build
settlements in East Jerusalem and other practices run
counter to international efforts and create new
obstacles to the resumption of talks. We strongly reject
such practices. We urge Israel to respond to
international appeals by ceasing construction of its
settlements and separation wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
We are opposed to any act that undermines the
basis for such talks and mutual confidence and
prejudges the outcome of those talks. We are deeply
concerned by the decision of Israel to implement its
military order in the West Bank and its possible
negative consequences. We call upon Israel to give
careful consideration to its own interests and to overall

10-31334

S/PV.6298

peace and stability in the region before taking action
and to create positive conditions for the resumption of
talks. We urge all parties to implement Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) in earnest and to
facilitate the lifting of the blockade of the Gaza Strip
so that construction can start as soon as possible and
people can return to their normal lives and live in
dignity.

showing genuine commitment to the peace process and
providing the requisite confidence-building measures
to promote it, the Israelis and Palestinians have
continued on a path that undermines peace between
them. The situation in Gaza is steadily gathering
momentum for a downward spiral into another cycle of
widespread violence and destruction. We urge the two
parties to sheathe their swords and embrace peace.

The realization of intra-Palestinian reconciliation
is very important to restarting the Middle East peace
process. We hope that all parties will focus on their
long-term national interests, consolidate unity and join
hands in achieving independent, self-reliant and viable
statehood for the Palestinians.

As was the case during our last debate, neither
party to the conflict can escape blame for actions and
pronouncements that are harmful to the peace process.
The clashes in Khan Yunis, which resulted in deaths
and reprisal strikes, as well as the new Israeli military
order that gives the power to detain, imprison and
deport Palestinians deemed to be infiltrators in the
occupied territory, are illustrative of these inimical
actions.

With the return of spring all life awakes anew. We
await the early return of spring in the Middle East
peace process. We welcomed the declaration of the
Quartet last month in Moscow. We hope that all parties,
including the Quartet, will take practical measures to
facilitate the early resumption of talks. We also hope
that the Security Council will play a greater and more
effective role in this process.
The Chinese Government supports the legitimate
rights and interests of the Palestinian people and their
just cause. We support the two-State solution based on
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the principle of land for peace. Together
with the international community, China will maintain
its support for the efforts of the Palestinian people to
achieve statehood and for the realization of just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the region.
The President: I would like to express the
sympathy and condolences of the Security Council to
the people and Government of China in this tragic
natural disaster.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I, too, would like at the
outset to express our condolences to the representative
of China for the earthquake that occurred this morning.
Our hearts go out to the victims. We also wish to thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing.
We are having this debate once again in the
backdrop of escalating tensions between the Israelis
and Palestinians. Recent efforts to bring the two parties
together in proximity talks were rendered futile
because of provocative actions and pronouncements on
both sides. It is a matter of regret that, instead of

10-31334

We reiterate our call on Israel and the
Palestinians to exercise utmost restraint in their actions
and utterances. The two parties should heed the wellmeaning appeals from different quarters, not least the
Quartet, to resume negotiations without further delay.
Arbitrary actions, such as the construction of new
settlements in East Jerusalem, the launching of rockets
and air strikes and the imposition of blockades, will not
solve the problem. Sustained dialogue, no matter how
tedious, will in the long run prove to be the most potent
weapon for the resolution of intractable conflicts.
The relevance of a two-State solution needs no
reiteration in these debates. There is no alternative to
it. All parties and interlocutors should take bold
measures to create the conditions conducive to the
achievement of a comprehensive and lasting peace in
the Middle East. Progress in that direction will depend
on the resumption of direct negotiations. Demonstrable
political will and commitment to the peace process
would also be helpful. The international community
should continue to support and encourage Israelis and
Palestinians to stay the course of peace.
We hope that the next briefing and debate on this
question will take place in a different atmosphere, and
we look forward to our participation in it.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me start by expressing
our deep sympathy to China for the tragic loss of lives
caused by the earthquake today.
Brazil welcomes the holding of this open debate
on the situation in the Middle East. I would like to

21

S/PV.6298

thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing and Ambassadors Riyad Mansour and Gabriela
Shalev for their contributions.

their part. Overcoming their divisions, keeping
extremists in check, including in Gaza, and enhancing
democratic governance is essential.

The situation in the region is volatile again, as
confrontations between Israeli security forces and
Palestinian protesters, including at religious sites in
Jerusalem, have left Palestinians dead and several
wounded. Rockets have again been fired, bombs
dropped and incursions resumed. This is all very
unfortunate and worrisome. Unfortunately, the
deterioration in the security situation in the occupied
territories is not surprising. We have all long been
saying that the status quo is unsustainable. Violence is
the visible expression of the lack of hope in view of the
absence of a real peace process. We must make no
mistake — political and security conditions are likely
to deteriorate further if no serious negotiations are
initiated very soon. An apparent sense of security
created in Israel by military and physical containment
is precisely that — only apparent. And even if it proved
effective for Israel, it would not be so for other
countries which, directly or indirectly, suffer the
consequences of this open wound in the Middle East.

While peace is in the hands of the parties
themselves, the international community must sustain
its involvement throughout the future peace process.
This was one of the main considerations that led
President Lula to visit the region recently. In all his
encounters in Israel, Palestine and Jordan, he pressed
for serious, action-oriented negotiations. Brazil
reiterates its support for the holding of a
comprehensive international conference on the Middle
East once conditions are appropriate. Further
engagement by relevant players from outside the
region will prove beneficial. The international
community, including the United Nations, must also
continue to support the Palestinian Authority’s Statebuilding agenda. As the Secretary-General indicated in
his most recent briefing to the Council on 24 March on
this issue, Palestinian statehood must become an
emerging reality. We are encouraged by the latest
positive report of the World Bank on the progress made
by the Palestinian Authority in this regard.

An independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security within internationally recognized
borders, remains the only solution to the Arab-Israeli
conflict. We therefore welcome the efforts of the
United States and others to restart the peace process
through the so-called proximity talks. They may help
to overcome the current paralysis if they are a credible
means to a genuine and comprehensive settlement. We
do not need talks about talks, with no immediate effect,
howsoever modest, on the reality of the occupied
territories. In this context, we welcome the timeline set
by the Palestinian Authority and endorsed by the
Quartet in its latest declaration on the establishment of
a Palestinian State.

Today, the Council is holding yet another open
debate in which delegations will regret the
humanitarian situation in Gaza, with little practical
effect on the ground. Access to basic goods and
services remains vastly insufficient. The Israeli
decision to allow further exports of Palestinian goods
and the entry of building materials, and to approve
some United Nations reconstruction projects, should be
welcomed. However, it barely scratches the surface of
the problem. Israel should act swiftly to reconcile its
security concerns with the movement of persons, goods
and services into and out of Gaza. We call upon the
international community to consider concrete ways to
help address the problem.

The continuation of Israeli policies that prejudge
the result of negotiations and change the demographics
of the West Bank and East Jerusalem make it more
difficult for negotiations to be resumed. We are very
concerned about reports of new Israeli regulations that
give the military apparently sweeping powers to detain,
imprison and deport Palestinians in the West Bank. It is
not clear why such measures have been taken at this
time and for what practical purpose. There is no doubt,
however, that they may become a major source of
instability and violence. Palestinians should also do

22

Another unresolved issue related to the war in
Gaza is accountability. There continues to be a need for
credible and independent investigations, in line with
standard international practice, on the disturbing
findings contained in the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48).
We must continue to avoid the return of conflict
between Lebanon and Israel. All parties must therefore
faithfully implement their obligations under resolution
1701 (2006), violations of which should be fully
investigated. We also urge the international community

10-31334

S/PV.6298

to assist Lebanon in building up its State capacity and
helping the central Government to exercise its
authority throughout the country.
Peace usually requires difficult decisions to be
made by all sides. It does not emerge from skilful
tactics but from true statesmanship. Those who believe
that there can be peace or security in the Middle East
without a Palestinian State are deceiving themselves.
Rather than trying to avoid the emergence of such a
State, they should help to create the conditions for it to
be peaceful, prosperous and democratic.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Uganda joins the other
members of the Security Council in expressing
condolences and sympathies to the Government and
people of China following the deaths, injuries and
destruction after the earthquake that occurred there
today.
I thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements.
The peace process in the Middle East is at a
critical and delicate phase, and the situation remains
tense. Uganda commends the international and regional
efforts that have been undertaken to restart
negotiations, including the recent United States efforts
to start indirect talks between Israel and Palestine. We
also commend the willingness of both Israel and the
Palestinian leadership to hold indirect peace talks.
However, despite the efforts that have been made
to restart negotiations, we are concerned that no
progress has been made. We remain convinced that a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Middle East
problem will be achieved only through negotiations.
We call for the immediate resumption of negotiations
with a view to achieving a comprehensive peace based
on the vision of two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.
We commend the continued efforts of the
Palestinians towards fulfilling their obligations under
the Road Map, particularly in the security sector, where
they have continued to maintain law and order, and in
the areas of economic development and State-building.
We are concerned about Israel’s continued construction
of settlements in the occupied territory, which is not

10-31334

consistent with its obligations under the Road Map. We
consider Israel’s decision to build 1,600 new homes in
East Jerusalem and other units near Bethlehem, as well
as the inclusion of the two mosques on the list of
Israeli national heritage, to be moves that threaten and
undermine the trust that is so sorely needed. We call
for a complete freeze on all settlement activity,
including natural growth.
The deterioration of the security situation is a
matter of concern. We deplore the continued rocket
attacks on Israel and Israel’s continued air strikes on
Gaza, which have intensified during the reporting
period. These attacks do not help bring the parties to
the negotiating table; they only alienate them further.
We call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint,
avoid further escalation and fully implement resolution
1860 (2009).
We reiterate our concern over the grave
humanitarian situation caused by the continued
blockade imposed on Gaza. While welcoming the
limited opening-up by Israel that has helped a limited
number of United Nations projects to start, we feel this
does not go far enough. We call for an end to the
blockade of Gaza, as called for in resolution 1860
(2009).
We are also concerned that the Palestinian groups
have yet to overcome their differences. These divisions
are detrimental to overall negotiations on the Middle
East question and to efforts for the reconstruction and
development of Gaza. We therefore call on all
Palestinians to resolve their differences and achieve
unity within the framework of the intra-Palestinian
dialogue.
On Lebanon, we welcome the national dialogue
that took place recently. We see it as a positive step
towards resolving the outstanding issues in Lebanon.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like first to extend our deepest
sympathy to the Chinese delegation in the wake of the
tragic earthquake that struck their country.
We are grateful to the Secretariat and UnderSecretary-General Pascoe for the briefing on the
situation in the Middle East.
We would like to reiterate the Russian
Federation’s policy of comprehensive support for an
Israeli-Palestinian settlement process, whose final goal
should be the establishment of an independent

23

S/PV.6298

Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel. Of course, the priority in that
connection continues to be the launching of proximity
talks, which should eventually lead to direct dialogue.
It is clear that it will be extremely difficult for the
parties to achieve that. However, there is no alternative
to relaunching the peace process on an international
legal basis, as endorsed by the Quartet’s Moscow
statement.
We would like to underscore the need for the
parties to fulfil the relevant provisions of the Road
Map, first and foremost ending settlement activity.
Unfortunately, many of the actions of the Israeli
leadership in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, where
there are plans for large-scale construction, can only
arouse serious alarm. The intention of Israeli
authorities to deport a significant number of
Palestinians from the West Bank is fraught with
additional risks of exacerbating tensions in IsraeliPalestinian relations and the region as a whole, and
destabilizing the situation in the Palestinian territories.
We would also like to express our concerns with
regard to the ongoing tension in Gaza and the
continuing blockade of the Strip, the negative actions
of extremists, including rocket fire against Israeli
territory, and the disproportionate use of force by
Israel, all of which lead to the suffering and death of
civilians. The deterioration of the situation in Gaza in
March, which is the most serious since the end of the
Israeli military operation in December 2008 and
January 2009, is a very dangerous development. The
Russian Federation is working on that issue with the
leadership of Hamas. They have confirmed to us that
authorities in the Strip favour preserving calm and that
they have no interest in escalating tension. They are
taking relevant steps to prevent the firing of rockets
from Gaza.
We fully support Mahmoud Abbas as the leader
of all Palestinians and his policy aimed at seeking
political solutions to complex problems facing
Palestinians. At the same time, we would like to
underscore the need to restore inter-Palestinian unity
on the basis of the Egyptian initiative. Among other
things, that would strengthen Palestinian potential for
negotiations. Events in that regard continue to have our
full attention.
We would like to emphasize that a united Arab
position is very important in the current, very complex

24

situation in the peace process. We were pleased to note
that, at the League of Arab States summit held in
Libya, Arab States demonstrated a responsible
approach and expressed their commitment to the Arab
Peace Initiative. It is precisely in that spirit that Russia
presented its policy during the Quartet’s meeting in
Moscow, to which I have referred. That very important
international step was intended to assist the immediate
participants in the dialogue so that they could again
begin to work on substantive agreements, with the help
of international diplomatic efforts in the Middle East,
including those of Senator Mitchell.
Our consistent policy is aimed at ensuring that
the Quartet consistently carries out its mission. While
we can all agree that the Quartet has not been entirely
successful in that regard, it is clear that there is no
alternative to the collective working methods adopted
in the framework of the Quartet. Close cooperation
between the Quartet and the League of Arab States is
one of Quartet’s best tools for enhancing its
effectiveness. We expect that, once Israeli-Palestinian
consultations have resumed, more substantial dialogue
on an Arab-Israeli settlement will take place at the
Moscow Middle East conference.
I should now like to say a few words on Lebanon.
We are extremely alarmed by the growing instability
along the Blue Line and the statements coming from
both sides with regard to the possibility of resumed
full-fledged conflict in the zone. It is for that reason
that it is now very important to reverse the trend in
growing provocative actions, including, for example,
Israeli incursions into Lebanese airspace, so as to
prevent tensions from escalating into direct military
confrontation in southern Lebanon and to achieve strict
compliance by all sides with the requirements set out in
resolution 1701 (2006). We are convinced that, with
the assistance of United Nations forces, the Lebanese
Government is a position to provide stability there.
With the situation in the region currently alternating
between a return to negotiations on a comprehensive
Arab-Israeli settlement and a return to confrontation,
we cannot allow the Lebanese spark to again ignite
conflict in the Middle East.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing.
Before turning to the subject at hand, let me join
other colleagues in extending our condolences to the

10-31334

S/PV.6298

Government and people of China on the loss of life and
the injuries suffered by so many as a result of the
devastating earthquake.
Advancing the cause of comprehensive peace in
the Middle East remains one of the United States
highest foreign policy priorities. Our commitment to
that goal is undiminished, and the resumption of
negotiations towards a two-State solution is the best
way forward. All concerned must confront a basic
reality, that is, that the status quo of the past decade
has neither produced long-term security nor served the
interests of the parties. Such a path means more
instability and more unrealized aspirations for Israelis,
Palestinians and others throughout the region.
Today, we are witnessing a struggle between
those in the region who accept peace and coexistence
with Israel and those who reject it and seek continued
violence. The latter course means drawing out a
conflict with tragic human costs that threatens Israel’s
long-term future as a secure and democratic Jewish
State and denies Palestinians the dignity of a State of
their own. The two-State solution is the only way to
resolve the conflict. The status quo strengthens the
rejectionists, who claim peace is impossible, and
weakens those who embrace coexistence.
At the same time, those willing to negotiate must
be able to show results for their efforts. Those who
preach violence, strife and bloodshed must be proven
wrong. All of the regional challenges that we face,
including combating violent extremism and promoting
both democracy and economic prosperity, become
harder if rejectionists grow in power and influence.
The current path is not sustainable for either Israelis or
Palestinians.
We therefore call again on our international
partners, both inside and outside the Council, to
support the resumption of proximity talks that lead, as
soon as possible, to direct Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations. We invite all involved to promote an
atmosphere of cooperation between the parties, and we
renew our specific call for Arab States to establish
regional and multilateral dialogues with Israel,
concurrent with the resumption of bilateral
negotiations. Only through good-faith negotiations can
the parties mutually agree on an outcome that ends the
conflict and reconciles the Palestinian goal of an
independent and viable State based on the 1967 lines,
with agreed swaps, and the Israeli goal of a Jewish

10-31334

State with secure and recognized borders that reflect
subsequent developments and meet Israeli security
requirements. We also believe that the parties can
mutually agree on an outcome that realizes the
aspirations of both parties for Jerusalem and safeguards
its status for people around the world.
The Secretary-General underscored those points
when he addressed the Arab League summit in Libya
on 27 March. He also conveyed the belief of the
Quartet’s members that those talks should lead to a
settlement, negotiated between the parties within
24 months, that ends the occupation that began in 1967
and results in the emergence of an independent,
democratic and viable Palestinian State living side by
side in peace and security with Israel and its other
neighbours.
It is also important that the parties fulfil their
Road Map obligations. Unilateral actions taken by
either party cannot be allowed to prejudge the outcome
of negotiations and will not be recognized by the
international community. Our position remains clear:
We do not accept the legitimacy of continued Israeli
settlement activity. Israel should also halt evictions and
demolitions of Palestinian homes. We have made our
views on these issues clear over the past several weeks.
At the same time, the Palestinian Authority
should continue to make every effort to ensure security,
to reform its institutions of governance and to take
strong, consistent action to end all forms of incitement.
In this regard, we strongly condemn the glorification of
terrorists, either through official statements or by the
dedication of public places.
Still, we should not overlook the significant
progress made by both sides in the West Bank over the
past year, including marked improvements in the local
economy,
greater
fiscal
transparency
and
accountability, advances in the rule of law and the start
of a more cooperative practical relationship between
Israelis and Palestinians that we hope will develop
further.
The Palestinian Authority has demonstrated its
commitment to reform and institution-building. It is
laying the foundations of a future Palestinian State.
The Authority’s strong fiscal policies, supported by
more than $3 billion in donor assistance over the past
two years, and its commitment to improving security
and the rule of law in the West Bank helped generate
significant economic growth in 2009.

25

S/PV.6298

The Palestinian Authority’s actions are inspiring
investor and consumer confidence, and we are seeing
positive signs of private sector growth and
development in the West Bank. For instance, three
venture capital funds are set to be launched this spring,
with the support of United States, Arab and European
investors. The Authority is also beginning to prepare
for an investment conference in Bethlehem in June that
will focus on small- and medium-size enterprises.
Meanwhile, subscription rates in Wataniya, the
Palestinian’s second mobile telephone provider, have
continued to climb since its launch in November 2009.
And nine affordable housing initiatives, which could
result in 16,000 new units, are in various stages of
development throughout the West Bank. We strongly
endorse
the
Palestinian Authority’s
two-year
programme to build the institutions for a Palestinian
State that will undergird this progress.
Israel has also taken significant steps to improve
Palestinian access to domestic and external markets,
including by easing checkpoints. For example,
thousands of vehicles per week have been entering the
West Bank from Israel through the Jalameh-Gilboa
crossing since it was reopened and expanded in
November 2009. This step, coupled with continued
relaxation of checkpoints between Jenin, Nablus and
Ramallah has helped infuse cash and raise demands for
goods and services into the northern West Bank. In
another example, tens of thousands of people travel to
Bethlehem from Israel and the West Bank during the
Christmas season, contributing millions of dollars to
the local economy.
Of course, these signs of increased economic
activity and growth can be undermined by renewed
violence. And more needs to be done. But we should
not ignore these reminders that Israelis and
Palestinians can work together to build a brighter
future for ordinary citizens on both sides.
In contrast, the situation for civilians in Gaza
remains extremely difficult, despite some small recent
steps forward. The Palestinian Authority is in effect a
lifeline to more than half a million people in Gaza,
making sure that Palestinian Authority salaries are paid
and social welfare payments are made on time. The
Authority plans to devote roughly half of its
$3.9 billion budget to Gaza in 2010. We urge all parties
and partners, including Israel, to focus on meeting the
humanitarian needs of those in Gaza and rebuilding the

26

civilian private sector that will be the engine of Gaza’s
recovery.
Israel has taken steps to improve the flow of
humanitarian goods into Gaza in order to alleviate the
hardship and stress that civilians in Gaza continue to
face every day. Israel has also increased the quantity
and scope of non-food items entering and exiting Gaza
through the official crossings to include glass, wood,
aluminium, some constructions material, including
cement, and some other goods. Israel has also agreed to
the completion of several critical United Nations
projects.
We continue to urge Israel to further open the
crossings, consistent with resolution 1860 (2009) and
the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access, and
with appropriate monitoring to address security
concerns, in order to allow the unimpeded flow to and
from Gaza of people, humanitarian aid and commercial
goods.
Hamas’s
interference
with
international
assistance shipments and the work of our
non-governmental organization partners complicates
our efforts in Gaza. Hamas’s continued arms
smuggling and its recent direct interference with the
official commercial banking system undermine security
and prosperity for Palestinians and Israelis alike.
Hamas has yet to accept the principles established by
the Quartet that are the building blocks of an
independent Palestinian State: renouncing violence,
recognizing Israel and accepting previous agreements.
Nor has it shown an interest in building a future for the
Palestinian people that could exceed its own hateful
rhetoric and embrace of violence.
We have recently seen a significant increase in
rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel — a direct threat
to international peace and security. There were 20 such
attacks in March alone, and a total of 40 this year.
Groups other than Hamas have claimed responsibility
for these terrorist attacks. Nevertheless, Hamas
asserted control of Gaza in 2007 and is thus
accountable for ensuring that these attacks cease. We
also call again for the immediate release of Gilad
Shalit, abducted and held by Hamas since 2006.
In closing, permit me to remind the Council of
the important role that Lebanon can play in efforts to
secure a comprehensive peace. The Special Tribunal
for Lebanon remains a key tool to end the era of
impunity for political assassinations in Lebanon. As

10-31334

S/PV.6298

Secretary of State Clinton has noted, the Tribunal is not
a bargaining chip; it is an independent judicial process.
United States support for the Tribunal in its pursuit of
justice will not waiver. We reiterate our support for
Lebanon’s sovereign Government and for the full
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006), all of which are equally
binding.
But the transfer of weapons from Syria to
Hizbullah undermines the Lebanese Government’s
ability to exercise sovereignty over all of its territory
and risks sparking a conflict that no one needs. We are
increasingly concerned about the sophistication of the
weaponry being transferred. We have continued to
reiterate our strong concerns to the Syrian and
Lebanese authorities, and we have made clear that they
need to be taking steps that reduce the risk and danger
of conflict, not taking steps that increase it.
The United States has continued to emphasize to
all relevant parties the importance of implementing
Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006), which call for ending weapons smuggling into
Lebanon and for the disarmament of Hizbullah, among
other things. We remain committed to supporting
Lebanon’s sovereignty and independence and working
to strengthen our partners in the Lebanese Government
and armed forces.
The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Japan.
I too join my colleagues in thanking Mr. Pascoe
for his update, and I am also very grateful to
Ambassador Shalev and Ambassador Mansour for their
respective contributions.
The only way to achieve durable peace is through
sincere negotiations in good faith between the parties
concerned. We support in particular the effort by the
United States to hold proximity talks and to restart
direct negotiations between the parties. We appreciate
the 19 March statement of the Quartet in that regard.
We encourage the parties to take the initiative to restart
direct negotiations. The negotiations should lead to a
two-State solution, which will end the 1967 occupation
of the territories, including East Jerusalem. Japan
supports and assists the Palestinian Authority’s plan for
building a Palestinian State within 24 months by
extending assistance for institution- and capacitybuilding. Palestinian unity is essential for realizing
peace in the Middle East.

10-31334

Both parties must carry out their obligations and
commitments under the Road Map. We call on the
Israeli Government to freeze all settlement activities in
the West Bank and not to implement the decision to
build new housing units in East Jerusalem. Any act that
could prejudice the final status negotiations should not
be taken. We also call on Israel not to implement
measures that place an undue burden on the
Palestinians in the West Bank.
With respect to the Palestinian Authority, we call
upon it to continue in its efforts to improve the security
situation and to fulfil its commitment to cease violence
and act of terrorism.
More than one year after resolution 1860 (2009)
was adopted and the end of the Israel military
operations in Gaza, the Israeli blockade continues to
create a serious humanitarian situation in Gaza. Such a
situation is unacceptable. We strongly hope that the
recent modest but positive step taken by Israel will be
followed by freer movement of goods and materials for
reconstruction. We also call on all who are responsible
for the rocket fire into Israel to stop such actions
immediately.
I resume my function as President of the Security
Council. I now have the honour of giving the floor to
the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure today
to address the Security Council on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. I will begin by expressing the
sincere sentiments of solidarity and sympathy of the
Movement’s members with the Government and the
People of China as it tackles the consequences of the
massive earthquake that struck them today, resulting in
human and material losses.
I would like to begin my statement by
emphasizing the importance of convening this open
debate at this critical juncture where the international
community, including the members of the Quartet,
exerts tireless efforts to bring about a two-State
solution and achieve comprehensive peace in the
Middle East region. Advancing the cause of peace by
ending Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian and Arab
territories that it has occupied since 1967 remains one
of the most important priorities and goals of the
Non-Aligned
Movement.
The
Non-Aligned
Movement’s commitment to the goal of peace is
unwavering, but the current Israeli practices and
policies in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,

27

S/PV.6298

including East Jerusalem, raise concerns and doubts
about Israel’s intentions with regard to achieving peace
and about the viability of the two-State solution.
Despite the international consensus on the twoState solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders and
the serious efforts by all international and regional
partners to relaunch negotiations, including proximity
talks, a just and lasting settlement to the question of
Palestine is still visibly far from being achieved owing
to Israel’s positions and continued non-compliance
with international law and Security Council
resolutions.
A serious effort by the Security Council is needed
to strengthen efforts aimed at overcoming the current
impasse and pressing for the early resumption and
conclusion of the negotiating process. Obviously,
negotiations cannot be resumed while measures exist to
forcibly impose a fait accompli on the Palestinian
people by altering the demographic composition,
character and status of the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in and around East Jerusalem.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, adhere to
international law and international humanitarian law,
fulfil its obligations under the road map and promote
an environment conducive to negotiations and
achieving peace. The Movement reaffirms that no
unilateral action undertaken by Israel will be allowed
to prejudice the outcome of negotiations nor will it be
recognized by the international community. The
international community, including the Security
Council, must be resolute in confronting Israeli
settlement activities and in demanding that Israel abide
by its obligations. Israel must unambiguously negotiate
on and resolve all core issues, namely, Jerusalem,
settlements, refugees, borders, security and water, in a
comprehensive manner and within a fixed time frame.
The Security Council has an obligation towards
that objective. It must shoulder its responsibility in
maintaining peace and security in the Middle East and
in the establishment of an independent and viable State
of Palestine on the basis of the two-State solution. The
Non-Aligned Movement is alarmed at Israel’s
continued provocations and taking of illegal measures
in the West Bank, including in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, particularly plans for building new
settlement units and measures to control and annex
holy religious sites. The Movement condemns the

28

Israeli announcement that it will include the Ibrahimi
Mosque in Al-Khalil (Hebron), the site of Bilal’s
Mosque in Bethlehem (Rachel’s Tomb) and the Walls
of the Old City of Jerusalem in its national heritage
listing. Further, the Movement condemns attacks
carried out by the Israeli occupying forces against
Palestinian worshippers at the Al-Haram al-Sharif
compound, including Al-Aqsa Mosque. In this regard,
it is imperative that the Security Council bear in mind
the religious sensitivity and feelings of frustration and
despair prevailing around the world owing to the
repeated Israeli attempts to alter the character,
composition and status of East Jerusalem and to
control religious holy sites, often without any reaction
from the Council.
Recalling that the annexation of occupied East
Jerusalem is illegal, null and void and has not been
recognized by the United Nations and the international
community, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that
East Jerusalem is an integral part of the occupied
Palestinian territory and is the capital of the future
State of Palestine. In this regard, the Non-Aligned
Movement condemns the decision by the Government
of Israel to move forward with planning for new
housing units in and around the City, including the
announcement of the approval for the construction of
1,600 new settlement units in East Jerusalem and 112
other units near Bethlehem, in defiance of the broad
international consensus against them and the repeated
calls to stop all settlement activities.
The Movement welcomes the Quartet’s intention
to monitor developments closely in and around
Jerusalem and to consider additional steps that might
be required to address the situation on the ground. The
Movement calls on the Security Council to take similar
steps and reaffirm its previous resolutions on East
Jerusalem, particularly resolution 478 (1980), in order
to stop further deterioration in the already volatile
situation and to promote a climate conducive to the
pursuit of peace.
The unresolved crisis in Gaza also continues to
cause negative repercussions on efforts to advance
peace in the region and inflicts unacceptable suffering
on the Palestinian civilian population. We continue to
witness unbearable human suffering caused by the
continuing illegal Israeli blockade. In this regard, we
reiterate
that
international
humanitarian
law,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention, and United
Nations resolutions must be respected. The

10-31334

S/PV.6298

Non-Aligned
Movement
demands
that Israel
immediately lift its illegal blockade and implement
resolution 1860 (2009) and the resolution of the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly
(A/RES/ES-10/6).
The Movement welcomes all endeavours aimed at
achieving this goal, including Secretary-General’s visit
to Gaza and his efforts to enable the immediate and
sustained opening of all border crossings in order to
alleviate the crisis in Gaza and ensure its urgent
reconstruction. Further, the Non-Aligned Movement
stresses once again the urgent need to begin
reconstruction in Gaza immediately and deplores
Israel’s continued obstruction of the reconstruction
process, including projects to be implemented by the
United Nations, despite the availability of financial
resources.
The Non-Aligned Movement further emphasizes
the importance of conducting investigations into the
serious violations of international humanitarian and
international human rights law reported by the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,
known as the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48). Those
investigations must be independent and credible and
conform with international standards. The NonAligned Movement further stresses the importance and
urgency of Palestinian reconciliation and reiterates its
support for all efforts to achieve it, including Egyptian
and regional endeavours.
In addressing the situation in the Middle East, the
Non-Aligned Movement remains deeply concerned
over Israel’s ongoing systematic violations of
Lebanon’s sovereignty, in breach of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), and the threat of potential
escalation. The Movement reiterates its call for the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), including
Israel’s full withdrawal from all Lebanese territories in
the Shab’a farms, the Kfar Shuba hills and the northern
part of Al-Ghajar village.
On the occupied Syrian Golan, the Non-Aligned
Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions
taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical and demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional structure, as
well as measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null, void and have no legal
effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw

10-31334

fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
June 4, 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
remains committed to the goal of the two-State solution
for peace and highlights the serious consequences of
the ongoing Israeli measures in the region. It is vital at
this critical juncture that all parties shoulder their
responsibilities to move towards a comprehensive and
durable settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Furthermore, the international community has to take a
robust posture to strengthen the process and to reaffirm
clear terms of reference for negotiations on all core
issues of the Palestinian track, as grounded in
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map. The
international community, including the Security
Council, must not allow Israeli intransigence and
illegal measures to obstruct its decisive steps to
translate the two-State vision into reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) Group.
Allow me at the outset to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe
for his comprehensive briefing. I should also like also
to praise your able presidency, Sir, and the successful
presidency of our colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Gabon, last month.
I would like to extend our deepest condolences to
the Permanent Representative of China and, through
him, to his Government and people.
For the umpteenth time since the inception of the
United Nations in 1945, we meet in the Security
Council to discuss the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, which is being
endangered again by irresponsible and illegal Israeli
acts that could lead the region as a whole into another
war, with great potential to spread uncontrollably
through the region and beyond. Once again, Israel has
turned its back on the increased efforts of international
community aimed at resuming the peace talks, and has
failed to respond accordingly to its requirements,
foremost among which is the implementation of the
international resolutions calling for its full withdrawal

29

S/PV.6298

from all occupied Arab territories to the lines of 4 June,
1967. In effect, the Israeli Government continues to
perpetrate illegal actions aimed at forcibly and
aggressively imposing a fait accompli on the
Palestinian people through its military might. It is
obvious that the continuation of such unlawful and
provocative Israeli behaviour will endanger the
achievement of a just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.
These illegal Israeli measures include the
unbridled and unlawful escalation of settlement
activities, dealing a critical blow to the Middle East
peace process; the ongoing three-year blockade of the
Gaza Strip, slowly choking off the essentials of life;
the irresponsible and aggressive decision to add the
Ibrahimi mosque and the mosque of Bilal ibn Rabah to
a list of so-called Israeli heritage sites; the shameful
approval issued by the Israeli Supreme Court to
construct a so-called museum of tolerance by
destroying and building over one of the oldest Islamic
cemeteries in Jerusalem; the continued construction of
the separation wall; the revocation of Palestinian
residency rights in the city; the eviction of Palestinian
families from the city; the imposition of severe
restrictions to movement, which have already isolated
the city from the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory; the issuance just two days ago of an
extremely dangerous new Israeli order that gives the
occupying forces power to detain, imprison and deport
Palestinians in the West Bank; and the dangerous
continued digging and excavation work in and around
Al-Aqsa mosque and its vicinity.
These violations are the most prominent evidence
of the policy of ethnic cleansing and aggression being
pursued by Israel, the occupying Power, and of the
intention of Israeli decision-makers to wage a fatal war
on the peace process and to undermine international
efforts to bring a just and comprehensive peace to the
region. The OIC strongly condemns these Israeli
violations and calls for the immediate cessation of all
such activities, in accordance with the occupying
Power’s obligations under international law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the many
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions.
In this regard, the OIC recalls, inter alia, Security
Council Resolutions 446 (1979), 465 (1980) and 478
(1980), which all remain valid and must be
implemented. The OIC Group demands that Israel also

30

abide by resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003) and withdraw from the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem
to the lines of 4 June 1967.
Despite the unanimous international rejection of
Israel’s de facto annexation of Al-Quds Al-Sharif in
1980, and despite the strong calls for Israel’s
immediate cessation of all colonization measures,
Israel, the occupying Power, continues its illegal
campaign geared to changing the Palestinian Arab
identity of the holy city of Al-Quds. The OIC members
reaffirmed, at the thirty-sixth ministerial meeting held
in Damascus, that all Israeli colonial settlement
measures and practices in Al-Quds and the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory are null and void, and
requests urgently the Security Council to revive the
International Supervision and Monitoring Committee
to Prevent and Prohibit Colonial Settlement in Al-Quds
and the Occupied Arab Territories.
We strongly condemn the attacks by the Israeli
occupying forces perpetrated against Palestinian
worshippers at Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif compound in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Any
provocative or illegal, unilateral actions against the
holy mosque of Al-Aqsa will have very serious
repercussions for the Islamic world and could incite
another cycle of violence likely to destabilize the
region and the rest of the world.
The OIC Group strongly condemns the Israeli
Government’s decision to usurp illegally Al-Haram
Al-Ibrahimi in the occupied Palestinian city of
Al-Khalil and Masjid Bilal in the occupied city of
Bethlehem. The OIC Group stresses the illegality of
the Israeli Government’s decision and considers it as
null and void and without any effect whatsoever.
The OIC Group calls on the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to shoulder its
responsibilities in taking the urgent necessary measures
to compel the Israeli Government to revoke its
irresponsible decisions and to refrain from any further
provocative acts aimed at undermining the chances to
achieve a just and comprehensive peace settlement.
The Israeli Government, as all know, continues to
ignore the international community’s demands to lift
the unlawful blockade it has imposed on the Gaza Strip
for the past three years. The OIC condemns this
inhumane blockade and expresses serious concern
about the grave deterioration of socio-economic

10-31334

S/PV.6298

conditions and the deepening of the humanitarian crisis
of Palestinian civilians. The OIC calls on Israel to end
its collective punitive measures imposed on the civilian
population in Gaza and calls for the immediate lifting
by Israel of the unjust Israeli blockade and for the
opening of all crossing points with Gaza, in accordance
with international law and United Nations resolutions.
This is the first time in human history that people
are being prevented from leaving a war zone, seeking
safety. The OIC welcomes the adoption by the General
Assembly of its resolution 64/254, of 26 February
2010, on the second follow-up to the report of the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on Gaza Conflict.
The Group is of the view that that resolution
constitutes an important step in pursuing accountability
for these Israeli violations, which were confirmed in
the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48). Thus, more
actions should be taken by the relevant United Nations
bodies, including the Security Council, to bring the
Israeli perpetrators of these crimes to justice and to put
an end to Israel’s impunity and above-the-law
mentality.
The OIC remains deeply concerned by Israel’s
ongoing air and land violations of Lebanon’s
sovereignty, in breach of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006), and calls on Israel to withdraw fully from
the remaining Lebanese occupied land in the Shab’a
farms, the Kafr Shuba hills and the northern part of the
village of Ghajar.
The OIC also joins the international community’s
stance in reaffirming that all measures and actions
taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the occupying Power,
to alter the legal, physical or demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional structure, as
well as the Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The OIC demands that Israel abide fully
and immediately by Security Council resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967, in implementation
also of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
The OIC calls for the intensification of efforts by
the international community, including by the Security
Council in line with its Charter responsibilities, aimed
at accelerating the process of achieving a just and
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East on
the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the

10-31334

Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of
land for peace, and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The OIC reiterates, in this regard, its firm and
unwavering support for the establishment of the State
of Palestine based on a commitment to the right of
sovereignty over the Palestinian territory occupied in
1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and a just
solution for the plight of the Palestine refugees on the
basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
(spoke in Arabic)
Allow me now to speak in my national capacity.
Today, we have had the pleasure of hearing statements
by the members of the Council that condemned Israel’s
actions and the unilateral measures it has adopted. It
has done so in contravention of its commitments as
occupying Power, as set out in the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, the laws of war and The Hague Convention of
1907. These Israeli actions contravene the international
community’s will to establish a comprehensive, just
peace in the region, with the creation of a Palestinian
State within the 4 June 1967 borders.
It would seem that the Israeli representative and
her Government do not recognize the agreements
commonly known as the Geneva Conventions, the laws
of war, the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly or the 38 resolutions adopted by the Security
Council. Allow me to reiterate that the number of
international resolutions adopted by the Council, the
General Assembly and the United Nations specialized
agencies against Israel are more numerous than the
resolutions adopted by the membership on any other
subject since the creation of our Organization.
A great many Israeli political leaders, both
military and civilian, can no longer travel freely
because they are accused of having committed war
crimes. This is a reality, and a truth that needs to be
borne in mind constantly, both here in the Council and
in other United Nations forums.
It is high time to set up a commission of inquiry
to examine all resolutions adopted by the United
Nations since 1948. The result, it will be seen, would
be striking. We also have to consider the option of
setting up a committee that would produce a register in
which we could record all the terrorist crimes
committed by Israel since its creation. We recently
witnessed the actions taken by the Mossad in Dubai.

31

S/PV.6298

Paragraph 39 of the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/105) on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) states that
the Lebanese Government “has not reported any breach
of the arms embargo imposed by resolution 1701
(2006)”. There are two reports, and neither makes
reference to the transfer of arms and weapons across
the Syria-Lebanon border, something that Israel claims.
Israel’s allegations have a single, precise objective: to
divert the attention focused on Israel’s primary
responsibility for the exacerbation of tensions in the
Middle East and to divert attention from Israel’s threats
against its neighbours and the entire region.
Yesterday, Israel prevented a MediterraneanEuropean conference from reaching agreement on the
issue of the water shortage in the Middle East. The
reason for the failure of the conference is quite simple:
the European and Arab States referred to the occupied
Palestinian territories in the conference’s final
document, and Israel simply does not recognize the
existence of occupied territories. It continues to flout
the Geneva Conventions and the norms of international
law. The very mention of the occupied territories in
that document was rejected by Israel in Paris yesterday.
As for nuclear weapons, it is an outrage; it is
scandalous. All of us are aware of the situation — and
incidentally, the source of the information is not Syrian
but Swedish. All are familiar with this book, an
international benchmark in nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. Over 15 pages therein concern
Israeli nuclear weapons. Israel possesses a nuclear
arsenal made up of over 300 nuclear bombs, and
nuclear missiles with a range of over 7,000 kilometres
that can strike Europe, China and America.
Israel is the only country in the Middle East that
has not yet joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. It has obstructed the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East, an initiative launched by Syria in 2003
when it was a member of the Security Council. This
initiative was not successful for reasons with which all
present are familiar.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to echo the words of previous
speakers by conveying my sincerest condolences to the
Government and people of China and the families of
the victims of this morning’s devastating earthquake.

32

It is an honour for me to speak on behalf of the
Arab Group to assess the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.
We would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing earlier. It was important, as it reminded the
international community of its responsibilities towards
the Palestinian people suffering a terrible occupation
by Israel, which persists in contravention of its
international commitments and continues to occupy
Arab territories.
It is unfortunate that after more than 60 years of
considering the Palestinian question, which is at the
core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, the international
community remains preoccupied with the issue as a
result of its inability to achieve a peaceful solution for
the Palestinian people and to restore their land to them.
Israel, the occupying Power, ignores the will,
resolutions and repeated appeals of the international
community. It continues to occupy Arab and
Palestinian territories and to stifle peaceful efforts to
relieve its illegal occupation, which has gone on since
1967, in defiance of the international community.
Israel’s practices in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including the Gaza Strip; its inhuman siege
of Gaza, its construction of the separation wall;
restrictions on the free movement of people; the
Judaization of Jerusalem; and the recent decision by
the occupation forces to deport tens of thousands of
Palestinians from their homes in the West Bank and in
Jerusalem while enabling Jews from all over the world
to settle in Palestine, including Jerusalem East, are all
proof that Israel, the occupying Power, is simply the
defying international community, international law and
United Nations resolutions. That contradicts the claims
of the Israeli authorities that Israel is a partner in the
peace process and that it respects its commitment to a
two-State solution. Prime Minister Netanyahu gave a
speech last month in which he said that Jerusalem is
Israel’s eternal capital and that settlements will
continue. That is proof of Israel’s intransigence and
contempt for Security Council resolutions and the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War.
The international community condemns such
provocations and escalation. It is clear that the
persistence of the occupation is not only due to Israel’s
refusal to accept the will of the international

10-31334

S/PV.6298

community and its international obligations vis-à-vis
the Security Council and the United Nations Charter,
but also because the Security Council allows it to
behave in all impunity, as if it were above the law. That
has contributed to Israel’s persistent lack of respect for
United Nations resolutions and the resulting political
instability and insecurity in the region. That is why the
Security Council today must shoulder its legal
responsibility and adopt measures to create an
independent Palestinian State, with its capital in East
Jerusalem, within the 4 June 1967 borders.
The Quartet met in Moscow last month and
condemned Israel’s settlement activities. We call upon
the Quartet to remain faithful to its basic position of
principle that calls for an end to Israel’s settlement
policies in Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, and to so-called natural growth, which are
serious obstacles to a just and comprehensive peace.
The international community today must reject Israel’s
arguments as it seeks to justify its settlement activities
and must pressure it to respect Security Council
resolutions 465 (1980) and 497 (1981), on this issue.
It is obvious that Israel interpreted the Arab Peace
Initiative as a sign of weakness, so it persisted in its
aggressive practices and violence against the
Palestinians and intensified its blockade of Gaza, with
its consequent humanitarian tragedy, as witnessed by
the Board of Inquiry and by the Secretary-General
during his recent visit to the region. The SecretaryGeneral stated that the blockade had led to
unacceptable human suffering and that Israel must lift
it and abstain from implementing measures to block
humanitarian aid.
Israel is harming religious sensitivities by
desecrating holy places and by placing the Ibrahimi
and Bilal bin Rabah mosques on its heritage list. These
buildings lie within occupied Palestinian territory, and
their identity cannot be changed, which is what Israel
is doing when it seeks to change the Arab character of
East Jerusalem and other occupied Arab land. The Arab
Group appreciated the resolution adopted by the
Executive Board of UNESCO, rejecting Israel’s
unilateral measures to change the demographic
character and the status of Jerusalem.
Given the fact that there is no serious Israeli
interlocutor willing to shoulder its international
responsibility, we fear that the Arab Peace Initiative
may become a dead letter because of Israel’s illegal

10-31334

practices and policies and its unilateral measures aimed
at changing the demographic and geographic character
of the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem.
Israel is seeking to circumvent the underlying
principles for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital.
In that context, I reaffirm the Arab position
demanding Israeli withdrawal from all Arab territories
occupied since 4 June 1967, including Shab’a farms,
Kafr Shouba and the village of Ghajar in southern
Lebanon, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003), as well as the Road Map, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the principle of land for peace, which are
all aimed at achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.
The President: Since there are so many speakers
remaining, I propose to listen to only one more this
morning. I would like to invite Mr. Pedro Serrano,
Acting Head of the delegation of the European Union,
to take the floor.
Mr. Serrano (European Union): Let me begin by
thanking you, Sir, for inviting the European Union to
this important debate. Many thanks also to UnderSecretary-General Pascoe for his report.
I wish to join others, at the outset, in conveying
the condolences and sympathy of the European Union
to the people and Government of China for the victims
and losses suffered in today’s earthquake.
The candidate countries, Turkey, Croatia and the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia and the European Free Trade
Association country Iceland, member of the European
Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, align themselves
with this statement.
Negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis
were last held in December 2008. The absence of
negotiations and the ensuing vacuum has been a source
of great concern to the European Union and the
international
community.
The
resumption
of
negotiations remains an absolute necessity, now more
urgent than ever. The European Union calls on both
Israelis and Palestinians to resume meaningful
negotiations on all final status issues without further
delay. A failure to do so will have negative

33

S/PV.6298

consequences and obstruct efforts to bring peace and
stability to the Middle East.
The European Union has strongly supported
international efforts led by the United States and aimed
at resuming negotiations. A firm, ambitious and
sustained effort from the United States remains
indispensable. The European Union will continue to
work closely with the United States and support its
efforts. At the same time, the European Union, together
with its Quartet and Arab League partners, will
continue actively to look for ways to ensure a peace
deal, which should be finalized within the 24-month
period mentioned in the Quartet statement agreed in
Moscow on 19 March 2010. The European Union
continues to support reinvigorated Quartet engagement.
The creation of the State of Palestine and the
realization of the two-State solution remain a core
European interest. The European Union is also ready to
step up its efforts by facilitating and sustaining peace
agreements. The European Union will continue to work
on contributions in the areas of State-building, regional
issues, refugees, security and Jerusalem, and will
continue to assist Palestinian state-building in
preparation for Palestinian statehood. It is ready to
extend full diplomatic, political and economic support
to the Palestinian Authority’s Government Plan
“Palestine, Ending the Occupation, Establishing the
State”.
In order to restore credibility to the peace process
the parties should implement their respective agreed
obligations under the first phase of the Road Map. This
should take place in parallel with a resumption of
negotiations on all final status issues. Israel must end
all settlement activities in East Jerusalem and the rest
of the West Bank, including natural growth. It should
dismantle all outposts erected since March 2001.
Palestinian institutions in Jerusalem should be allowed
to reopen. The Palestinian side must continue to
implement its obligations to end violence.
The European Union is deeply concerned about
the situation in East Jerusalem and calls on all parties
to refrain from further provocative actions. The

European Union has never recognized the annexation
of East Jerusalem. If there is to be a genuine peace, a
way must be found through negotiations to resolve the
status of Jerusalem as the future capital of two States.
All discriminatory treatment of Palestinians in East
Jerusalem must stop.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to
be a source of deep concern. The physical and political
divisions between Gaza and the West Bank undermine
the efforts of the international community to resume a
meaningful peace process. Gaza must be an integral
part of the future State of Palestine. The continued
policy of closure is both counterproductive and
unacceptable. The European Union reiterates its call
for the urgent and full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) and for the immediate,
sustained and unconditional opening of crossings for
the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and
persons. The European Union calls on those holding
the abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit to release him
without delay. The European Union further emphasizes
the importance of appropriate and credible
investigations, in accordance with international
standards, into possible violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
by the parties to the conflict.
European Union assistance aimed at supporting
the peace process stands at more than €1 billion per
year. The European Union will continue to provide this
support. The European Union also calls on all regional
actors to undertake confidence-building measures in
order to stimulate mutual trust, and encourages Arab
countries to be forthcoming, both politically and
financially, in assisting the Palestinian Authority and
Palestinian refugees through the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. The European Union hopes and expects that all
parties to the conflict will shoulder their
responsibilities and move towards lasting peace.
The President: With the Council’s concurrence, I
intend to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m. Thank you
for your cooperation.
The meeting was suspended at 1.25 p.m.

34

10-31334
