Resolutions adopted on reports of the Third Committee
( 3) He has acquired a new nationality, and enjoys the
protection of the country of his new nationality; or

49

artll"k persons in other categories, including such as may
he n·cumrnnHkd Ly the (;encral Assembly.

( 4) He has voluntarily re-established himself in the
country which he left or outside which he remained owing
to fear of persecution; or
( 5) He can no longer, because the circumstances in
connexion with which he has been recognized as a refugee
have ceased to exist, claim grounds other than those of
personal convenience for continuing to refuse to avail
himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.
Reasons of a purely economic character may not be invoked; or
( 6) Being a person who has no nationality, he can no
longer, because the circumstances in connexion with which
he has been recognized as a refugee have ceased to exist
and he is able to return to the country of his former
habitual residence, claim grounds other than those of personal convenience for continuing to refuse to return to
that country.
C. The present Convention shall not apply to persons
who are at present receiving from other organs or agencies of the United Nations protection or assistance.
D. The present Convention shall not apply to a person who is recognized by the competent authorities of the
country in which he has taken residence as having the
rights and obligations which arc attached to the possession
of the nationality of that country.
E. The provisions of the present Convention shall not
apply to any person with respect to whom there arc serious
reasons for considering that (a) he has committed a crime
specified in article VJ of the London Charter of the International Military Tribunal; or ( b) he falls under the
provisions of article 14, paragraph 2, of the Universal
Declarationb of Human Rights.

F. The Contracting States may agree to add to the
definition of the term "refugee" contained in the present
"See resolution 217 A (III).

430 (V).

Problems of assistance to refugees

'J'he (;eneral Assembly,
1 f m·i11g tal.:en cognizance of the communication 20 addressed to it by the General Council of the International
l{efugee Orgai1ization on 13 October 1950 in amplification of its memorandum of 20 October 1949 addressed
to the fourth session of the General Assembly,

J l avinq noted that the General Council of the International Refugee Organization has decided to continue
operations until 30 September 1951,
l. ])ccidcs to address an urgent appeal to all States,
whether or not :'.\lembcrs of the United Nations, calling
upon them to assist the International Refugee Organization in its efforts to resettle refugees remaining under
its care and particularly those in need of permanent
custuclial care ;

) llccidcs. in the absence of definite data, to postpcmt· until its sixth session the examination of the problem ot assistance raised bv the above-mentioned communications, in the light "of a further communication
on the subject \Yhich the International Refugee Organization is invited to ,;ubrnit and of the observations
which tht' 1 !igh Commissioner will make in his report
tu the sixth ses:-;icm of the Ccneral Assembly.
325th plenary meeting,
14 lJecr·mber 1950.
20 See () fficwl Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Third Committee, Annexes, Agenda item 32, document
A/(: 3/5·!0
