United Nations

A/RES/56/38

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 January 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 108

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/56/L.27 and Add.1)]

56/38. Recommendations on support for volunteering
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/17 of 20 November 1997, in which it proclaimed
the year 2001 as the International Year of Volunteers, based on Economic and Social
Council resolution 1997/44 of 22 July 1997, and its resolution 55/57 of 4 December
2000, in which it requested the Secretary-General to prepare a report on ways in
which Governments and the United Nations system could support volunteering, and
bearing in mind Commission for Social Development resolution 39/2 of 23 February
2001, 1
Recalling also the outcome document of the twenty-fourth special session of
the General Assembly entitled “World Summit for Social Development and beyond:
achieving social development for all in a globalizing world”, 2 in which the General
Assembly recommended the promotion of the involvement of volunteers in social
development, inter alia, by encouraging Governments, taking into account the views
of all actors, to develop comprehensive strategies and programmes by raising public
awareness about the value and opportunities of volunteerism and by facilitating an
enabling environment for individuals and other actors of civil society to engage in
voluntary activities, and the private sector to support such activities,
Recalling further paragraphs 73 and 179 (f) of the Platform for Action adopted
by the Fourth World Conference on Women, 3 paragraph 42 of the Declaration on
Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New Millennium adopted at the twentyfifth special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of
the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II) in June 2001, 4 and paragraphs 32 (i) (b) and 41 (ii) (a) of
the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–

_______________
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2001, Supplement No. 6 and corrigendum
(E/2001/26 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. E.
2
See resolution S-24/2, annex.
3
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
4
See resolution S-25/2, annex.

01 47881

A/RES/56/38

2010 adopted at the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries in May 2001, 5
Recognizing the valuable contribution of volunteering, including traditional
forms of mutual aid and self-help, formal service delivery and other forms of civic
participation, to economic and social development, benefiting society at large,
communities and the individual volunteer,
Recognizing also that volunteerism is an important component of any strategy
aimed at, inter alia, such areas as poverty reduction, sustainable development,
health, disaster prevention and management and social integration and, in particular,
overcoming social exclusion and discrimination,
Recognizing further the existing contribution of the organizations of the United
Nations system to supporting volunteering, including the work of United Nations
Volunteers around the world, by promoting volunteerism, including by placing
volunteers,
Aware of the need to approach voluntary activities strategically as a means of
enhancing resources, addressing global issues and improving the quality of life for
everyone,
1.
Welcomes
volunteering; 6

the

report

of

the

Secretary-General

on

support

for

2.
Also welcomes the work of the United Nations Volunteers as the focal
point for the International Year of Volunteers in supporting national International
Year of Volunteers committees and in collecting and disseminating information on
the Year, including through its web site; 7
3.
Expresses its appreciation regarding the support to the International Year
of Volunteers extended by States, international organizations and civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, especially at the local, national and
regional levels;
4.
Commends the ongoing contributions of all volunteers to society,
including in extraordinary conditions such as disasters;
5.

Encourages all people to become more engaged in voluntary activities;

6.
Lays down in the annex to the present resolution the recommendations on
ways in which Governments and the United Nations system could support
volunteering;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to take specific measures, in particular
within the mandates of the United Nations Volunteers and the Department of Public
Information of the Secretariat, to disseminate widely the present resolution and the
annex;
8.
Calls upon all Governments and organizations of the United Nations
system to give these recommendations due consideration;
9.
Decides that on 5 December 2002, International Volunteer Day for
Economic and Social Development, two plenary meetings at the fifty-seventh
_______________
5

A/CONF.191/11.
A/56/288.
7
www.iyv2001.org.
6

2

A/RES/56/38

session of the General Assembly shall be devoted to the outcome of the International
Year of Volunteers and its follow-up under the agenda item entitled “Social
development, including questions relating to the world social situation and to youth,
ageing, disabled persons and the family”;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in his report to the General Assembly at
its fifty-seventh session on the outcome of the International Year of Volunteers and
its follow up, to include proposals for an integrated and coordinated follow-up, to be
pursued in the relevant parts of the United Nations system, as well as on crosscutting issues, building on his report to the Assembly at the present session and
taking into account the present resolution, the discussions held during the present
session and other relevant contributions.
76th plenary meeting
5 December 2001

Annex
Recommendations on ways in which Governments and the United
Nations system could support volunteering
I.

General considerations

1.
In these recommendations, the terms volunteering, volunteerism and voluntary
activities refer to a wide range of activities, including traditional forms of mutual
aid and self-help, formal service delivery and other forms of civic participation,
undertaken of free will, for the general public good and where monetary reward is
not the principal motivating factor.
2.
Actions by Governments and the United Nations system are mutually
reinforcing but are treated separately below for the sake of clarity.
3.
There is not one universal model of best practice, since what works well in one
country may not work in another with very different cultures and traditions.
4.
Support for voluntary activities does not imply support for government
downsizing or for replacing paid employment.
5.
It is not just targeted measures that have an impact on volunteering; general
social and economic policy measures can also influence citizens’ opportunities and
willingness to volunteer.
6.
Neglecting to factor volunteering into the design and implementation of
policies could entail the risk of overlooking a valuable asset and undermine
traditions of cooperation that bind communities together.
7.
It is important to ensure that opportunities for volunteering in all sectors are
open both to women and men, given their different levels of participation in
different areas, and recognizing the potential positive effect of volunteering on the
empowerment of women.
II.

Government support

1.
It is recommended that Governments further support voluntary activities by
creating a favourable environment, including through the following policies and
measures, and taking into account the local cultural context.

3

A/RES/56/38

(a) Increasing public awareness of the vital contribution of volunteerism to
the social and economic functioning of their communities through, inter alia, public
information activities and public events
(i) Highlight the contribution of volunteering; organize briefings and
seminars for policy makers and the media. Official papers on the status of
volunteering and the issues that need to be addressed can be published and
widely disseminated. High-profile events and campaigns can be organized on
national days and on International Volunteer Day for Economic and Social
Development on 5 December. Negative stereotyping of volunteers can be
challenged. The promotion of volunteering can be achieved through special
programmes and public service announcements or by joint initiatives such as
award schemes;
(ii) Encourage the media to play a supportive role in public awarenessraising activities;
(iii) Disseminate the results of studies and surveys on the contribution of
volunteerism, where they exist, through the media, schools, non-governmental
organizations and other channels.
(b) Taking general measures concerning encouragement and facilitation,
preparation, training and recognition of volunteers
(i) Provide, in a way complementary to the support from other sources, an
adequate human and physical infrastructure for volunteering. This could
include, inter alia, awareness-raising campaigns, development of a volunteer
centre infrastructure, establishment of focal points or the use of pilot schemes
and the promotion of online volunteering. Specific campaigns in the area of,
for example, mass immunization, literacy, or low-cost housing, could include
budgetary provision for the encouragement and facilitation, orientation and
training, monitoring and recognition of volunteers;
(ii) Facilitate the establishment and functioning of volunteer centres, which
provide a valuable stimulus to formal service volunteering through advocacy,
monitoring and encouraging new initiatives. National volunteer centres
provide effective leadership in the formal volunteer movement, while regional
and local centres ensure linkages with the grass-roots communities and
organizations. Legal and fiscal frameworks are important factors in the
sustainability of such centres and financial support may also be desirable;
(iii) Provide or facilitate specialized training and the formation of
professional volunteer managers and trainers in the area of formal service
volunteering, including by introducing formal credentials and standards;
(iv) Encourage public sector workers to volunteer, for instance by facilitating
measures, recognition, career enhancement incentives and the establishment of
a dedicated special unit. This sets a positive example for society and helps to
strengthen the sense of collective responsibility.
(c) Enabling fiscal, legislative and other frameworks, including for
community-based organizations and not-for-profit organizations engaged in
volunteering
(i) Introduce enabling legislation. The goal is to encourage or inspire
citizens to volunteer but allow the choice to rest with the individual or
organization; it can also facilitate employee volunteering. It can provide tax

4

A/RES/56/38

incentives and subsidies for organizations, as well as coverage and protection
against risks, in a way fitting the particular society;
(ii) Facilitate partnership-building around volunteer-based activities of civil
society, including arrangements for joint planning, implementation and
monitoring. This could incorporate employee volunteer activities of the private
sector.
(d) Encouraging and undertaking research in the various aspects of
volunteerism and its impact on society
(i) Ensure that consideration of the issues regarding volunteering is based on
a sound appreciation and analysis of the parameters, profile and trends of
volunteering in the particular country context. Studies on volunteering can be
undertaken by independent public policy research and/or academic institutions.
Governments can also initiate research themselves, in partnership with other
stakeholders;
(ii) Establish the economic value of volunteering to help to highlight one
important aspect of its overall contribution to society and thereby assist in the
development of informed policies which take into account the different levels
of participation of women and men, youth and older people in different fields
of volunteering.
(e) Ensuring
volunteering

citizens’

access

to

information

on

opportunities

for

(i) Facilitate the establishment of national databases on volunteer
opportunities in collaboration with community-based organizations and notfor-profit organizations;
(ii) Disseminate information through the media, schools, and other channels
with particular attention given to ensuring that information is accessible also to
disadvantaged segments of the population. Encourage media companies to
support and expand the concept of pro bono public service announcements on
behalf of volunteer-based organizations and activities.
(f) Addressing the possible impact of general social and economic policy
measures upon citizens’ opportunities and willingness to volunteer
(i) Take into account the possible impact of general social and economic
policy upon citizens’ opportunities to volunteer. Such a “volunteer check”
could pertain to measures related to labour, for example, such as the length of
the work week and the age of retirement, which have an impact on the profile
of volunteering. Legal and fiscal measures could also be reviewed to assess
whether they impinge negatively on the status of volunteer-involving
organizations, including issues related to juridical status, rights to associational
activities, and resource mobilization. Subsequently, legal and administrative
hindrances to volunteering, where they exist, can be reduced;
(ii) Give due weight to local ownership and citizen participation, to bring
public services closer to communities and to open space for greater citizen
engagement expressed through channels such as parental involvement in
schools and community involvement in natural resource management;
(iii) Recognize that transport, communication and other infrastructure, such as
public spaces, enhance the capacity of people to organize for voluntary
activities. This is especially true of geographically dispersed populations and
5

A/RES/56/38

of people living in poverty, as well as older persons and people with
disabilities. It is desirable that the impact of such infrastructure on levels of
volunteering be factored into the planning process.
(g) Integrating volunteerism into national development planning,
recognizing the potential contribution of volunteerism to the achievement of
sustainable development goals
(i) Extend the notion of volunteerism as an additional valuable component
of national development planning to development cooperation policy.
Recognizing and building strategically on rich, local traditions of voluntary
self-help and mutual aid can open the way to building up a new constituency in
support of development efforts. Forging a link in the mind of the general
public in countries providing development assistance between domestic
volunteering in those countries and volunteering in countries receiving
assistance can also help enlist public support for development cooperation.
(h)

Participation of all population groups

(i) Consider all means available for more people to become involved in
voluntary activities and to be drawn from a broader cross-section of society,
including youth, older persons and people with disabilities and persons
belonging to minorities, targeting opportunities for voluntary activities to
facilitate the active participation of those groups which have little or no access
to the benefits of engaging in volunteering;
(ii) Promote volunteering within educational establishments and youth
services; develop specific programmes to encourage youth volunteering; put in
place systems to recognize and accredit volunteering by youth; and work with
the media to present an attractive image of volunteering. This can have a
significant impact on the level of youth participation and constitute a sound
investment in a country’s human resources.
III. Support by the United Nations system
1.
It is recommended that the relevant organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, including the regional commissions, further support voluntary
activities by creating a favourable environment, including through:
(a)

Awareness-raising

(i) Raise awareness internally and with their partners as regards the role of
volunteerism in the various areas in which they are active and can sensitize
their constituencies as to the implications in terms of activities undertaken. At
the political level, strategically manage and support volunteering and
incorporate it into the agenda of their meetings;
(ii) Undertake research and disseminate information about the cross-cutting
link between volunteerism and major global concerns, including through
technical and popular publications, workshops and Internet sites. This would
serve also to extend recognition to volunteers and their organizations, which
could be complemented by awards and other measures, including raising the
profile of International Volunteer Day.

6

A/RES/56/38

(b)

Recognition of the contributions of volunteers

(i) Enhance and expand the current practice of extending special recognition
to volunteers and volunteer-involving organizations across the United Nations
system.
(c) Involving volunteers in their programmes, interlinking with national
initiatives
(i) Include volunteers in their activities, supporting, inter alia, the
establishment of volunteer schemes to address a range of global concerns.
Where they exist, national and local volunteer centres could benefit
substantially from the specialized expertise and networks of the United
Nations system;
(ii) Actively encourage staff of the United Nations system to volunteer,
utilizing their special skills and experiences.
(d) Long-term planning for the enhancement of social capital by including
all segments of society in volunteering
(i) Make a strategic choice for the involvement of all segments of society,
including youth, older persons and people with disabilities and persons
belonging to minorities, targeting opportunities for voluntary activities to
facilitate the participation of those groups that have little or no access to the
benefits of engaging in volunteering. In this way, building on societal norms
and networks will enhance the social capital of the society concerned,
strengthen its capacity for development and have a lasting impact on its wellbeing.
(e)

Assisting in building national capacities, including in the field of training

(i) Assist countries, upon request, in building national capacities, including
in the field of training, and further support Governments in their actions to
promote volunteerism as a strategic tool to enhance economic and social
development;
(ii) Recognize the continuing role of the United Nations Volunteers as the
volunteer arm of the United Nations system, placing volunteers in
development and humanitarian programmes and promoting online
volunteering. Build on the acquired experience of the United Nations
Volunteers in enhancing the recognition, facilitation, networking and
promotion of volunteering, deriving from its role as focal point for the
International Year of Volunteers.

7
