S/2002/1225

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 November 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 7 November 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering the
period from 1 to 30 September 2002 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-68447 (E)

111102

*0268447*

S/2002/1225

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-30 September 2002) there were almost 32,400
troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre.
2.
The overall situation in Kosovo during the month of September remained
generally stable.
Security
3.
During the period under review there were no direct attacks on KFOR
personnel. Isolated, non-related, inter-ethnic incidents of violence were reported. On
10 September, an explosion occurred in a Kosovo Albanian house in Donja Godance
(10 km south-west of Lipljan). On the same day, a hand grenade exploded in a house
in Gnjilane, injuring a Roma woman. On 11 September, a hand grenade exploded in
a Kosovo Serb yard in Kololec (5 km east of Kamenica), following which Kosovo
Serbs blocked the road and allegedly beat some Kosovo Albanians. On 15
September, a hand grenade exploded in a Kosovo Albanian shop in Glogovac, and
on 16 September a grenade was thrown against a Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC)
building in Mitrovica South.
4.
Demonstrations to protest against attempts to arrest Milan Ivanovic (a member
of the Kosovo Assembly and leader of the Serb National Council for Northern
Kosovo) a were held, but did not give rise to any violence. The frequency of these
demonstrations diminished by the end of the month.
5.
The situation in Mitrovica remained relatively calm, although there were some
incidents reported. For example, on 1 September an explosion occurred in Mitrovica
North close to a Kosovo Serb house, and on 9 September a hand grenade exploded
in front of a Kosovo Albanian house. No one was injured and no arrests were made.
6.
KFOR continued to carry out Kosovo-wide search operations in its campaign
against weapons smuggling and any activity of ethnic Albanian armed groups.
Weapons and ammunition were seized on a daily basis. Items confiscated during the
month included 149 assorted weapons, 7,478 grenades and mines, and 9,882 rounds
of ammunition.
Border/boundary security
7.
The number of illegal border crossing incidents increased slightly in
September, with 24 reported incidents. Most of these occurred on the border with
Albania and most of those arrested were ethnic Albanians.

__________________
a Milan Ivanovic eventually gave himself up on 9 October at gate 1 of Multinational Brigade

(North). He was subsequently taken by UNMIK police to the Mitrovica North court house where
he was charged by an international judge with leading a violent demonstration and related
offences. After pleading not guilty to the charges, he was released on bail of €10,000.

2

S/2002/1225

Cooperation and compliance by the parties
8.
Security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia remain in compliance
with the terms and conditions of the Military Technical Agreement.
9.
The strength of the Kosovo Protection Corps is currently 3,101 active
members. The priority of the KFOR Commander remains the strict control and
supervision of KPC and, to that end, he has introduced more liaison officers at the
Regional Task Group and detachment levels.
10. With regard to non-compliance, 12 cases were reported during the period under
review, and 35 cases remained open at the end of September.
11. Four meetings of the KPC Infrastructure Working Group were held during the
month of September to discuss a revised policy paper on KPC infrastructure, and
draft plans for the rationalization of KPC sites. Although general agreement was
reached on the policy paper, there was no consensus on the draft plans for KPC
sites.
12. As previously reported, following the agreement between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Michael Steiner, and Nebojsa Covic on the
integration of Kosovo Serbs into the Kosovo Police Service (KPS), Kosovo Serb
KPS trainees undertook patrols for the first time in Mitrovica North from 24 to 27
September. Plans are in place for the cadets to conduct three more one-week periods
of duty in Mitrovica.
Cooperation with international organizations
13. On 6 and 7 September, KFOR supported UNMIK during a search operation to
identify illegally owned, high-value vehicles stolen in Western Europe.
14. On 27 September, KFOR conducted a joint exercise with UNMIK police and
KPC to improve coordination of agencies that might be involved in responding to
civil emergencies. KFOR reported that the aims and objectives of the exercise had
been met.
Outlook
15. The security situation in Kosovo is expected to remain stable. The risk of
tension arising following the municipal elections to be held in October is estimated
to be low.

3
