A/RES/64/9

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 December 2009

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 75

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 November 2009
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/64/L.9 and Add.1)]

64/9. Report of the International Criminal Court
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 63/21 of 11 November 2008, and all its previous
relevant resolutions,
Recalling also that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 1
reaffirms the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
0F

Reiterating the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome Statute,
Emphasizing that justice, especially transitional justice in conflict and postconflict societies, is a fundamental building block of sustainable peace,
Convinced that ending impunity is essential if a society in conflict or
recovering from conflict is to come to terms with past abuses committed against
civilians affected by armed conflict and to prevent such abuses in the future,
Noting with satisfaction the fact that the International Criminal Court has achieved
considerable progress in its analyses, investigations and judicial proceedings in various
situations and cases which were referred to it by States parties to the Rome Statute and
by the Security Council, in accordance with the Rome Statute,
Recalling that effective and comprehensive cooperation and assistance in all
aspects of its mandate by States, the United Nations and other international and
regional organizations remains essential for the International Criminal Court to
carry out its activities,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing effective
and efficient assistance to the International Criminal Court in accordance with the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court (“Relationship Agreement”), 2
1F

_______________
1
2

09-46237

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
Ibid., vol. 2283, No. 1272.

*0946237*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/9

Acknowledging the Relationship Agreement as approved by the General
Assembly in its resolution 58/318 of 13 September 2004, including paragraph 3 of
the resolution with respect to the payment in full of expenses accruing to the United
Nations as a result of the implementation of the Relationship Agreement, 3 which
provides a framework for continued cooperation between the International Criminal
Court and the United Nations, which could include the facilitation by the United
Nations of the Court’s field activities, and encouraging the conclusion of
supplementary arrangements and agreements, as necessary,
2F

Welcoming the continuous support given by civil society to the International
Criminal Court,
Recognizing the role of the International Criminal Court in a multilateral
system that aims to end impunity, establish the rule of law, promote and encourage
respect for human rights and achieve sustainable peace, in accordance with
international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Expressing its appreciation to the International Criminal Court for providing
assistance to the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
1.

Welcomes the report of the International Criminal Court for 2008/09; 4
3F

2.
Welcomes the States that have become parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court1 in the past year, and calls upon all States in all regions
of the world that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to consider ratifying or
acceding to it without delay;
0H

Welcomes the States parties as well as States not parties to the Rome
3.
Statute that have become parties to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities
of the International Criminal Court, 5 and calls upon all States that have not yet done
so to consider becoming parties to that Agreement;
4F

Calls upon States parties to the Rome Statute that have not yet done so to
4.
adopt national legislation to implement obligations emanating from the Rome Statute
and to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in the exercise of its functions,
and recalls the provision of technical assistance by States parties in this respect;
Welcomes the cooperation and assistance provided thus far to the
5.
International Criminal Court by States parties as well as States not parties, the
United Nations and other international and regional organizations, and calls upon
those States that are under an obligation to cooperate to provide such cooperation
and assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and surrender, the
provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and witnesses and the
enforcement of sentences;
Emphasizes the importance of cooperation with States that are not parties
6.
to the Rome Statute;
Invites regional organizations to consider concluding cooperation
7.
agreements with the International Criminal Court;

_______________
3

Articles 10 and 13 of the Relationship Agreement.
See A/64/356.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2271, No. 40446.
4

2

A/RES/64/9

8.
Recalls that, by virtue of article 12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute, a State
which is not a party to the Statute may, by declaration lodged with the Registrar of the
International Criminal Court, accept the exercise of jurisdiction by the Court with
respect to specific crimes that are mentioned in paragraph 2 of that article;
Encourages all States parties to take the interests, the need for assistance
9.
and the mandate of the International Criminal Court into account when relevant
matters are being discussed in the United Nations;
10. Emphasizes the importance of the full implementation of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court,2 which forms a framework for close cooperation between the two
organizations and for consultation on matters of mutual interest pursuant to the
provisions of the Relationship Agreement and in conformity with the respective
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Rome Statute, as well as the
need for the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth
session of the expenses incurred and reimbursements received by the United Nations
in connection with assistance provided to the International Criminal Court;
11. Expresses its appreciation for the work undertaken by the International
Criminal Court liaison office to United Nations Headquarters, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to work closely with that office;
12. Encourages States to contribute to the Trust Fund established for the
benefit of victims of crimes within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court and the families of such victims, and acknowledges with appreciation
contributions made to that Trust Fund thus far;
13. Notes that the Special Working Group on the Crime of Aggression, which
was open to all States on an equal footing, has concluded its mandate and has
elaborated proposals for a provision on the crime of aggression, in accordance with
article 123 of the Rome Statute;
14. Notes that the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute decided at
its seventh session, while recalling that, according to article 112, paragraph 6, of the
Rome Statute, the Assembly of States Parties shall meet at the seat of the
International Criminal Court or at the United Nations Headquarters, to hold its eighth
session in The Hague, 6 looks forward to the eighth session, which is to be held from 18
to 26 November 2009, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary
services and facilities in accordance with the Relationship Agreement and resolution
58/318;
5F

15. Notes the convening by the Secretary-General of the Review Conference,
which will begin on 31 May 2010 in Kampala, and which may provide an
opportunity to address issues, in addition to those related to the possible definition
of the crime of aggression, that have been identified by States, including States that
are not parties to the Rome Statute;
16. Encourages the widest possible participation of States in the Assembly of
States Parties and particularly in the Review Conference, invites States to contribute
to the Trust Fund for the participation of the least developed countries, and
acknowledges with appreciation contributions made to that Trust Fund thus far;
_______________
6
See resolution ICC-ASP/7/Res.3 of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.

3

A/RES/64/9

17. Invites the International Criminal Court to submit, in accordance with
article 6 of the Relationship Agreement, a report on its activities for 2009/10, for
consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session.
34th plenary meeting
2 November 2009

4
