United Nations

A/RES/59/170

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 100

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/498)]

59/170. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on the activities of his Office 1 and the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the
work of its fifty-fifth session 2 and the conclusions and decisions contained therein,
Recalling its previous annual resolutions on the work of the Office of the High
Commissioner since its establishment by the General Assembly,
Recalling also its resolution 58/153 of 22 December 2003 on implementing
actions proposed by the High Commissioner to strengthen the capacity of his Office
to carry out its mandate,
Expressing its appreciation for the leadership shown by the High
Commissioner, commending the staff and implementing partners of the Office of the
High Commissioner for the competent, courageous and dedicated manner in which
they discharge their responsibilities, and underscoring its strong condemnation of all
forms of violence to which humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel are increasingly exposed,
Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
1.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its fifty-fifth
session;2
2.
Welcomes the important work undertaken by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Executive Committee in the
course of the year, and notes in this context the adoption of the general conclusion
on international protection, the conclusion on international cooperation and burdenand responsibility-sharing in mass influx situations and the conclusion on legal
safety issues in the context of voluntary repatriation of refugees, 3 which are aimed

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/59/12).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/59/12/Add.1).
3
Ibid., chap. III, sects. A–C.
2

04-48646

A/RES/59/170

at strengthening the international protection regime, consistent with the Agenda for
Protection, 4 and at assisting Governments in meeting their protection responsibilities
in today’s changing international environment;
3.
Reaffirms the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 5 and its
1967 Protocol 6 as the foundation of the international refugee protection regime, and
recognizes the importance of their full and effective application by States parties
and the values that they embody, notes with satisfaction that one hundred and fortyfive States are now parties to one instrument or to both, encourages States not
parties to consider acceding to those instruments, underlines in particular the
importance of full respect for the principle of non-refoulement, and recognizes that
a number of States not parties to the international refugee instruments have shown a
generous approach to hosting refugees;
Notes that fifty-seven States are now parties to the 1954 Convention
4.
relating to the Status of Stateless Persons 7 and that twenty-nine States are parties to
the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, 8 and encourages the High
Commissioner to continue his activities on behalf of stateless persons;
5.
Notes also that 2004 marks the twentieth anniversary of the Cartagena
Declaration on Refugees and that States convened in Mexico City in November
2004 to commemorate this anniversary, recalls the contribution to refugee protection
which regional approaches can make, and encourages States to strengthen further
international protection of refugees in the region, in conjunction with relevant
international organizations as well as representatives of civil society;
Re-emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the
6.
responsibility of States, whose full and effective cooperation, action and political
resolve are required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to fulfil its
mandated functions;
Urges all States and relevant non-governmental and other organizations,
7.
in conjunction with the Office of the High Commissioner and in a spirit of
international solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing, to cooperate and to
mobilize resources with a view to enhancing the capacity of, and reducing the heavy
burden borne by, countries that have received large numbers of refugees and
asylum-seekers, including by holding international consultations aimed at
developing a comprehensive plan of action, as appropriate, to respond to a specific
mass influx or protracted refugee situation, and calls upon the Office to continue to
play its catalytic role in mobilizing assistance from the international community to
address the root causes as well as the economic, environmental and social impact of
large-scale refugee populations in developing countries, in particular the least
developed countries, and countries with economies in transition;
Emphasizes that international protection of refugees is a dynamic and
8.
action-oriented function that is at the core of the mandate of the Office of the High
Commissioner and that includes, in cooperation with States and other partners, the
promotion and facilitation of, inter alia, the admission, reception and treatment of

_______________
4

Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/57/12/Add.1), annex IV.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
6
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
7
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
8
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
5

2

A/RES/59/170

refugees and the ensuring of durable, protection-oriented solutions, bearing in mind
the particular needs of vulnerable groups, and notes in this context that the delivery
of international protection is a staff-intensive service that requires adequate staff
with the appropriate expertise, especially at the field level;
Welcomes the progress attained so far in regard to the High
9.
Commissioner’s Convention Plus initiative, 9 including the development of the
Multilateral Framework of Understandings on the strategic use of resettlement, and
encourages the High Commissioner and interested States to strengthen the
international protection regime through the development of comprehensive
approaches to resolving refugee situations, including improving international
burden- and responsibility-sharing and realizing durable solutions that give due
regard to the importance of both protection and, where possible, refugee selfreliance;
10. Recalls the important role of effective partnerships and coordination in
meeting the needs of refugees and other displaced persons and in finding durable
solutions to their situations, welcomes the efforts under way, in cooperation with
refugee-hosting countries and countries of origin, including their respective local
communities, United Nations agencies and other development actors, to promote a
framework for durable solutions, particularly in protracted refugee situations, which
includes the “4Rs” approach (repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and
reconstruction) to sustainable return, and encourages States, in cooperation with
United Nations agencies and other development actors, to support, inter alia,
through the allocation of funds, the development and implementation of the 4Rs and
of other programming tools to facilitate the transition from relief to development;
11. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely
humanitarian and non-political character of the function of the Office of the High
Commissioner of providing international protection to refugees and seeking
permanent solutions to refugee problems, and recalls that these solutions include
voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible, local integration and
resettlement in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary repatriation,
supported by necessary rehabilitation and development assistance to facilitate
sustainable reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
12. Recognizes the desirability of countries of origin, in cooperation with the
Office of the High Commissioner, other States and other concerned actors, as
necessary and appropriate, addressing, at an early stage, issues of a legal and
administrative nature which are likely to hinder voluntary repatriation in safety and
dignity, bearing in mind that some legal safety or administrative issues may be
addressed only over time and that voluntary repatriation can and does take place
without all legal and administrative issues having first been resolved;
13. Emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept the return of their
nationals, calls upon States to facilitate the return of their nationals who have been
determined not to be in need of international protection, and affirms the need for the
return of persons to be undertaken in a safe and humane manner and with full
respect for their human rights and dignity, irrespective of the status of the persons
concerned;

_______________
9

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/59/12),
chap. III.

3

A/RES/59/170

14. Condemns all acts that pose a threat to the personal security and
well-being of refugees and asylum-seekers, such as refoulement, unlawful expulsion
and physical attacks, deplores, in particular, the armed attacks that took place in the
Gatumba transit centre in Burundi in August 2004, calls upon all States of refuge, in
cooperation with international organizations, where appropriate, to take all
necessary measures to ensure respect for the principles of refugee protection,
including the humane treatment of asylum-seekers, notes with interest that the High
Commissioner has continued to take steps to encourage the development of
measures to better ensure the civilian and humanitarian character of asylum, and
encourages the High Commissioner to continue those efforts in consultation with
States and other relevant actors;
15. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to improve
its management systems and to ensure effective and transparent use of its resources,
recognizes that adequate and timely resources are essential for the Office to
continue to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it through its statute 10 and by
subsequent General Assembly resolutions on refugees and other persons of concern,
recalls its resolutions 58/153 and 58/270 of 23 December 2003, concerning the
implementation of paragraph 20 of the statute of the Office, and urges Governments
and other donors to respond promptly to the annual and supplementary appeals
issued by the Office for requirements under its programmes;
16. Requests the High Commissioner to report on his activities to the General
Assembly at its sixtieth session.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

_______________
10

4

Resolution 428 (V), annex.
