S/2023/432

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 June 2023
Original: English

Letter dated 12 June 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
The Security Council, in its resolution 2643 (2022), requested that I present a
review of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA)
at least one month before the expiration of its mandate on 14 July 2023. The Mission,
established pursuant to paragraph 1 of Council resolution 2452 (2019), supports the
implementation of the Agreement on the City of Hudaydah and the Ports of
Hudaydah, Salif, and Ra’s Isa, as set out in the Stockholm Agreement ( S/2018/1134,
annex).
Since my previous review, submitted on 14 June 2022 ( S/2022/484), UNMHA
has continued to pursue the priorities set forth therein, namely: (a) incrementally
intensifying its monitoring of the ports and the governorate-wide ceasefire; (b) restoring
communication and liaison channels between the parties; (c) re-establishing avenues
for de-escalation; and (d) prioritizing entry points for confidence-building and mine
action, while working with the parties to calibrate implementation of the Agreement.
The Mission enhanced its monitoring of the governorate-wide ceasefire and
intensified its patrolling in the ports of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa. Monitoring
visits to conflict-affected districts on both sides of the front line in the south of
Hudaydah Governorate were an important milestone, particularly in areas that the
Mission had not previously been able to access. The increased frequency of patrolling
in the ports underscores the primacy placed by the Mission on supporting the
functioning of the ports of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa and ensuring their civilian
character. The Mission continued to play an important supporting role as part of
United Nations efforts to enable the flow of essential goods and humanitarian
assistance into Yemen. Despite the progress made, freedom of movement remains one
of the greatest challenges to the Mission’s effective operation, particularly in
monitoring the civilian nature of the Red Sea ports.
The advancements since June 2022 were, in part, the outcome of the Mission
increasing its direct engagement with the parties at multiple levels. In this regard, an
important breakthrough was achieved in March 2023, when a meeting between
UNMHA and government representatives of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee took place for the first time since the Government of Yemen suspended
its participation in the Committee in 2020. Frequent engagement with representatives
of the Houthis (who also call themselves Ansar Allah) also continued throughout the
period under review. In addition, the Mission, in coordination with the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, engaged regional actors in support of advancing
its mandate and building a common purpose behind the implementation of the
Hudaydah Agreement.

23-11347 (E)

060723

*2311347*

S/2023/432

As the Mission sought to calibrate its support to the parties in their
implementation of the Agreement within a shifting political and operational
environment, mine action coordination and civil affairs became increasingly integral
to building the confidence of the local population in the positive impacts of the
Hudaydah Agreement. Progress within these areas also opened space for increased
collaboration with United Nations humanitarian and development actors operating
within the governorate. These efforts were bolstered by the Mission’s enhanced
presence in government-controlled areas, which has been in place since 4 June 2022.
While the situation was relatively stable throughout the reporting period,
UNMHA was required to respond to a number of incidents. The Mission expressed
its deep concern over a large military parade held by the Houthis i n Hudaydah City
on 1 September 2022, in violation of the Agreement. The Mission also registered daily
violations of the governorate-wide ceasefire, although hostilities between the parties
in Hudaydah did not amount to major or sustained escalation.
The nationwide truce, and the subsequent period, had a positive impact on the
people of Hudaydah, the worrying humanitarian situation in the governorate
notwithstanding. The reduction in the intensity of military confrontation between the
parties in Hudaydah and the increased flow of goods through the Red Sea ports
brought tangible benefits for the local population. These must be sustained, together
with efforts that are supportive of the Yemen-wide political process.
Military and political dynamics
The United Nations-brokered nationwide truce (April–October 2022) continued
on a de facto basis and provided a semblance of normalcy and stability in large parts
of Hudaydah Governorate and beyond. Since the truce expired, the efforts of the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen have focused on
bringing the parties to an agreement on the implementation of economic and
humanitarian measures, a nationwide ceasefire and the resumption of a political
process to end the war. These efforts have been supported by discussions between
regional and Yemeni stakeholders. In addition, a release of almost 900 detainees in
April 2023 was a sign of the benefits that compromise between the parties can bring
to the Yemeni people.
The front line established in southern Hudaydah Governorate following the
November 2021 withdrawal of the Government of Yemen joint forces, now a
contested area about 100 km south of Hudaydah City, settled into a relatively stable
pattern of low-level hostilities. Nevertheless, the threat of military escalation
persisted owing to continual clashes between the parties. Hays and Tuhayta’ districts
were most affected by the conflict, with the Mission receiving daily reports on the
use of small arms, mortars, artillery and drones for both reconnaissance purposes and
for conducting air-to-ground strikes.
Since 14 June 2022 and as at 1 June 2023, the Mission had received reports of
310 civilian casualties in Hudaydah Governorate due to the impact of the conflict,
including 207 people injured and 103 people killed. Women constituted 6.5 per cent
and children 44 per cent of casualties. In total, 16 per cent of the casualties were a
direct result of hostilities, while the remaining 84 per cent were victims of landmines
and explosive remnants of war. Hudaydah Governorate remains the area of Yemen
most affected by the blight of landmines and explosive remnants of war, with Hays,
Tuhayta’, Durayhimi and Bayt al-Faqih districts the locations where civilians are
assessed as most at risk of harm.
On 6 December 2022, in Hali district, a UNMHA armoured vehicle that was part
of a convoy accompanied by the Houthi de facto governor of Hudaydah detonated a
landmine, damaging a mission vehicle. While no mission personnel or civilians were
2/8

23-11347

S/2023/432

injured in the incident, it further highlighted the prevalent risk of landmines and
explosive remnants of war facing the people in Hudaydah. The Mission subsequently
reviewed its security procedures and discussed with the Houthis measures to address
the threat of landmines and explosive remnants of war facing Yemenis, including the
expansion of mine risk education projects.
On 1 September 2022, the Houthis held a substantial military parade in
Hudaydah City, in violation of the stipulation in the Hudaydah Agre ement that the
parties shall be committed to remove any military manifestations and not to bring any
military reinforcements to the city, the ports of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa, and the
governorate. The parade included the participation of Houthi military personnel and
equipment, including naval forces and materiel. The Mission communicated its
concern to the Houthis and publicly identified the parade as a violation of the
Agreement. On 22 March, UNMHA noted that Houthi de facto military authorities
had conducted an additional parade in Hudaydah City featuring uniformed personnel
and statements by Houthi officials, reportedly without overt display of arms or
equipment. A smaller-scale naval military exercise was also conducted by the Houthis
between 27 and 28 March 2023 in waters in proximity to the ports of Salif and Ra’s
Isa, and Kamaran Island in the Red Sea.
In this context, the parties attempted to consolidate their authority in the
respective areas under their control. On both sides of the front line, the parties sought
to promote initiatives in such areas as infrastructure development, health care,
education, water and sanitation, income generation and the rule of law. In this regard,
the Presidential Leadership Council Vice-President Brigadier General Tareq Saleh
appeared to increase his efforts to project a more visible profile in Hudaydah
Governorate and on the west coast in general, attending and sponsoring political and
military events in Khawkhah and Hays districts, in a continuation of activi ties noted
in the previous review. He called for unity among government-affiliated political and
military factions, including those based in Hudaydah and Ta‘izz Governorates.
Even as the parties focused on internal consolidation, they blamed each other
for the continued dire situation in Hudaydah Governorate. The Houthis organized
demonstrations and sit-ins, held press conferences and issued public statements,
emphasizing civilian casualties and damage to infrastructure allegedly caused by
government-affiliated forces. The Houthis also repeatedly raised complaints about
damage to Hudaydah’s ports and airport and the resultant economic and civilian
impact in their interactions with the Mission in the context of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and during patrols in the ports. Meanwhile, the Government
and the authorities in districts under its control alleged that the Houthis repressed the
population, illegally seized land, destroyed essential infrastructure and diverted funds
and assistance intended for the population to military activities. The Government also
called for the reopening of roads across the front line to alleviate humanitarian needs,
which it raised with the Mission in the context of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and engagements of the Mission with military, social and political
officials and women leaders from Hudaydah Governorate.
The situation in neighbouring Ta‘izz Governorate has had an ongoing impact on
Hudaydah Governorate. Frequent clashes observed in Maqbanah distric t in Ta‘izz,
which borders Hudaydah Governorate, were often mirrored in the frequency and
severity of clashes in southern Hudaydah Governorate. A military escalation by the
Houthis in Ta‘izz Governorate between February and March 2023 was a reminder of
the fragile nature of the current situation. Efforts to gain military control over terrain
in Ta‘izz may directly affect the posture of the parties in southern Hudaydah and lead
to an increase in hostilities.

23-11347

3/8

S/2023/432

Redeployment Coordination Committee and its de-escalation mechanisms
The Mission made progress in its efforts to secure a sustained resumption of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee, the Hudaydah Agreement’s core implementation
and coordination mechanism. These efforts centred on: (a) re-establishing dialogue
between the parties through a joint meeting; (b) addressing the issues barring the
participation of the Government of Yemen in the Committee; and (c) enabling the
Mission’s equal access to both sides of the front line in Hudaydah Governorate .
The Mission continued regular bilateral engagement with the Houthi delegation
to the Redeployment Coordination Committee to address freedom of movement in
relation to monitoring of the ports and conflict-affected areas in the southern districts,
mine action activities, and engagement and consultation with communities. Through
the Redeployment Coordination Committee de-escalation mechanism, the Mission
continued to receive ceasefire violation reports from the Houthis and discussed
observations from its regular patrols in the Red Sea ports. Throughout these
engagements, the Houthis expressed their commitment to the Hudaydah Agreement
and requested that UNMHA, as well as the United Nations country team, increase
support and cooperation on the delivery of humanitarian assistance and mine action
efforts. The Mission conducted regular meetings with Houthi officials in Sana’a in
support of its work with the Redeployment Coordination Committee and the
implementation of the Hudaydah Agreement.
Since August 2022, mission leadership has intensified engagement with
representatives of the Government of Yemen. This engagement served to address the
concerns raised by the Government regarding the killing of its liaison officer on a
front line in March 2020, an incident that prompted the Government to suspend its
participation in the Redeployment Coordination Committee, and to seek agreement
to conduct monitoring visits in government-controlled areas of the governorate. In
parallel, the Mission, in close consultation and coordination with the Special Envoy,
intensified engagement with regional actors and diplomatic partners to help to address
challenges facing mandate implementation.
In February and March 2023, these consultations culminated in the Head of
Mission and the Deputy Head of Mission undertaking separate visits to the Hays and
Khawkhah districts, which are under government control, a significant step towards
achieving the Mission’s objective of establishing a footprint on both sides of the front
line. In conjunction with his visit, on 13 March 2023, the Head of Mission held a
meeting with the government delegation to the Redeployment Coordination
Committee for the first time in three years, during which the latter expressed
willingness to resume cooperation with the Mission and appointed a liaison officer to
this end. The establishment of regular monitoring visits in government-held areas of
Hudaydah Governorate as well as potential avenues to restore the Redeployment
Coordination Committee as a mechanism for coordination, confidence -building and
de-escalation were also discussed. In the weeks following the meeting, the
Government began to provide occasional reports on ceasefire violations to the
Mission and facilitated joint visits to the sites of alleged ceasefire violations.
The Mission continued to encourage the parties to resume the Redeployment
Coordination Committee through various modalities. To date, the parties have not
agreed to reconvene. Reinstating the Redeployment Coordination Committee as a
joint forum for de-escalation remains one of the Mission’s priorities.
Monitoring the ceasefire and maintaining the civilian nature of the ports
On 1 February, the Head of Mission conducted a visit to the southern districts
of the governorate under the control of the Houthis, following over eight months of

4/8

23-11347

S/2023/432

advocacy amid persistent denials of access. This enabled UNMHA to access several
districts for the first time, including Zabid, Tuhayta’ and Jarrahi districts, and to
observe the security situation and impact of the conflict on the population there. The
report of the visit was shared with the United Nations country team to facilitate its
consideration of humanitarian programming in these locations. Access to the southern
districts continues to be central to the implementation of the mandate of UNMHA
since the front line shifted following the withdrawal of the Government of Yemen
from Hudaydah City in November 2021. The Houthis have not granted the Mission
access to this area for subsequent visits despite repeated requests.
On 13 March 2023, the Head of Mission visited Hays and Khawkhah districts,
which are under government control, and discussed the Mission’s freedom of
movement across the front line, ceasefire violations, and mine action support with
government-affiliated stakeholders. The local authorities called for UNMHA to
establish a permanent presence in Khawkhah to enable regular visits to the front line
and support ceasefire monitoring. Previously, the Deputy Head of Mission visited the
area in February 2023 and met with local authorities to discuss collaboration between
the Government and UNMHA, as well as with local women’s organizations. The
Deputy Head of Mission also met and offered condolences to the family of the
Government’s liaison officer who died in March 2020. The visit represented a step
towards restoring cooperation between UNMHA and the Government. The
considerable progress made within the Mission’s operations in government-controlled
areas is a positive step that was enabled by an increased and sustained UNMHA
presence therein.
UNMHA also progressively strengthened its activities in support of the women
and peace and security agenda. In December 2022, in Aden, the Deputy Head of
Mission of UNMHA engaged with women community figures and the leaders of
women’s organizations based in Hudaydah to discuss means of promoting women’s
participation in the implementation of the Hudayd ah Agreement. In March 2023,
UNMHA engaged with women’s organizations in Khawkhah and Hays districts with
a view to implementing quick-impact community projects in support of building
confidence in the Agreement. These initiatives were part of a broader ad vancement
of the Mission’s community engagement in Hudaydah Governorate, particularly with
a diverse range of women community leaders and grass-roots figures. These
interactions paved the way for significant progress, including the conduct of
monitoring visits to Khawkhah and Hays, while highlighting the importance of
integrating the women and peace and security agenda into the Mission’s operations.
The Mission conducted an unannounced patrol in Bayt al-Faqih district in
Houthi-controlled territory in September 2022 following reports of the forced
displacement of civilians by Houthi representatives to make way for military
installations. Similarly, two visits were conducted to locations in Hays district in
March 2023 to ascertain the circumstances around reports of Houthi artillery fire and
drone strikes targeting civilian objects. Repeated requests to both parties to enable
the systematic monitoring of their compliance with the governorate -wide ceasefire in
all districts have not yet been met with agreement.
The Mission continued to conduct regular patrols in the ports of Hudaydah, Salif
and Ra’s Isa to monitor the maintenance of their civilian nature. The Mission did not
observe any military objects or manifestations during the conduct of its patrols;
however, Houthi restrictions on the Mission’s freedom of movement continued to
limit its ability to assess the situation more broadly, independently and
comprehensively at Hudaydah’s ports.

23-11347

5/8

S/2023/432

Coordination with Stockholm Agreement stakeholders
UNMHA continued to reinforce coordination with Stockholm Agreement
stakeholders, with a view to building unified intent and support behind the Hudaydah
Agreement. UNMHA, working through an established forum for regular exchange of
information with the United Nations country team, regularly provided situational
awareness briefings and took an active part in coordination bodies overseen by the
United Nations country team. These efforts bolstered collaboration with United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes across numerous areas of work. One such
area has been the offer of potential logistical, situational awareness and crisis
management support, where appropriate, to the FSO Safer vessel salvage operation
that was an outcome of continuing cooperation with the Office of the Resident
Coordinator for Yemen and the United Nations Development Programme.
Mine action and civil affairs are other areas in which UNMHA has strengthened
coordination with the United Nations country team and Stockholm Agreement
stakeholders. The Mission has continued its mandated mine action coordination role
in Hudaydah Governorate and expanded the local mine action coordination
mechanism comprising the Yemen Executive Mine Action Centre (Sana’a), the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International Committee of
the Red Cross and Save the Children. UNMHA has also worked to build partnerships
with the Yemen Executive Mine Action Centre (Aden) and other relevant actors in
government-controlled areas in Hudaydah Governorate. Coordination and
engagement with non-governmental organizations undertaking demining activities
(e.g. the Danish Refugee Council, Norwegian People’s Aid, the HALO Trust,
Humanity and Inclusion, and Project Masam) have also been important developments
in the past year. The Mission has successfully provided targeted technical expert
advice to mine action actors in both Houthi- and government-controlled areas and
assisted in efforts to develop and implement a coherent strategic plan to support
demining activities. This includes support for efforts to promote information -sharing
on mine and explosive remnants of war incidents, identify and survey mined areas
and amplify explosive ordnance risk education with a focus on women and children.
The expanding civil affairs work of UNMHA includes potential quick -impact
projects that aim to build relationships with communities in Hudaydah. In this regard,
UNMHA is coordinating its activities with the United Nations country team and
relevant coordination clusters, as well as with the Office of the Special Envoy, in
order to maximize impact and avoid duplication of effort. By sharing its monitoring
visit reports on conditions in conflict-affected districts of Hudaydah, UNMHA
contributes to the facilitation of United Nations interventions in locations that have
often thus far remained difficult to reach for humanitarian and development
programming. These efforts aim to strengthen a collective app roach to supporting
communities within Hudaydah Governorate and engendering stability that supports
the implementation of the Hudaydah Agreement. The Mission also continues to
advocate other initiatives, such as party requests for the opening of civilian c rossing
points on the front line. Such activities are done in close consultation with the Office
of the Special Envoy and the United Nations country team.
Paramount among the Mission’s coordination efforts remains its relationship
with the Office of the Special Envoy. At the technical level, innovative approaches to
information-sharing, where appropriate, have been institutionalized, while, more
broadly, UNMHA remains fully dedicated to fostering confidence-building measures
in Hudaydah Governorate that support the Special Envoy’s efforts to achieve a
comprehensive and inclusive negotiated political settlement to end the conflict.

6/8

23-11347

S/2023/432

Observations
As the fifth anniversary of the signing of the Hudaydah Agreement approaches
at the end of 2023, the military and political landscape in which UNMHA operates is
defined by two key trends. First, following the tangible benefits of the nationwide
truce period and its aftermath, the current situation at the national level appears to
present clear opportunities to reach a peaceful, comprehensive and inclusive
negotiated settlement of the conflict. On the other hand, the front line in Hudaydah
Governorate remains active and the risk of escalation, given the persistent ceasefire
violations, remains concerning, particularly in the light of the strategic nature of the
ports in the economic and humanitarian functioning of Yemen.
In this context, supporting the parties’ efforts to maintain the civilian nature of
the ports of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa remains a critical priority for the Mission.
Approximately 90 per cent of the country’s staple food and nearly all other essential
goods are imported, and the majority arrive through the Red Sea ports. In 2022 the
monthly average consignments of foodstuffs discharged at the ports of Hudaydah
(including both commercial and humanitarian assistance) increased by over 10 per
cent, and fuel consignments increased by 300 per cent, compared with 2021. In
particular, the six-month truce period saw a 358 per cent increase in fuel imports
through the ports of Hudaydah compared with the same six-month period in 2021.
While these developments have been significant, the magnitude of the humanitarian
challenge in Yemen underscores the importance of this trend continuing and the por ts
remaining open and operational. The Mission’s continued presence in Hudaydah City
and its intensified monitoring of the ports therefore remain essential.
The contested southern districts, particularly Hays and Khawkhah, are seeing
some of the highest numbers of newly displaced households per week in Yemen.
Moreover, the parties have made explicit their efforts to maintain military readiness
and the ability to resume operations. Any deterioration or return to conflict in
Hudaydah would represent a grave setback in a governorate that has, in the past year,
seen relative stability in the military situation and an increased flow of goods and fuel
through the ports of Hudaydah, which is particularly critical as the humanitarian
situation in Hudaydah and throughout Yemen remains dire.
The impact of the countrywide truce in Hudaydah Governorate and the apparent
respect of its central provisions despite its expiry helped to improve the situation in
the governorate and bring much-needed relief to the population. Notwithstanding the
many challenges noted above, the reduction in hostilities and casualties and the
restraint demonstrated by the parties as observed in Hudaydah Governorate over the
past year are welcome. However, it is essential that the Houthis allow UNMHA
increased, unfettered and independent access to the ports of Hudaydah to instil further
confidence in their sustained civilian character. This would help to ensure that the
entry of essential goods and humanitarian assistance can continue unimpeded and that
the ports do not re-emerge as zones of military confrontation. The facilitation of
access throughout the governorate by both parties, including to areas of alleged
ceasefire violations and near the front line, remains critical for mandate
implementation. In this context, UNMHA stands ready to expand its ceasefire
monitoring activities to support the parties in further de-escalating tensions, under the
Hudaydah Agreement or any other arrangements to which the parties may agree.
Second, the impact of landmines and explosive remnants of war on civilians in
Hudaydah Governorate continues to be dire, and incidents in which civilians,
including children and women, are injured and killed remain an all -too-frequent
occurrence. The 6 December 2022 incident, in which a UNMHA vehicle struck a
landmine, is but one more incident that serves as a stark reminder of the dangers that
civilians face daily. This is due in part to the population’s increased access to areas
23-11347

7/8

S/2023/432

that were formerly part of the front line and where mined areas are unmarked. The
intensification of the mine action coordination efforts of UNMHA will continue to
help advocate for renewed action and reduce the risk of death or injury among the
most vulnerable in Hudaydah Governorate. Collective eff orts to build on those
initiatives, including support for efforts in government -controlled territory, will be
paramount to protecting more of the local population. UNMHA has also been
instrumental in advocacy efforts to allow international demining non -governmental
organizations to operate in Houthi-controlled areas. The Mission will also bolster the
delivery of quick-impact community projects, the increased need for which became
apparent during visits to front-line and conflict-affected districts in February and
March 2023.
The parties’ facilitation of access of UNMHA to the southern districts in
February and March 2023 represented an important step towards adjusting the
Mission’s footprint to reflect the altered context. However, persistent restrictions
placed on UNMHA by the Houthis obstruct the Mission’s ability to implement its
mandate and to play an impartial role in supporting the parties in implementing the
Hudaydah Agreement. The Houthis also objected to the Mission’s establishment of a
presence in areas under government control, in line with its mandate, an issue on
which the Mission will continue to engage. The Mission’s access throughout
Hudaydah Governorate, pursuant to its mandate, must be facilitated by the parties,
including through the timely and systematic issuance of visas and permits for entry
to Yemen. The approval of several visas by relevant authorities in late 2022 and early
2023 facilitated a substantial increase in the number of monitors able to deploy to
Yemen, which served the parties’ shared interest in the independent monitoring of the
ceasefire and in retaining the civilian character of the ports.
While the front line has stabilized, freedom of movement for civilians
throughout Hudaydah Governorate remains restricted, leading to serious hardship,
economic distress and obstacles to daily life. The restoration of freedom of movement
throughout the governorate is a pillar of the Hudaydah Agreement that remains
unfulfilled. UNMHA stands ready to support the parties in examining all options
available to restore this fundamental right.
The United Nations remains steadfast in its commitment to facilitate
communication through the Redeployment Coordination Committee, the
revitalization of which is critical to the implementation of the Hudaydah Agreement
and remains unfulfilled. The continued engagement of Houthi representatives of the
Committee, as well as the resumption of government engagement with UNMHA,
represents a vital step in the achievement of this objectiv e. The Houthis’ stated
willingness for the Redeployment Coordination Committee to resume operations
should be encouraged. The Mission will continue to work with the parties bilaterally
and stands ready to facilitate the re-establishment of joint forums for cooperation and
de-escalation between the parties at any level.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

8/8

23-11347
