S/PV.7488

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7488th meeting

Monday, 20 July 2015, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. McCully . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Non-proliferation

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-22384 (E)
*1522384*

S/PV.7488

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Germany and the Islamic Republic of
Iran to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. Members of the
Council have before them document S/2015/547, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on
the draft resolution before it. I would like to thank all
Council members for their sponsorship of the draft
resolution, which is now a presidential text. I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2231 (2015).
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Today we
have adopted resolution 2231 (2015), enshrining the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed to six days
ago in Vienna.
By now, many are familiar with the basic tenets
of the deal, which, if implemented, would cut off all
pathways to fissile material for a nuclear weapon for
the Islamic Republic of Iran, while putting in place

2/16

20/07/2015

a rigorous inspection and transparency regime for
verifying Iran’s compliance. The Plan of Action will
cut the number of Iran’s centrifuges by two thirds and
prevent Iran from producing weapons-grade plutonium.
Iran will also get rid of 98 per cent of its stockpile of
enriched uranium, going from a quantity that could
produce approximately 10 nuclear weapons to a fraction
of what is needed for a single nuclear weapon. The deal
will quadruple Iran’s break-out time — the time needed
to produce enough weapons-grade uranium for one
nuclear weapon — from the current estimate of two to
three months to one year. It will also require Iran and
all States to comply with legally binding restrictions
on nuclear and conventional arms-related and ballistic
missile-related activities.
Ninety days from today, when our respective
capitals and legislatures have had a chance to carefully
review the deal’s provisions, the commitments in the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action should take effect.
Sanctions relief will begin only when Iran verifiably
completes the initial steps necessary to bring its nuclear
programme in line with the deal. It is important today
to step back from the Plan of Action to its larger
lessons — lessons about enforcing global norms,
the essential role of diplomacy, the need for ongoing
vigilance and the absolute necessity of the unity of the
Security Council; lessons that have implications both
for ensuring implementation of the deal and for tackling
other crises that confront us today.
This year we mark 70 years since the founding
of the United Nations, which its second SecretaryGeneral, Dag Hammarskjöld, famously said “was not
created to bring us to heaven, but to save us from hell”.
In the wake of the devastating loss of life in the Second
World War and the immeasurable suffering it caused,
representatives of nations around the world came
together with an aim — to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war.
The first lesson we can learn from how this deal
was secured is that it is not enough to agree to global
norms, such as that against the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. The Council and all the countries of the
United Nations must actually take steps to enforce
global norms. In 2006, in response to Iran’s efforts to
develop a nuclear-weapons programme, the Security
Council put in place on the of toughest sanctions
regimes in its history, which was complemented by
robust sanctions imposed by the United States, several
other countries and the European Union (EU). Faced

15-22384

20/07/2015

Non-proliferation

with Iran’s ongoing non-compliance, the United
Nations tightened its sanctions in 2007, 2008 and 2010.
The sanctions regime played a critical role in helping to
lay the groundwork for the talks that would give rise to
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
The second lesson is one that was most eloquently
articulated more than 50 years ago by President John
F. Kennedy and echoed last week by President Obama:
“Let us never negotiate out of fear, but let us never fear
to negotiate”. Given the devastating human toll of war,
we have a responsibility to test diplomacy. In 2010,
when then-United States Ambassador to the United
Nations Susan Rice spoke in the Chamber after the
Council strengthened sanctions on Iran, she cited the
ways in which Iran had violated its commitments to the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and its
obligations under prior Security Council resolutions.
Yet she also said:
“The United States reaffirms our commitment to
engage in robust, principled and creative diplomacy.
We will remain ready to continue diplomacy with
Iran and its leaders” (S/PV.6335, p.5).
And when a credible opening emerged for negotiations,
that is exactly what the United States and the other
members of the P-5+1 — the United Kingdom, France,
Germany, Russia and China — and the EU did.
There were many occasions over these past
two years of grueling negotiations when any party
could have walked away. The distances just seemed
too great, the history between us searing and the
resulting mistrust defining. But the United States
and our partners knew that we had a responsibility
to try to overcome these obstacles and resolve the
crisis peacefully. One only has to spend a week in the
Security Council — any week — and hear accounts of
the bloodshed and heartbreak in Yemen, Syria, South
Sudan, Darfur, Mali, Libya or any other conflict-ridden
part of the world to be reminded of the consequences
of war. Sometimes, as bother the Charter of the United
Nations and history make clear, the use of force is
required, but we all have a responsibility to work
aggressively in diplomatic channels to try to secure our
objectives peacefully.
This nuclear deal does not change our profound
concern about human rights violations committed
by the Iranian Government or about the instability
Iran fuels beyond its nuclear programmes — from
its support for terrorist proxies to its repeated threats

S/PV.7488

against Israel to its other destabilizing activities in the
region. That is why the United States will continue to
invest in the security of our allies in the region and why
we will maintain our own sanctions related to Iran’s
support for terrorism, its ballistic-missiles programme
and its human rights violations.
And this deal will in no way diminish the United
States outrage over the unjust detention of United
States citizens by the Government of Iran. Let me use
this occasion to call once again on Iran to immediately
release all unjustly detained Americans: Saeed Abedini,
imprisoned for his religious beliefs; Amir Hekmati,
falsely accused of espionage; and Jason Rezaian, a
Washington Post correspondent who just a year ago was
covering the nuclear negotiations. I also call on Iran
to help locate Robert Levinson, who has been missing
from Iran since 2007. No family should be forced to
endure the anguish that the Abedini, Hekmati, Rezaian
and Levinson families feel, and we will not rest until
they are home where they belong.
But denying Iran a nuclear weapon is important not
in spite of these other destabilizing actions, but rather
because of them. As President Obama has pointed out,
“that is precisely why we are taking this
step — because an Iran armed with a nuclear
weapon would be far more destabilizing and far
more dangerous to our friends and to the world”.
So while this deal does not address many of our
profound concerns, if implemented it would make the
world safer and more secure.
Yet while reaching this deal matters, our work is far
from finished. In the months and even years ahead, the
international community must apply the same rigour to
ensuring compliance with the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action as we did to drafting and negotiating it. This
is my third point — implementation is everything. And
that is precisely why so many verification measures
have been built into this deal. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action will grant the IAEA access when it needs
it and where it needs it, including 24/7 containment
and surveillance of Iran’s declared nuclear facilities.
Inspectors will have access to the entire supply chain
that supports Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme, from
mining and milling to conversion, enrichment, fuel
manufacturing, nuclear reactors and spent fuel. If the
terms of the deal are not followed, all sanctions that have
been suspended can be snapped back into place, and if
the United States or any other participant in the Plan of

15-223843/16

S/PV.7488

Non-proliferation

Action believes that Iran is violating its commitments,
we can trigger a process in the Security Council that
will reinstate the United Nations sanctions.
The fourth and final lesson we can learn from the
process that led us here today is that when our nations
truly unite to confront global crises, our impact grows
exponentially. The founders of the United Nations
understood that concept intrinsically and enshrined it
in the Charter, which calls on each of us “to unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security”.
In the twenty-first century, it is now an axiom that
our nations can do more to advance peace, justice and
human dignity by working together than any single
country can achieve on its own, and that, indeed, only
when we act as united nations can we address the
world’s most intractable problems.
Although we do not see that unity enough here at
the United Nations, the countries of the United Nations
did largely unite behind the cause of preventing nuclear
proliferation in Iran, and it was the persistent multilateral
pressure that came out of this unity, combined with a
critical openness to seeking a diplomatic solution that
gave the P-5+1 and EU negotiators the leverage they
needed to get the deal that would advance our collective
security.
In conclusion, the only proper measure of this deal
and all of the tireless efforts that went into it will be its
implementation. This deal gives Iran an opportunity to
prove to the world that it intends to pursue a nuclear
programme solely for peaceful purposes. If Iran seizes
that opportunity; if it abides by the commitments that
it agreed to in this deal, as it did throughout the period
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action negotiations;
if it builds upon the mutual respect and diligence that
its negotiators demonstrated in Lausanne and Vienna;
and if it demonstrates a willingness to respect the
international standards upon which our collective
security rests, then it will find the international
community and the United States willing to provide a
path out of isolation and towards greater engagement.
We hope that Iran’s Government will choose
that path, not only because it would make the United
States, its allies and the world more secure — which
it will — but also because it will more fully empower
the Iranian people, whose potential all of us should
wish to see unlocked. But let us just think for one
moment how much more effective the Council would
be if we were to bring the same approach to tackling
other threats to international peace and security today:
4/16

20/07/2015

rigourous enforcement; a willingness to be relentless in
our pursuit of tough, principled diplomacy, even when
the odds seem stacked against us; a commitment not
just to resolutions but to their full implementation; and
a willingness to overcome divisions to strengthen our
collective security.
If we did all that, we can only imagine what we
might be able to achieve to mitigate the horrific
suffering in Syria today, and what progress the United
Nations could make were we to bring the same political
will to advancing the human rights of the world’s most
vulnerable people as we have to cutting off Iran’s
pathways to a nuclear weapon. How many more girls
worldwide would be in classrooms? How many more
warlords and dictators worldwide would be behind
bars? It is humbling to imagine how much more we
could achieve. It should motivate us to do far more.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): A few
minutes ago, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2231 (2015), on the Iranian nuclear issue,
endorsing the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
reached on that matter by the P-5+1 — China, France,
the Russian Federation, Germany, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America — in Vienna on on
14 July.
In spite of ups and downs, the efforts made with
regard to the Iran nuclear issue over more than the past
10 years have finally resulted in a political solution.
With the conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime has been safeguarded. Iran has made a political
commitment not to develop nuclear weapons, while at
the same time it has been given the legitimate right to
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. A new chapter has
also begun on Iran’s relationship with all sides.
The conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action brings far-reaching inspiration to contemporary
international relations. First, the setting up of a new
type of international relationship centred on mutual
benefit and win-win outcomes has a strong vitality. The
Iranian nuclear issueconcerns the immediate — and
even core — interests of all sides. Without a multi-win
and all-win spirit, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action would not have been achieved. Even if it had
been, it would not have lasted for long.
Secondly, it is essential to stay the course in
seeking political solutions to major issues. However
the difficult the process may be, a political solution

15-22384

20/07/2015

Non-proliferation

is always the only practical and viable path. The
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action also serves as a
successful example of how to address other regional
and international hot-spot issues through political and
diplomatic means.
Thirdly, it is possible to achieve success so long as
confidence is maintained, political will is demonstrated
and tireless efforts are made in the course of seeking
political solutions. The Council’s adoption of resolution
2231 (2015), which endorses the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, is an important step in the process of
implementing the agreement. This is a good beginning.
Implementing the agreement over the next 10 years
will be even more important, during which it will be
essential to adhere to the following principles.
First, the Council’s resolution and the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action must be implemented in a
balanced, precise and comprehensive manner. All sides
should effectively fulfil the commitments they have
made and seriously and effectively implement all the
provisions of the agreement. Secondly, in accordance
with the principles of mutual respect, equality and
mutual benefit, it is essential to appropriately resolve the
differences that may arise during the implementation
process, demonstrate goodwill and stay the course for
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action. Thirdly, it is necessary to constantly take
stock of experiences and good practices during the
implementation process, maintain the effectiveness of
the relevant mechanism and make positive efforts to
maintain world peace, promote regional stability and
improve relations among all sides.
China has all along worked constructively for
fruitful negotiations on the Iranian nuclear issue. We
will continue to make new contributions to implement
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action in a responsible
manner.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), which
marks a historic moment both for international peace
and security and for the Security Council. Following
12 years of a nuclear crisis, after many months of
intensive months of negotiation, an agreement with
Iran was finally reached in Vienna on 14 July. First,
the agreement charts a demanding path towards
establishing trust in the exclusively peaceful nature
of Iran’s nuclear programme. It also serves to confirm
the relevance and robustness of the non-proliferation
regime. The agreement will also make a contribution

S/PV.7488

to regional and international stability, as an Iran with
nuclear weapons would further destabilize a region
already experiencing many crises. Conversely, with
this agreement we will together be able to write a new
chapter in the history of the region. Above all, the
authority of the Council and of our collective security
system has been strengthened thanks to this agreement.
If the commitments are upheld, one of the most serious
crises of the past 20 years will have been settled
peaceably through dialogue and negotiation.
This agreement is first and foremost a triumph
of method. As the Council is aware, from the outset
of the crisis, in 2003, along with Germany and the
United Kingdom, France gave priority to dialogue
through what came to be known as a dual approach,
namely, negotiations and sanctions. We believed that,
without firmness and pressure from the international
community, calls for dialogue would have been in
vain. Our American, Russian and Chinese partners,
and eventually the rest of the Security Council, rallied
around that approach. In that way, we were able to
establish the framework for dialogue that, 12 years
later, made it possible to arrive at an outcome.
This agreement is also the result of firmness.
Throughout the negotiations, France did not waver
from its position of being in favour of civilian nuclear
programme for Iran but against a nuclear weapon.
Against that backdrop, France resolutely joined in
the search for a negotiated solution. That course of
constructive resolve made it possible to arrive at a robust
and binding agreement that is also precise, complete
and credible and whose full implementation will
serve to address the expectations of the international
community and the concerns of Iran’s neighbours.
It is now up to the Security Council to endorse
the Vienna agreement and act as guarantor of its
implementation. Although the time for negotiations has
come to an end, now is the time for action and vigilance.
The process that has been put in place includes clear
and exact limits on Iran’s nuclear programme, a robust
oversight and verification system and the possibility for
automatically reinstating sanctions in the event of Iran’s
violation of its commitments. It is Iran’s responsibility,
in line with the timetable that has been established, to
implement the entirety of the measures agreed. The
International Atomic Energy Agency will play a key
role with regard to oversight and verification, as well
as in informing the Council as to Iran’s adherence to
its commitments. Along with its partners, France will

15-223845/16

S/PV.7488

Non-proliferation

rigorously and in good faith monitor compliance with
this agreement. We will judge Iran’s by its actions in
making this agreement a success. The role and unity
of the Council will also be a determining factor. The
lifting of Security Council sanctions is preconditioned
on Iran’s respect for its commitments. The Council must
continue to exercise vigilance throughout the period
covered by the agreement. Over the next 15 years, it
must be prepared to reinstate sanctions in the event of
shortcomings on the part of Iran.
Together, with eyes wide open, we are embarking
today upon a new chapter. But the most important part
is yet to be written, and the coming weeks will be
decisive.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s resolution 2231 (2015), adopted
unanimously in support of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, marks a fundamental shift in the Security
Council’s consideration of the situation regarding
the Iranian nuclear programme, with a view towards
resolving the matter once and for all. By creating a new
reality, we are not just turning a page but beginning a
new chapter in the work of the Council. We expect that
all countries will quickly adapt to the new conditions
and contribute to the successful implementation of the
agreement.
The Security Council, and the international
community it represents, has supported a clear choice
to resolve the situation regarding the Iranian nuclear
programme through political and diplomatic means
based on international law — first and foremost the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
A choice has been made in favour of mutual respect,
stability and cooperation. We are pleased that that
decision has been based on a gradual and reciprocal
approach, which our country consistently supported
throughout all stages of the negotiations.
The Council has today confirmed the inalienable
right of Iran to develop a peaceful nuclear programme,
including to enrich uranium, while also ensuring
comprehensive oversight by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). This resolution also guarantees
lifting the burden of sanctions on Iran in the framework
of the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action though a clear and transparent mechanism
that will be made operational through concrete steps
based on confidence in Iran’s nuclear programme,
including IAEA verification.

6/16

20/07/2015

A reliable filter has been created in the framework
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and resolution
2231 (2015) that will guarantee that all disputes and
disagreements that could arise in the implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action will be subject
to collective consideration in the framework of the
joint commission, with the participation of the P-5+1,
Iran and the European Union. Moreover, the Security
Council maintains a leading role on issues regarding
the implementation of the Plan of Action. During
negotiations we knew that the Plan of Action would be
subject to Security Council approval, and we therefore
gave special attention to ensuring the prerogatives of
this organ and respect for the role of all its members,
including non-permanent members, in taking decisions
that are essential to implementing the agreement. We
are grateful to the IAEA for its readiness to assume
responsibility for monitoring and verification of Iran’s
obligations.
We hope that the agreement with Iran will help
other countries of the Middle East and the Persian
Gulf to refrain from destabilizing moves, including in
the nuclear sphere, and to ensure that the region does
not enter a new arms race. We are creating conditions
conducive to the establishment in the Middle East of
a zone free of weapons of mass destruction and to the
search for common approaches among countries of the
Middle East to addressing regional security issues and
uniting their collective efforts in the fight against the
terrorist threat. In a statement following the conclusion
of the negotiations, the President of the Russian
Federation, Vladimir Putin, underscored that Russia
will do all it can to ensure that the Vienna agreements
become fully operational in order to promote the
strengthening of international and regional security,
the global regime of nuclear non-proliferation, and the
mobilization of a broad regional coalition to counteract
the terrorist threat.
We underscore that the work of all the negotiating
teams deserve the highest praise. We commend in
particular the Governments of Austria and Switzerland,
which ensured optimal conditions for guaranteeing the
success of the negotiations. We would also like to praise
the consideration of our friends from Kazakhstan, who
organized several rounds of negotiations.
Reaching an agreement to resolve the issues
surrounding
the
Iranian
nuclear
programme
demonstrates that where there exists a political will
based on realism and respect for legitimate mutual

15-22384

20/07/2015

Non-proliferation

S/PV.7488

interests, the international community can resolve the
most complex tasks. All participants in the negotiations
demonstrated their readiness to engage in collective
efforts. A reserve of trust has been built up that will
be very useful in the course of implementing the
agreement. We hope that this invaluable experience
of collective efforts, unburdened by ideological
geopolitical calculations, will also be used to resolve
other crisis situations where, perhaps, success will be
secured exclusively through joint work. Russia is ready
for this.

agreement. That will not be easy. There will inevitably
be difficulties and unforeseen obstacles, but we must
live up to our commitments, act in good faith and try
wherever possible to resolve together any problems in
implementing the deal. The role of the Security Council
will be important. We will maintain oversight in the
implementation of the agreement. We also need to take
significant steps to support its implementation. In some
areas, that will involve novel working methods for the
Council. We will have to be flexible and imaginative,
and get this right.

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2231
(2015). The resolution endorses the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action agreed in Vienna last week. It creates
the baseline from which to recalibrate our broader
relationship with Iran, and it is an opportunity for
us all to re-engage economically and culturally with
an important regional Power as it takes on its proper
responsibility for improving regional stability. Today’s
adoption is an important milestone in the history of the
Council, the culmination of negotiations that have taken
place over more than a decade. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action is a landmark achievement, and I join
my colleagues in expressing my congratulations and
gratitude to everyone involved in that process.

The deal gives us the chance to change the
relationship between Iran and the Security Council,
and change for the better the dynamics in the region
and beyond. We can now start the work of rebuilding
a deficit of trust that has arisen over decades; we can
start to normalize our relationships, which hold great
promise for the future. We will also encourage Iran
to play a transparent and constructive role in regional
affairs, including in the current crises in Yemen and
Syria. Iran has an opportunity to make a positive
decision about its responsibilities in the region.

In the Council, we often call for the peaceful
resolution of disputes. In some cases, progress is
slow and situations remain unresolved, but while
in the past we have met to call on Iran to respond to
our concerns, today we can be proud that Iran has
committed to taking actions to address those concerns.
I am delighted that the Council has endorsed the deal
unanimously. It is a good deal — good for the United
Kingdom and the international community, good for
the region, and good for Iran. If implemented fully,
the resolution will address our proliferation concerns
through comprehensive commitments on the part of
Iran to limit its nuclear programme — commitments
that will be verified through extensive monitoring and
transparency. As soon as Iran takes steps on its nuclear
programme, it will receive comprehensive economic
and financial sanctions relief, enabling it to trade
more freely again with the rest of the world. Under full
implementation of the deal, Iran will be treated just like
any other non-nuclear-weapon State party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
We now need to look ahead and make sure that we
all deliver on our commitments as we implement the

The world is now a safer place in the knowledge
that Iran cannot build a nuclear bomb. I encourage all
of us in the Council to show the same determination,
courage and vision in supporting this project and
pursuing our other top priorities, as the negotiators on
all sides have demonstrated in getting us the agreement
we have endorsed here today.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Today we celebrate the triumph of diplomacy
following an arduous and complex negotiating process
between the E-3+3 and Iran. I join in congratulating
all participants on their efforts and commitments.
I congratulate Iran, the United States, Russia, China
and our partners in the European Union, and of course
the United Kingdom, France and Germany. They have
demonstrated us that nothing is impossible where there
is political will. They have also given us new impetus
in addressing new challenges to international peace
and security, as we do daily here in the Council. Such
challenges can sometimes seem insurmountable in the
absence of inspiration such as that provided in this case
today.
Plutarch, writing in Parallel Lives in the late
first century A.D., ascribes to Alexander the Great a
statement that we here today could also endorse, to
the effect that dealing with the Persians on the basis
of dialogue rather than confrontation serves our

15-223847/16

S/PV.7488

Non-proliferation

interests and benefits us and them. The benefits will
be undeniable — Iran can return to normality and the
world will be a safer place.
We are also seeing a demonstration of the Security
Council’s effectiveness. In adopting resolution 1737
(2006), on 23 December 2006, the Council showed its
determination to place limits on Iran’s development
of sensitive nuclear technologies that could serve to
support its nuclear and missile programmes. Today, the
Council followed through on that determination. The
Council’s approach to the Iranian issue has undoubtedly
been decisive in reaching the agreement and shows
how, when we act united and with determination, we
can make the Council the most valuable guardian
of international peace and security. Moreover, in a
symbiotic process, the more effective this body is, the
stronger it is and the more capable it is to address future
challenges.
Before us now are opportunities and challenges.
The opportunities we now have stem from a balanced
agreement that strengthens the non-proliferation system
and offers an outstanding opportunity that should not
be missed. We also have the responsibility to take
advantage of the synergies the agreement offers. To that
end, we must ensure that the process is brought to an
optimal conclusion. Among the opportunities presented,
we must highlight the beneficial effect that the process
could have on the region because it will bring about an
element of stability, as the representative of the United
Kingdom just said. We must take advantage of this as as
a valuable basis to work towards combating the threat
of terrorism and bringing about the end of the conflict
in the Middle East.
But there are also challenges, which is why we
must implement what has been agreed to in a timely and
effective manner. Today, the Foreign Affairs Council of
the European Union will meet to take a decision about
the Union’s role under the terms of the agreement. Now
that the hardest part has been achieved, we here in the
Council must continue to show unity and determination
in duly implementing the agreement and establish
follow-up and monitoring mechanisms that will replace
current ones. We must find the most effective way of
monitoring the restrictions that will remain in place for
a certain amount of time.
Accordingly, as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), I feel deeply involved in this process and I

8/16

20/07/2015

can guarantee that I will make every effort to uphold
my role throughout the transition phase, being as
pragmatic as possible and assisting Member States
in the full implementation of the agreement in their
respective relationships with the current regime. As
I said on the day that the United States submitted the
draft resolution, the greatest source of happiness for me
would be to see the 1737 Committee simply disappear,
as that would mean we are fulfilling the message the
tapestry that floats above this Chamber delivers on a
daily basis: the 1737 Committee, like the phoenix, will
die only to light up a future of peace and security. As
we forge that future the Council can count on the full
support and commitment of Spain.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
welcomes the agreement reached on the Iranian
nuclear issue, as well as the political and diplomatic
efforts made by China, France, Germany, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom, the United States and
the European Union to achieve it.
Jordan has always called for a peaceful diplomatic
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. Therefore,
Jordan supports any steps taken to entrench regional
and international peace and security and stability,
particularly in the current conditions prevailing in the
Middle East. We hope that the agreement signed between
the P5+1 and Iran will promote further confidence
among the States of the region. We also hope that it will
have positive repercussions on all States of the region
and on the security and stability of their peoples. And
we hope that it will serve as a constructive step towards
preventing a new arms race in the Middle East region
and that it will rid the region of all weapons of mass
destruction, including nuclear weapons.
In conclusion, we stress the importance of the
role of the International Atomic Energy Agency in
following up and implementing the agreement and
providing the Security Council with regular reports
on Iran’s implementation in accordance with the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
express our satisfaction at the adoption of resolution
2231 (2015), by which the Security Council endorses
the agreement reached between Iran and the E3/EU+3
on the Iranian nuclear programme. We voted in favour
of the resolution because we value the agreement, as it
contributes to resolving differences on the programme’s
scope and prospects and reaffirms the right of all States

15-22384

20/07/2015

Non-proliferation

party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy.
We hope that the significant verification elements
in the agreement will make it possible to build
confidence among the parties, preserve the integrity of
the multilateral non-proliferation regime and strengthen
the role of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), thereby promoting greater cooperation to
safeguard peace and stability in the Middle East.
The agreement has served to reaffirm the
irreplaceable value of negotiation and diplomacy in
conducting international relations. The responsibility,
flexibility and creativity that all the parties
demonstrated show the will and commitment to peace
and cooperation, which are the guiding principles of
our Organization.
At this historic juncture, from our seat in the
Council and on the Board of Governors of the IAEA,
we will provide our full support to the effective and
smooth implementation of this agreement. We therefore
hope to contribute to building confidence and creating
better conditions for the maintenance of regional and
global security.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela co-sponsored and voted in favour of
resolution 2231 (2015), which ratifies the agreements
reached between the P5+1, the European Union and
the Islamic Republic of Iran. We are convinced that
through this resolution the Security Council is giving
its firm backing to an important agreement that ushers
in a new era in relations among the various States.
Venezuela welcomes this important agreement and
congratulates all the delegations that participated in
the negotiations process that led to the signing of this
important document — on the courage, persistence,
political will and commitment they showed throughout
the 18 months of intense negotiations. The results
achieved reveal the importance of political and
diplomatic efforts to find a peaceful solution to the
impasse, in accordance with Article 2 of the Charter
of the United Nations. It also shows once again that,
where there is political commitment among the
parties, peace and dialogue impose themselves in the
face of warmongering speeches that fuel distrust and
confrontation.

S/PV.7488

This agreement is the triumph of diplomacy over
war. The full implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action will guarantee the Islamic Republic of
Iran the right to exercise its sovereign right to the use
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes with a view to
promoting its technological and energy independence.
We are also convinced that this instrument will
contribute positively to the birth of a new phase of
diplomatic relations between Iran and the States party
to the agreement, based on mutual trust and respect and
a collective commitment with a view to strengthening
international peace and security.
We are pleased that the agreements reached will in
the end allow for the final lifting of the Security Council
sanctions regime as well as other unilateral coercive
measures unlawfully applied in other areas related to
Iran’s nuclear programme, which include measures
restricting access to economic, commercial, financial,
technological, energy goods and services, inter alia,
which has had a negative impact on the Iranian people
and other States in their cooperative relations with
Iran. We reaffirm our full support and implementation
of this historic effort with a view to achieving the
welfare and progress of the Iranian people. We hope
that the agreement reached will mark the beginning
of a far-reaching political process that paves the way
to progress towards a peaceful solution to the other
conflicts taking place in the Middle East — including
regarding the Palestinian issue, Syria, Iraq, Yemen and
extremist terrorism — that are threatening peace and
stability in the region.
In conclusion, we believe that the international
community must now support and demonstrate
the same political will with a view to achieving
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East in
conformity with the package of measures agreed at
the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which is
necessary and of major importance in achieving peace
and stability in that troubled region.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor to explain Malaysia’s vote on
resolution 2231 (2015), which the Council just adopted
and which we co-sponsored and voted in favour of.
At the outset, Malaysia wishes to congratulate the
delegations responsible for reaching this historic
agreement, namely, China, France, Germany, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, the United

15-223849/16

S/PV.7488

Non-proliferation

States, the European Union and, of course, the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
We place on record our appreciation to those
delegations for their commitment and for remaining
steadfast in upholding key principles of constructive
engagement, dialogue and diplomacy in good faith
throughout the difficult negotiations. The Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, endorsed by the Council
via resolution 2231 (2015), is a positive step that augurs
well for international efforts aimed at enhancing
nuclear security. We look forward to the immediate and
constructive implementation of the Plan of Action by
all the parties concerned.
The agreement reached on 14 July is a landmark
understanding that, in our view, reaffirms the
principle of the peaceful use of nuclear technology
and, at the same time, appears to strike a balance in
terms of concerns about proliferation as provided
for under the regime established under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Malaysia remains convinced that the NPT regime
continues to occupy a role of central importance in
the efforts to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons,
as well as forming an essential foundation for the
pursuit of general and complete nuclear disarmament.
Nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament
are two sides of the same coin. In that connection, we
reiterate the call upon all the nuclear-weapon States to
reinvigorate efforts to implement their obligations under
the disarmament pillar of the NPT regime, including by
taking steps to reduce their nuclear weapon stockpiles
and decrease the operational readiness of the nuclear
weapons systems, among others.
As a member of the Council and of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), Malaysia looks forward to working with
other Council members in the implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with a view to
working towards the eventual lifting of all United
Nations sanctions against the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Malaysia hopes that the successful implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action will positively
contribute to peace and stability in the Middle East
region and beyond.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): We would like to begin by
congratulating the parties — the Islamic Republic of
Iran, China, France, Germany, the Russian Federation,
the United Kingdom, the United States and the
European Union — on the historic agreement reached
10/16

20/07/2015

last week on the Iranian nuclear programme. The
agreement is a victory for diplomacy. It proves that, no
matter how difficult a subject is, with commitment and
determination, negotiations can produce results.
Nigeria voted in favour of resolution 2231 (2015)
because we are convinced that it will aid in the
process of implementing the agreement. The Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action clearly spells out the
obligations of the parties. We urge them to implement
the plan transparently and in good faith.
We takes this opportunity once more to reaffirm
our support for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
in accordance with article IV of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): The Angolan delegation
is very honoured to take part in this meeting of the
Security Council and to have cast its vote on the
historic resolution 2231 (2015), which represents the
triumph of multilateralism, negotiation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The agreement that the Council
has just endorsed is clear evidence that, however
complex or difficult it might be, negotiated solutions
can be achieved for any political problem if the parties
show political will and a commitment to seek peaceful
solutions and to avoid recourse to military means.
The present agreement has an additional and
special virtue, since, for many years, diplomacy has
been defeated in all Middle East disputes. The United
States, China, France, Germany, the United Kingdom,
the Russian Federation, the European Union and the
Islamic Republic of Iran deserve all of our praise for
being able to reach such an outstanding achievement
by concluding the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action as a contribution to the building of confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. We hope that implementation of the Plan
of Action will produce the best possible results, that
the national Parliaments of the signatory States will
give their endorsement to the agreement, that the
International Atomic Energy Agency will assume its
essential and independent role in verifying compliance
with the Safeguards Agreement and that the sanctions
imposed on Iran will be lifted in accordance with the
provisions of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
It was our expectation — or, if preferred, our
wishful thinking — that the very difficult and
thoughtful negotiating process would allow for the
highest possible degree of understanding of each

15-22384

20/07/2015

Non-proliferation

other’s views and expectations, thus making possible
the building of mutual confidence and triggering a
game change, namely, an innovative factor that might
create a new dynamic for the whole region. However,
in the current environment in the Middle East, the
closing — or the opening — of the distracting Iranian
nuclear programme, after such a long and complex
negotiating process between the main world Powers,
the permanent members of the Security Council and an
influential regional Power, is a limited outcome. Now
we want more. The people of the region deserve more.
And the agreements so far reached should be followed
by other outstanding initiatives that address very
serious regional issues.
It is our view that the permanent members of
the Council should deploy further efforts by taking
advantage of the negotiating dynamics opened up by
the Iranian nuclear programme, so as to reach out to
regional Powers and countries of the region to address
and resolve proxy wars and serious crisis situations
affecting the region, namely, the fight against the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the Syrian war,
the conflict in Yemen, the Palestinian issue and the
establishment of a political framework to repair the
rift between Sunni and Shiite majority countries in the
Middle East.
In our view, beyond the non-proliferation and arms
control issues, the establishment of new dynamics in
the entire Middle East region would be the greatest
accomplishment and most valuable legacy of the process
to which we are giving a boost today by adopting this
landmark resolution.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): Lithuania welcomes
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), on
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed by the
European Union (EU), the E3/EU+3 and the Islamic
Republic of Iran on 14 July. We strongly believe that
this deal, based on Iran’s implementation of essential
changes to its nuclear programme in return for a phased
lifting of sanctions, offers a real, durable and verifiable
path to resolve a dispute spanning over a decade. It also
marks a victory for multilateralism and international
diplomacy, as it proves that sustained pressure by the
international community, including through United
Nations sanctions and their full implementation by
Member States, can create conditions that bring parties
to the negotiating table and keep them engaged in good
faith and in the spirit of compromise.

S/PV.7488

Lithuania applauds the perseverance and
determination of all those involved in that
extraordinary diplomatic endeavour. In particular, we
acknowledge the instrumental coordinating role played
by both former and current European Union High
Representatives for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
Since the core objective of the deal is to ensure the
international community’s trust in a peaceful measure
of Iran’s nuclear programme, the full implementation of
comprehensive transparency and verification measures
will be indispensable in ensuring its success. Iran’s
agreement to implement the Additional Protocol to
its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement as well as
further transparency measures foreseen in the Plan of
Action will provide the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) with powerful tools to implement
continuous monitoring and will grant the Agency
extensive access to Iran’s nuclear sites. We also
welcome the road map agreed on by the IAEA and Iran
on 14 July that provides a specific time frame to clarify
past and present outstanding issues by the end of this
year.
In addition to the rigorous verification measures,
Iran will remain under the legally binding Charterbased obligations to comply with the arms embargo
and refrain from ballistic missile-related activities.
The travel ban and assets freeze will also remain in
place, while the Council will continue to be actively
engaged in monitoring the implementation of the
Plan of Action. Finally, all current sanctions will be
reinstated in the event of significant non-performance
by Iran with regard to its commitments under the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action.
In conclusion, Lithuania is convinced that,
if implemented fully and in good faith, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action will become a crucial
element in building trust between Iran and the
international community, open the door to a steady
improvement of relations with Iran and positively
contribute to regional and international peace and
stability.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Chad would
like to join previous speakers in welcoming the signing
in Vienna on 14 July by the Islamic Republic of Iran,
the P5+1 countries and the European Union of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
programme. Chad takes note of the parties’ joint
statement aimed at promoting transparency and creating
an atmosphere conducive to the implementation of the

15-2238411/16

S/PV.7488

Non-proliferation

Plan of Action. Chad encourages them to implement
their commitments fully and in good faith.
It is important to recall that the Plan of Action,
which the Security Council has just endorsed in
resolution 2231 (2015), is the outcome of a long process.
The text of the agreement is voluminous, with more
than 100 pages and five annexes. The complexity and
length of the negotiations clearly demonstrate that the
parties were open-minded and persevered to overcome
doubts and difficulties throughout the process. Chad
would like to congratulate all the leaders, politicians,
diplomats and experts from all parties for the courage,
determination, tact and wisdom that they demonstrated
in reaching a negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear
programme. We share their satisfaction in having
managed to reach an agreement that had not, in past
negotiations, been reached for more than 12 years.
We support future efforts to implement the agreement
reached on 14 July. Chad is convinced of the virtues of
dialogue and peace, which is why we voted in favour
of the resolution just adopted. Its unanimous adoption
clearly symbolizes the triumph of diplomacy and
the noble principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations that call for the peaceful resolution of
differences without the use of threats or force.
Within the framework of that approach, we pay
tribute to the leadership of the United States and its
leaders’ fresh approach that focuses on dialogue,
peace and stability around the world. In that regard,
we completely agree with what President Obama said
when receiving the Nobel Peace Prize, on 10 December
2009 in Oslo:
“sanctions without outreach — condemnation
without discussion — can carry forward only a
crippling status quo.
Chad expects that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) will monitor respect for the agreements
on guarantees and the implementation of the cooperation
framework agreed with Iran on 11 November 2013, as
well as the road map for clarification of the past and
current outstanding issues. With that in mind, Chad
encourages the IAEA and Iran to cooperate fully to
ensure the comprehensive, successful implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. We also
hope that the sanctions and measures implemented
pursuant to the relevant provisions of the various
Council resolutions adopted between 2006 and 2015
pertaining to Iran will be completely lifted after the

12/16

20/07/2015

Security Council receives an IAEA report that confirms
the adoption by that country of the implementation of
all measures outlined in the Plan of Action.
We would like to reiterate that, like all the other
States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Iran is entitled to develop, conduct
research and produce nuclear energy for civilian
purposes. We hope that the agreement signed on 14 July
will make it possible for Iran to join the community
of nations and ensure its contribution to the promotion
and strengthening of international cooperation. In a
world threatened by conflict, every contribution should
be welcomed in maintaining international peace and
security.
In conclusion, we should like to reiterate our
encouragement and support to all parties of the 14 July
Vienna agreement. We call on them to respect the
commitments undertaken and to continue to engage in
dialogue until the end of the implementation of the Plan
of Action. Chad, which signed and ratified the Treaty of
Pelindaba, which makes Africa a nuclear-weapon-free
zone, dreams of a world rid of these weapons of mass
destruction, wherein the use of nuclear science and
technological research are done solely for peaceful
purposes. Therefore, we would like to note the very
pertinent and, unfortunately, very imperialist slogan
“Nuclear energy for all, nuclear weapons for no one”.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand.
Today, the permanent members of the Security
Council, the European Union, Germany and Iran
have presented us with an agreement that, if fully
implemented, will provide a comprehensive and longterm solution to the Iran nuclear issue. The truly historic
agreement reached in Vienna represents a triumph
of diplomacy and cooperation over confrontation
and mistrust. New Zealand commends all parties for
staying the course throughout what were complex and
challenging negotiations.
It is now crucial to ensure that the agreement is fully
and swiftly implemented and that small missteps and
misunderstandings not be allowed to derail the process.
We urge all parties to approach that task with the same
constructive intent that has led to this agreement,
and we encourage Iran to act swiftly to implement
all transparency measures and allow the International
Atomic Energy Agency access to the relevant sites.

15-22384

20/07/2015

Non-proliferation

Through the adoption today of resolution 2231
(2015), we give international legal force to the agreement
reached in Vienna and extend the obligations it contains
across the broader United Nations membership. New
Zealand endorses the comments of High Representative
Mogherini, who has said that this is a good deal for
everyone — for the parties who signed up to it and for
the rest of the international community. Sadly, there
are too few days when we can say that constructive
and patient diplomacy has succeeded in bridging the
differences and overcoming the mistrust that contain
the seeds of conflict. Today we mark an opportunity to
change the nature of the relationship between Iran and
the international community, and we remind ourselves
that with the right approach and with the commitment
of key stakeholders, even seemingly intractable issues
can be resolved through diplomacy and dialogue. As
the Council confronts the extraordinarily difficult
challenges related to the Middle East peace process,
Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Libya, that is a message we
should reflect on today.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Today’s
adoption by the Council of resolution 2231 (2015)
marks a significant development and a fundamental
shift in the Council’s consideration of Iran’s peaceful
nuclear programme over the past 10 years. The Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action is the result of an extensive
series of collective efforts that for close to two years
have sought to give diplomacy a chance and end resorts
to pressure, coercion and threats. That fundamentally
different approach, a departure from the path travelled
in previous years, has helped all of us to opt for the best
possible way out, put an end to an unnecessary crisis
and accomplish a major achievement for all the parties
involved and the international community as a whole.
Today’s resolution and the Plan of Action that it
endorses also provide for terminating the Security
Council resolutions that placed unjustifiable sanctions
on Iran for its efforts to exercise its rights. The sanctions
were grounded on nothing but baseless and pure
speculation and hearsay. Nobody has ever presented
any proof that Iran’s programme has been anything but
peaceful. The International Atomic Energy Agency,
which has put Iran’s facilities through a record number

S/PV.7488

of inspections, has consistently reported that Iran has
duly stood by every single one of its commitments.
For example, in terms of inspection frequency, only
Japan has been subject to greater scrutiny than Iran,
while Japan has far more extensive nuclear facilities.
Last year, Iran even surpassed Japan in the number of
inspections it was subjected to.
The Security Council’s involvement was thus not
based on a suspicious nuclear weapon programme; it was
driven by the objective stated in resolution 1696 (2006),
of compelling Iran to suspend its lawful enrichment
programme. That demand was not only unnecessary
and uncalled for, but also ran counter to the unanimous
conclusions of the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, which stipulated that Member States’
choices with regard to their fuel-cycle activities must be
respected. It also ignored the repeated demands of the
majority of the international community represented in
the Non-Aligned Movement.
The sanctions imposed on Iran by resolution
1737 (2006) through resolution 1929 (2010) were all
punishments for the Iranian people’s refusal to accept
that demand. In engaging with the E3+3, the Iranian
people have had the foresight to move forward without
losing sight of the past. While we therefore hope that
the Security Council will open a new chapter in its
relations with us, we cannot accept or forget its previous
treatment of Iran, starting with its inaction in the face
of Saddam’s aggression and use of chemical weapons
and continuing through its more recent approach to
Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme.
The solution we have arrived at is undoubtedly in the
interests of strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation
regime in its entirety, since it includes and recognizes
Iran’s right to develop nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, including conducting uranium enrichment
activities and research and development on its territory.
The rights and obligations of States parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), as under any other international regime, must
go hand in hand. Obligations can be honoured and such
regimes, including that of the NPT, can be sustained
only if those rights are also achievable. No threats of
sanctions or war can sustain the NPT in the long run if
the great Powers fail to honour all three of its pillars,
including total nuclear disarmament and the right of all
to use nuclear energy, and if non-parties are rewarded
for their intransigence.

15-2238413/16

S/PV.7488

Non-proliferation

Looking to the future, my Government hopes that
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and resolution
2231 (2015) herald a new chapter in the relationship
between Iran, the Council and the Plan of Action’s
participants. Iran is both able and willing to comply
fully with its commitments under the Plan of Action,
because it is already committed to the fatwa of its
Supreme Leader, who has declared all weapons of mass
destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, to be haram,
or forbidden, which is also a principle of Iran’s defence
doctrine. We hope that our partners and the Council
will do the same with regard to their commitments
under the same documents.
The desire that the Council has expressed for
building a new relationship with Iran, its encouragement
of all Member States to cooperate with Iran within
the framework of the Plan of Action in the area of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and related projects,
and its emphasis on the fact that the Plan of Action
can help to promote and facilitate the development of
normal economic and trade contacts and cooperation
with Iran are all positive and encouraging signs.
While this deal focuses on the nuclear issue, Iran
expects it to have broader positive implications for our
region and the entire international community that
include the following. First, the deal, sealed on the basis
of mutual respect and understanding, is an important
victory for diplomacy over the pressure and coercion
exerted on Iran, which have produced no results over
the past 37 years. It reinforces our faith in diplomacy
as the most rational way to resolve differences in our
interconnected world, and it shows that diplomacy can
work and prevail over war and tension. It therefore
sends a clear message to those who still believe they
can achieve anything through force and coercion.
Secondly, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
has the potential to help trigger major developments
in the region aimed at achieving greater cooperation
and coordination in addressing the real issues at hand.
We therefore earnestly hope that it helps turn a page
in our region that can enable countries to close ranks,
fight resolutely against violent extremism and move
towards greater cooperation in addressing the grave
threats facing the region and the world. While every
country in the region has a very high stake in defeating
terrorism, violent extremism and sectarianism, the Plan
of Action’s participants are facing similar challenges
to their security from such phenomena. With the dust
settled over the nuclear issue, we are now free to

14/16

20/07/2015

focus on real issues and to benefit from an improved
environment conducive to wider cooperation among all
actors.
Thirdly, in the wake of this major development in
the region, we renew our confirmation to our neighbours
and friends in the Persian Gulf and the wider region that
Iran is ready to engage in good faith with all of them
based on mutual respect, good-neighbourliness and
brotherhood. We have many common challenges in our
region to address and many common opportunities to
benefit from. This is the time to start working together
against our most common and important challenges,
which include above all violent extremism.
Fourthly, the Israeli regime, following its general
policy to stoke tension in the region, has done all in its
power to sabotage and defeat any effort to resolve the
standoff over Iran’s nuclear energy programme. In so
doing, it has proved once more that it does not see peace
in our region to be in its interest and considers peace to
be an existential threat to itself. The Iranophobia that it
tries to spread in the region and beyond also serves that
nefarious purpose. We therefore alert our friends and
neighbours not to fall into Israel’s trap.
In this context, it is also not surprising that the Israeli
regime is the only obstacle in the way of establishing
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, the
concept for which my country initiated more than 40
years ago and has promoted ever since. We believe that
the nuclear warheads stockpiled by the Israeli regime
constitute a grave threat to peace and security in our
unstable region, and that the Security Council should
live up to its primary responsibility under the Charter
of the United Nations and take the action necessary to
neutralize this threat.
To conclude, let me recall that Iran, a nation
with a rich culture and civilization, has withstood
enormous millennial storms while being steadfast in
preserving its independence and identity. These have
not been acquired by oppressing others or reneging on
commitments. The steadfastness that our delegation
showed during the negotiations was based on the fact
that we only accept commitments that we can abide
by. As Iran is resolute in fulfilling its obligations, we
expect that our counterparts shall also remain faithful
to theirs. Only by honouring commitments, displaying
good faith and adopting the right approach can we
ensure that diplomacy will prevail over conflict and war
in a world that is replete with violence, suffering and
oppression. In this context, the Joint Comprehensive
15-22384

20/07/2015

Non-proliferation

S/PV.7488

Plan of Action provides a solid foundation for further
and more effective diplomatic interaction.

and a tribute to the merits of patient diplomacy on
all sides.

Let me thank those Ambassadors who supported
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and those
countries that helped this deal to happen. I also wish
to briefly react to some baseless accusations leveled
by some speakers in today’s meeting. It is ironic
that the Ambassador of the United States accused
my Government of destabilizing the region and of
terrorism. The country that invaded two countries
of our region and created grounds favourable to the
growth of terrorism and extremism is not well placed to
raise such accusations against mine. The feckless and
reckless actions of the United States in our region over
many years are at the root of many challenges that we
are now facing in our neighbourhood. Iran is a stable
country in an unstable region. As we want our stability
to endure, we promote stability in the region and help
our neighbours to stabilize and cooperate towards that
end.

“It is appropriate that the deal was struck in
Vienna, where all this began 12 years ago, when
the International Atomic Energy Agency started
to look into possible undeclared Iranian nuclear
activities. Since then, there have been many months
and years of at times difficult negotiations. A key
milestone in that process was the interim Geneva
agreement of 2013, the smooth implementation of
which provided the time and space necessary for
the complex negotiation process that followed. This
resulted in the Lausanne agreement in April 2015,
which set the parameters for the final deal.

In conclusion, let me also inform you, Mr. President,
that my delegation, upon instruction from my
Government, is forwarding the statement of the Islamic
Republic of Iran following the action taken today by the
Security Council, to be circulated as a document of the
Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. MayrHarting.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: The High Representative
of the European Union (EU) for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini, has asked
me to convey the following message to the Security
Council:
“The agreement reached in Vienna on 14 July
2015 between Iran and China, France, Germany,
Russia, the United Kingdom and the United
States of America, with the support of the High
Representative of the Union for Foreign and
Security Policy, on a Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action is historic in nature.
“The agreement, once implemented, marks a
conclusion to the long-running diplomatic efforts
to reach a comprehensive, long-lasting and peaceful
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue that will
provide the necessary assurances on the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme, on the
one hand, and the lifting of sanctions, on the other.
As such, it represents a significant achievement

“The E-3/EU+3 format was especially
effective. We feel that the European Union, in
particular through the High Representative, was
able to play a crucial facilitation role. Throughout
the whole process, the EU was the facilitator,
moderator and, in the final stages, penholder for
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action text and
its annexes. It is hard to imagine another actor that
could have done this. A key element of success was
maintaining the unity of the group and focus on
a shared goal. It is to the credit of all those who
participated that we stayed committed to reaching
a mutually beneficial deal. The fact that the selfimposed deadline was overrun several times bears
witness to the shared view that a quality agreement
was vastly superior to a quick one.
“The agreement is good, durable and verifiable.
Iran has agreed to make changes to its nuclear
programme. The International Atomic Energy
Agency will have the access it needs to determine
when Iran has completed those actions and to
detect any future violation of the agreement. Iran
will receive phased sanctions-lifting in return. The
Plan of Action annexes set out in detail what is
required by all sides, providing clarity to facilitate
the implementation of the agreement. Together
with the conclusion to be made by the International
Atomic Energy Agency in that regard, the full
implementation by Iran of its commitments under
the Plan of Action will contribute to building
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme.
“It will be necessary for all sides to work now
towards implementing the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. The resolution adopted today

15-2238415/16

S/PV.7488

Non-proliferation

by the Security Council is a key element in this
process. As agreed in Vienna, the European Union
will endorse the resolution in conclusions of the
Foreign Affairs Council, which is in session as we
speak. The European Union will also endorse the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and commits
to abiding by its terms and to follow the agreed
implementation plan.”
In effect, European Union actions and commitments
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action related to
the lifting sanctions will be carried out in accordance
with the timeline and modalities specified in the
Plan. As stipulated in the Plan, the termination of the
implementation of economic and financial sanctions
would come into effect once the International Atomic
Energy Agency has verified that Iran has implemented
all of its nuclear-related commitments. For the time
being, the provisions of the Joint Plan of Action agreed
in Geneva in 2013 have been extended for a further
six months, to cover the period until the International
Atomic Energy Agency has verified that Iran has
carried out its commitments.
The High Representative of the Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy will continue her supporting
and coordinating role during the entire implementation
phase of the Plan of Action. The High Representative
hopes and expects that this positive development will
open the door to a steady improvement in relations
between the European Union, its member States
and Iran, as well as improved Iranian regional and
international relations, and that it will constitute the
basis of a more stable and secure region in the longer
term. It is essential that this opportunity be seized by
all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, reached in Vienna and endorsed today
by the Security Council in resolution 2231 (2015), is an
important, and possibly historic, step towards ending
the decade-long conflict concerning Iran’s nuclear
programme. As such, it has the potential to ease
concerns regarding peace and security in the region and
beyond. Allow me briefly to address its significance
from three different angles.

20/07/2015

First, Germany firmly believes that the agreement
does in fact reduce the risk of a nuclear arms race.
After long and demanding negotiations, the E3+3 and
the European Union has achieved a credible framework
that will prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons.
Iran has committed itself to comprehensive technical
restrictions and an unprecedented transparency regime
that will allow us to rule out any covert nuclear
activities.
The agreement is not merely built on trust or
goodwill; we have established a unique and longterm set of confidence-building measures. Everything
we agreed on will be strictly monitored. A powerful
snap-back mechanism for sanctions will serve as an
additional incentive for Iran to abide by its obligations.
It will now be crucial to effectively implement the
agreement. The International Atomic Energy Agency
will have an important role in that regard. In exchange
for the nuclear restrictions, Iran will profit from early
and comprehensive sanctions relief. The resolution
adopted today is a decisive step in the right direction.
Secondly, the agreement also offers ample political
opportunities for Iran. It reflects a fundamental choice
by the Iranian Government. It is an expression of intent
to be a constructive part of the international community.
It is up to Iran to deliver on that commitment. We
express our hope that, in fulfilling the agreement, Iran
will seize this potential to bring about improvements in
other fields as well, from civil liberties to human rights
and the accommodation of regional security concerns.
Finally, we hope that the agreement reached in
Vienna will also have a positive effect on the relations
between Iran, the European Union and its member
States — and that it will improve Iran’s regional and
international relations. We also hope that it will open
the door to a more constructive Iranian foreign policy
and, ultimately, contribute to a more secure and stable
region.
The agreement reached in Vienna on 14 July has
proved that complex and long-standing conflicts can
be peacefully resolved if there is enough political will
and courage. It is a victory for diplomacy and for the
principles of the United Nations.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

16/16

15-22384
