S/PV.7704

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7704th meeting

Thursday, 2 June 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Minami
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Responding to human trafficking in situations of conflict-related sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361)
Letter dated 27 May 2016 from the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/496)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-15556 (E)
*1615556*

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): As this is the first
formal meeting of the Council for the month of June, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador
Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, Permanent Representative of
Egypt, for his service as President of the Council for the
month of May. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Aboulatta and his delegation for the great diplomatic
skill with which they conducted the Council’s business
last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Responding to human trafficking in situations
of conflict-related sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361)
Letter dated 27 May 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/496)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Estonia, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Portugal, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey and the United Arab
Emirates to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, especially in women and
children; and Ms. Lisa Davis, of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.
2/66

02/06/2016

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/361, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/496, which contains a letter dated
27 May 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
France to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept note on the item under
consideration.
I warmly welcome His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): It is a
pleasure for me to join the Security Council today for
this debate on sexual violence in conflict. All over the
world, we are witnessing an appalling number of acts
of sexual violence in wartime. No region can escape
this scourge, which continues to plague women, girls,
boys and men. However, an unprecedented political
momentum has made it possible to make clear progress
in the fight against such crimes. The international
community has finally broken the silence and taboo
surrounding the issue.
(spoke in English)
Sexual violence is widely recognized as a
deliberate strategy used to shred the fabric of society,
to control and intimidate communities and to force
people from their homes. It is rightly seen as a threat to
international peace and security, a serious violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and a major impediment to post-conflict reconciliation
and economic development. The Council has played a
significant role in ushering in this change, in particular
through several landmark resolutions that confirm
sexual violence as a war crime, a crime against
humanity and a constituent act of genocide. The
designation of 19 June as the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict is a further
sign of heightened engagement and commitment.
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

Over the past decade, I have sought to do whatever
I could to end sexual violence in conflict and to uphold
the rights of women and girls everywhere. I launched
my UNiTE Campaign to End Violence against Women
and created the post of Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. Through the work of my
Special Representative, the United Nations has agreed
frameworks of cooperation and joint communiqués with
Governments and regional bodies. The deployment of
women protection advisers to peacekeeping and political
missions has strengthened the monitoring, analysis
and reporting of conflict-related sexual violence and
engagement with parties to conflict, which are vital
steps towards accountability. The United Nations will
continue our own efforts to ensure that peacekeepers
uphold the highest standards of integrity towards the
people they serve.
Today, we and our partners are supporting
thousands of survivors whom we were not reaching
a decade ago, with practical measures ranging from
reporting hotlines to community-based care. Those
policies not only help survivors, they enable societies
to begin their own recovery.
International jurisprudence has also been developed
around sexual violence in conflict, leading to landmark
cases against political and military leaders. The
recent conviction of Jean-Pierre Bemba Gombo by the
International Criminal Court was the latest sign that
the era of impunity for sexual violence as a tool of war
is over.
The past decade has shown that progress is possible,
even in the most difficult and intractable situations.
However, we still face serious challenges. My latest
annual report (S/2016/361) covers 19 situations of
concern and lists dozens of parties that systematically
commit such crimes. One extremely disturbing aspect
is the use of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism.
Da’esh, Boko Haram and other extremist groups
are using sexual violence as a means of attracting
and retaining fighters, and to generate revenue. It is
estimated that the Yazidi community gave Da’esh
up to $45 million in ransom payments in 2014 alone.
Abducted women, men, girls and boys suffer the most
terrible trauma through brutal physical and sexual
assault, child and forced marriages and sexual slavery
on a massive scale. The abduction of more than 200
girls from Chibok, Nigeria, more than two years ago, is
one of the most horrific examples of the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of terrorism.

S/PV.7704

I call for the immediate release of all those taken
captive, and for care and support for those who return,
who can suffer from social isolation and depression.
Women and girls with children may need special
medical and psychosocial support, which must extend
to the children themselves, who can suffer complete
rejection. The shame and social stigma faced by those
women and children should be redirected towards the
brutal perpetrators of violence.
We must continue to speak up for the women, girls,
men and boys whose bodies for too long have been
considered the spoils of war. I look forward to a strong
and unified response from the Council to the concerns
raised in my report.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.
Ms. Bangura: I wish to thank the Government of
France for hosting this open debate and the Council
for the priority accorded to this issue. I am grateful to
the Secretary-General for his personal presence and
unwavering support. I appreciate also that Lisa Davis
of MADRE is able to join us today to give voice to civil
society, which is a moral compass for this mandate. I
am grateful that Maria Grazia Giammarinaro, Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, is also here.
As highlighted by the Secretary-General, in the
past decade we have witnessed a fundamental shift
in the way this issue is understood and addressed
as a peace and security concern, and there has been
unprecedented progress. Yet, even as we make gains,
new and critical challenges have emerged. Today, as
we deliberate here, women are being traded in an open
slave bazaar in Raqqa. Price lists exist to regulate their
sale, like livestock at a farmers’ market. A so-called
fatwa has been issued by Da’esh that codifies sexual
slavery, in attempt to justify sexual violence through
holy scriptures. Social media platforms are being
used to facilitate trade and trafficking — women and
children are offered in the same online forums as rifles
and rocket-propelled grenades.
“This one is young, beautiful and good in bed. I
need at least $7,500 for her. You won’t regret it.”
That is part of the message thread under a photograph
of a girl painted with bright red lipstick. She cannot be
older than 12 years of age. Eventually, the winning bid

16-155563/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

was $7,700, offered by a Libyan fighter of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant.
When I visited the Middle East last year, I met with
girls who had escaped captivity. Some of them told
me that they had been the objects of as many as eight
separate transactions during two years of captivity,
before finally escaping or being ransomed by their
families. But thousands more are missing — in Syria,
Iraq, Nigeria and elsewhere.
The report (S/2016/361) before the Security Council
today is the eighth dedicated account of conflict-related
sexual violence.
The report before the Council today (S/2016/361)
is the eighth dedicated account of conflict-related
sexual violence. Cumulatively, these reports build a
historic record for a crime that has long been omitted
from official accounts of war and peace. As the report
outlines in harrowing detail, we are confronting new
and previously unforeseen threats. Just as we make
inroads with national security forces, the problem of
sexual violence committed by non-State actors acquires
ever-more difficult and disturbing dimensions. Let
us consider the fact that of the 48 parties listed in
the annex of the Secretary-General’s report, 37 are
non-State armed actors. Yet, the instruments that we
have as a United Nations system are primarily to engage
Member States.
Therefore, new tools and approaches will be
required to enforce the compliance of these actors,
who often vary dramatically in character, composition,
motivations, capacity and modus oparandi. We face
both political and operational challenges in this regard,
but if we are to eradicate sexual violence in conflict,
this mandate must focus on the persistent perpetrators
and will require the support of the Security Council
to do so. At the same time, we must confront the new
reality that sexual violence today is used not only as a
tactic of war, but also as a tactic of terrorism.
Without exception, the first sign of rising violent
extremism has been the restriction of women’s rights.
Extremists know that to populate a territory and control
a population, one must first control the bodies of women.
Sexual violence is not merely incidental, but integral to
their ideology and strategic objectives. They are using
sexual violence as a means of advancing political,
military and economic ends. They have used rape and
forced marriage as part of the systems of punishment
and reward through which they consolidate power, and
4/66

02/06/2016

to build a so-called State cast in their own image and
beliefs. The same litany of horrors echoes across the
accounts of Nigerian girls who fled Boko Haram, the
tales of Somali women liberated from Al-Shabaab, and
the depictions of women’s lives in northern Mali under
the extremist group Ansar Eddine.
When we think of terrorism, we think of
the destruction of property, killing, bombing or
hostage-taking. But we cannot deplore the public
violence of terrorism while ignoring the violence
terrorists inflict on women and girls in private, behind
closed doors. We must also confront the reality that
after all they have endured in captivity, many victims of
Da’esh and Boko Haram face the additional heartbreak of
being shunned by their own communities if they return.
Sexual violence is still the only crime that stigmatizes
the victim rather than the perpetrator. We must not
only bring back our girls; we must bring them back to
an environment of support, equality and opportunity.
Social and economic reintegration is imperative and
must become a more integral part of our programmatic
response and post-conflict development frameworks.
The war of conquest of extremist groups is being
fought on — and fought over — the bodies of women
and girls, generating millions of dollars in revenue. This
is not just objectification; it is commodification. It is
the revival of the slave trade in our own times and lives.
The promise of access to wives and sex slaves is used to
attract recruits and serves as a form of compensation for
fighters. Each time a woman is traded, the transaction
generates a profit. It is part of the political economy of
terrorism, just like the sale of oil, antiquities or drugs.
If these groups are beyond the reach of judicial
deterrence, then we must focus on divesting them of
resources and degrading their capacity to communicate,
travel, trade and do harm. This must form a part of
our global, regional and national strategies to counter
terrorism and violent extremism. As the report notes,
“counter-terrorism strategies can no longer be
decoupled from efforts to protect and empower
women and girls and to combat conflict-related
sexual violence” (ibid, para. 1).
Through our sanctions infrastructure, we must raise
the cost of these crimes, because the human costs
defy calculation;
Through strategic communication, a counternarrative
must ring out loud, clear and consistent that the human,
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

sexual and reproductive rights of women and girls
are non-negotiable. Traditional and religious leaders
must use their moral authority to negate any attempt
to legitimize rape on religious grounds. Our response
must recognize and address the nexus of conflictrelated sexual violence with cross-border trafficking to
fund conflict and terrorism. Our normative framework,
including the resolutions of the Council, must keep
pace with the changing global security context and the
new dimension of sexual violence deployed as a tactic
of terrorism.
The report also sheds light on other emerging
concerns that are not yet adequately treated within the
ambit of the resolutions on sexual violence in conflict.
This includes the plight of children born of wartime
rape, who also live in shadow and shame. They are
often undocumented and stateless; indeed, there may
be thousands of such children living on the peripheries
of their communities, who are fertile ground for
radicalization and recruitment. Failure to recognize
these children, to nurture and protect them represents a
long-term threat to peace and security;
We have begun focusing more attention in the past
few years on sexual violence against men and boys,
which is a particular concern in the context of detention
and interrogation. But unfortunately, male survivors
are still a blind-spot in our monitoring, not to mention
service response;
The mass migration crisis has heightened the risk
of sexual violence, including in places of supposed
refuge. We understand more clearly than ever before the
acute vulnerability of refugees and internally displaced
persons not only within camps or settlements, but at
every stage of displacement, and how sexual violence
may be a significant push factor for displacement.
This year, in the case of Burundi, which appears
in the Secretary-General’s report for the first time, we
have received information of the targeting of women
and girls on the basis of actual or perceived political
affiliation or ethnic identity, with rape employed as a
tool of political repression by arms bearers, including
members of national security forces. Sexual crimes used
as part of the repertoire of violence during contested
elections or public demonstrations are a long-standing
concern of the Council, from Kenya in 2007 to Guinea
in 2009 and Côte D’Ivoire in 2011. It represents another
dimension of this agenda that will require continued
vigilance and tailored responses.

S/PV.7704

My emphasis since taking office has been
on fostering national ownership, leadership and
responsibility, which has required focused engagement
in the affected countries. The advances of a number
of national Governments that we support through our
Team of Experts are encouraging and show that this
is not a mission impossible. In the past two years,
we have gained a more intimate understanding of
how the resolutions of the Council can be turned into
solutions on the ground. At the same time, we also
have clearer sight of what is missing in the normative
framework of resolutions that are our conceptual and
operational guide.
That is why I ask the Council, on basis of the
report, to continue deliberations in the coming weeks
and to consider a new draft resolution that will give
us the tools for a comprehensive and multidimensional
response that takes into account the rapidly shifting
international peace and security landscape. I believe in
the unity of purpose of the Council to give us what is
needed to eradicate this crime once and for all.
The past decade has seen greater progress and
political momentum to end war-time rape than in the
rest of human history combined. I believe that we
are on the brink of converting a centuries-old culture
of impunity into a culture of accountability and
deterrence. But at this crucial juncture, we cannot
afford to be complacent or lose our focus; we must meet
the new challenges on the horizon and we must keep the
searchlight of international scrutiny on this historically
silenced crime. When survivors tell us that “our bodies
are worth less here than a dead rat”, it diminishes our
collective humanity.
Ultimately, all our words and laws and resolutions
will mean nothing if violations go unpunished in
practice and we are unable to increase the cost and
consequences for committing such crimes.
To the victims and perpetrators alike, I would
send a simple but unequivocal message — that justice
may be delayed, but it will not be denied, and that the
international community is steadfast and committed to
living up to its sacred duty to prevent these crimes and
care for survivors.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Bangura for her briefing and for her exemplary
commitment in combating sexual violence in conflict.
I now give the floor to Ms. Giammarinaro.

16-155565/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

Ms. Giammarinaro: It is a great honour for me
to be able to address the Security Council today. This
is the first time that my Office has been invited to
contribute to an open debate, and I thank the Council
profusely for that. I am encouraged to see that the
issue of trafficking in persons in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations continues to be addressed by
the Security Council, including through presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25, of December 2015, and
today’s open debate.
Since assuming the functions of my mandate
as Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, in August 2014, I
have identified the impact of conflict on trafficking in
persons for purposes of sexual, labour and other forms
of exploitation as an issue that warrants further research
and international attention. I will report on this issue to
the Human Rights Council in a few days.
Trafficking in persons — and this is the first message
I would like to convey to the Security Council — is
without a doubt underreported in the context of recent
conflicts. What is trafficking? Trafficking is actually
an umbrella concep that encompasses various forms
of exploitation, and exploitation is the essence
of trafficking.
Recent reports — such as those published by the
International Organization for Migration and Caritas
Internationalis, and other initiatives, such as the
Migrants in Countries in Crisis Initiative, led by the
United States and the Philippines, have shown that
trafficking in persons in conflict and crisis situations
is not a mere possibility or isolated incident; rather, it
happens on a regular basis as a consequence of conflict.
That is what suggests that we have to do better and we
have to do more.
Why is trafficking a consequence of conflict on
a regular basis? It is because conflict is accompanied
by a breakdown in public institutions and a collapse
of the rule of law. Existing vulnerabilities of minority
groups — for example, of women and children — become
more significant and new vulnerable groups emerge.
This is a situation in which traffickers and exploiters
can take advantage to enslave and exploit people.
Conflict-related violence, such as sexual violence, can
itself be a driver of forced internal displacement, which
in turn increases vulnerability to further exploitation,
including through trafficking.
6/66

02/06/2016

We must also deal with trafficking as a consequence
of a large influx of people fleeing conflict. We have
seen, for example, how many pregnant women are
crossing the Mediterranean Sea every day — and
they are pregnant as a consequence of rape and sexual
violence and exploitation borne in transit countries.
For the millions of people who are forced to flee their
countries because of armed conflict, the journey
of escape has become increasingly expensive and
hazardous. The Syrian conflict in particular is causing
a massive exodus that should be considered a global
humanitarian crisis. Unfortunately, we have to admit
that the European Union (EU), EU countries and the
international community at large have mostly failed
in addressing this crisis. The result is that hundreds of
people, including many children, have lost their lives
in the Mediterranean Sea and, as we speak, people
continue to be at risk of losing their lives.
We must also consider that, for those surviving their
perilous journey, there is a tangible risk of traffickingrelated exploitation. Throughout their journey and at
their destination, migrants, including refugees and
asylum seekers, who have sold all their possessions to
pay for their travel, are highly vulnerable to physical
violence, sexual assault, extortion and trafficking. For
such migrants, the clandestine nature of their journey,
the often unscrupulous and corrupt conduct of their
facilitators and collaborators and the extent to which
some States will go to prevent their departure, transit or
arrival all operate to create or exacerbate opportunities
for traffickers who prey on their precarious situation.
Therefore, even if they were not trafficked from the
very beginning of their journey, they can become
trafficked during the process. For instance, Rohingya
from Myanmar typically embark on maritime and
overland journeys, often via Thailand, to irregularly
reach Malaysia. Initially smuggled across borders,
some are subsequently trafficked to fishing boats and
palm oil plantations for labour exploitation, ending
up in bonded labour to repay the debts incurred from
the transport. Others are held captive and abused in
Malaysia until ransom is paid by their relatives.
The conclusion is clear: not all people fleeing
conflict are victims of trafficking in persons, from a
legal point of view at least. However, trafficking in
persons for the purpose of exploitation, even extreme
exploitation, be it sexual or labour or other forms of
exploitation, can occur any time. Recently, an egregious
pattern of abductions from their homes or schools of
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

women and girls who are subsequently forced to marry
and/or serve as sex slaves has been reported in conflictaffected settings. Those violations are perpetrated by
groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Boko Haram, but I will not comment on this
because the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral touched upon it.
Let me say a few words about peacekeeping
operations. Peacekeeping operations, unfortunately,
continue to be theatres for shameful incidents of sexual
violence and abuse, which undermine their vital role
in protecting communities, including women and
children, from the violence and exploitation that is
common in post-conflict situations. However, abuse
and exploitation by peacekeepers again has been
underreported when it amounts to trafficking, in
contrast to other conflicts occurring in the past, such
as the Balkan conflict. Again, we have to think that it is
imperative to better identify and detect cases of sexual
exploitation amounting to trafficking in this area.
Let me very briefly highlight some linkages
between trafficking and conflict or post-conflict
situations that are much less known or investigated.
For example, the trafficking of migrant workers into
conflict zones for the purpose of labour exploitation is
so far a completely hidden issue. While not all cases of
contracting and subcontracting involve trafficking for
labour exploitation, there have been cases where large
firms that hold the primary contract with States and
their militaries hire migrant workers through smaller
subcontractors or local employment agencies to perform
tasks, including cleaning, construction, cooking and
serving, and haircutting.
Often the conditions of trafficking for labour
exploitation also favour sexual violence and
exploitation. Out of the reach of workplace protections,
discrimination, harassment, unsafe conditions, and
the exploitation and abuse of women are common. In
such situations, women and girls are often subjected
simultaneously to labour and sexual exploitation .
Secondly, persons fleeing conflict could also be
vulnerable to trafficking for the purposes of organ
removal. Cases of that nature have been detected.
Thirdly, Syrian refugee women and girls are
trafficked for sexual exploitation through the practice
of temporary marriages, child marriage or forced
marriages. The girls and women concerned are
often forcibly married by their parents. Through

S/PV.7704

such marriages, they may be trafficked for forced
prostitution, and marriages with foreign men can also
lead to situations of forced prostitution and trafficking.
Fourthly, in the post-conflict climate, the
vulnerability of women and girls to trafficking-related
exploitation is heightened by their relative lack of access
to resources, education, documentation and so forth.
Fifthly, after fleeing conflict, children may be
compelled to work to sustain themselves and to support
their families. Iraqi and Syrian refugee children
in Lebanon, for example, work in textile factories,
in construction, in the food-service industry, in
agricultural labour or as street vendors. That is, of
course, not limited to Lebanon, which has generous
policies for accepting refugees from Syria. It is just
an example of the fact that children in such situations
can become primary breadwinners and therefore
particularly vulnerable to exploitation.
What can be done to address the issue of
trafficking? I have just a few comments. I also want to
touch upon issues related to peacekeeping because, of
course, Ms. Bangura elaborated on that. Let me just say
a few words concerning trafficking in persons for the
purpose of labour exploitation.
I think that the same level of attention and initiative
that has been devoted to sexual exploitation should be
attached to labour exploitation by the entire United
Nations system. In particular, State-contracting
agencies should exercise due diligence when employing
workers, including migrant workers. They should
employ workers directly whenever possible, ensure
that private individuals or the companies they have
contracted or subcontracted with protect the rights
of workers, including decent working and living
conditions, their right to return and their freedom of
assembly and association. They should also establish
a zero-tolerance policy for violations of those workers’
fundamental rights.
Last but certainly not least, the protection of people
during conflict and of people fleeing conflict is now
the top priority, Anti-trafficking measures should be
incorporated into all humanitarian interventions in
conflict zones. In particular, United Nations agencies
and programmes, and international and humanitarian
organizations should include the prevention of
trafficking in persons as part of their life-saving
protection activities from the outset of a conflict-crisis,
whether or not trafficking incidents have been detected.

16-155567/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

In reception centres for migrants, hot spots,
and centres for asylum seekers and refugees and
in administrative detention centres for migrants,
appropriate procedures should be established and carried
out by trained personnel, preferably in cooperation
with civil-society organizations, aimed at assessing
the grounds for international protection, the grounds
for child protection, the indications of trafficking
and the risks of trafficking and exploitation. Where
such indications have been found, tailored solutions
should be identified in every individual case, based on
international protection grounds or on other protection
grounds, including the granting of assistance, residence
permits and compensation for trafficked persons and
job opportunities for trafficking victims and people
at risk of trafficking and exploitation. In that context,
the protection of children is paramount. Children must
never be detained on immigration grounds, and a
durable solution must be identified on a case-by-case
basis in the best interests of the child.
I look forward to an open and fruitful debate.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Giammarinaro for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Davis.
Ms. Davis: I speak today on behalf of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, and in
my capacity as the Human Rights Advocacy Director
for MADRE, as well as a Working Group member.
Sexual violence and gender-based crimes are a
constant threat for many local women’s organizations
and activists working on the front lines of conflict,
while survivors of such violence face immense obstacles
impeding their access to life-saving services. Impunity
for those crimes remains the norm. All the while,
women are excluded from peace and reconciliation
processes and from the design of policies to counter
terrorism and prevent violent extremism.
While sexual and gender-based violence is prevalent
across conflicts today, it is not a new phenomenon. It
is part of broader structural violence that is rooted in
attacks on gender equality and women’s rights and
freedoms. Such oppressive gender narratives perpetuate
many different forms of violence. From Colombia
to Syria and Myanmar, many NGO Working Group
members have seen how conflict paves the way for a
wide range of abuses against women and girls. Today,
as the Security Council focuses on violent extremism,
8/66

02/06/2016

we will highlight a number of areas that need urgent
attention.
First, there is the humanitarian response. Member
States must fulfil their obligations to those fleeing
conflict-related violence. There is much talk today of
strengthening international collaboration on protection
strategies and accountability mechanisms. At the same
time, however, Member States have been closing their
borders to those fleeing violence. Such contradictory
actions cannot stand.
Women and girls face daily threats from both
combatants and non-combatants, including rape,
trafficking and other rights violations as they flee
conflict-related violence. They are at risk in displaced
persons camps and when leaving camps to conduct
essential livelihood activities. In many of those
settings, gender-based violence is also perpetrated
by intimate partners, family members and civilians,
including humanitarian-aid staff. Refugee women
and girls are often unable to access basic services,
including the full range of sexual and reproductive
health care, psychosocial support and access to justice.
The protection risks that women and girls face in
humanitarian crises are compounded by the shame and
stigma that accompany sexual violence. We urge donor
States to fund comprehensive and non-discriminatory
sexual and reproductive health care, including access to
safe abortion services in humanitarian settings and in
line with international humanitarian law.
Local women’s organizations must be supported
by the international community. Local women’s
organizations not only provide shelter for the most
vulnerable, but they also act as first responders,
offering much needed aid and peer-to-peer support
to survivors of trafficking and other forms of sexual
and gender-based violence. Member States should take
action on the recent commitments made at the recent
World Humanitarian Summit and take practical steps to
support new financing mechanisms for women and girls
as leaders and decision-makers, to reduce vulnerability,
including vulnerability to trafficking, to ensure access
to sexual and reproductive health care in crisis settings,
and to end impunity.
Secondly, there are threats against female human
rights defenders. All Governments, including those
on the Security Council, must condemn the increased
crackdowns on women human rights defenders
and women’s organizations. All national security
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

strategies, including those relating to preventing and
combating violent extremism, should be grounded in
a human rights framework and adhere to international
humanitarian law.
As members of the Working Group have reported
in numerous countries, speaking out about conflictrelated sexual violence is extremely dangerous,
especially in cases where State actors are implicated as
perpetrators. Local activists who speak up about rape
by security forces often face imprisonment, threats of
rape and deliberate efforts to tar their reputations. Often
impunity still reigns for those crimes. Under the guise
of countering violent extremism, Governments around
the world are invoking national security concerns to
justify the systematic harassment, arrest and detention
of women activists and providers. That securitized and
militarized framework also contributes to the shrinking
of civil society space.
The efforts of the international community to
address the threats of violent extremism cannot succeed
while women’s human rights defenders are under threat.
As our colleagues engaging in the dangerous work of
defending women’s rights know, the bitter irony is that
policymakers often speak to the importance of that work
while doing little to support it in practice. From Syria
to Afghanistan, Burundi and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, our brave colleagues continue to work
in conflict zones, facing death threats and sometimes
paying the ultimate price for their work.
Thirdly, with regard to justice and accountability,
documentation of combatant violence committed
against all marginalized persons must be supported.
For example, in Iraq and Syria local and international
groups are documenting human rights abuses committed
against women, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex (LGBTI) persons, and other minorities that
defy gender stereotypes. Those issues were raised last
year when the Security Council held the first-ever Arria
Formula meeting to address LGBTI rights. When such
violations in conflict are not exposed, history teaches
that they are often left out of the human rights discourse
and transitional justice processes. The Council should
support those documentation efforts and ensure that
crimes committed against all marginalized persons
in conflict are accounted for in tribunals and other
transitional justice processes.
The international community has a range of options
to support access to justice at the local, national, and

S/PV.7704

international levels. The recent landmark conviction of
former Chadian President Hissène Habré is a reminder
that while the wheels of justice turn slowly, they
do turn, and it is possible to achieve accountability
for crimes that include rape and sexual slavery. The
Security Council and other Member States should
expand political and financial support to accountability
efforts, including through referrals to the International
Criminal Court and ensuring that those with arrest
warrants against them face trial in The Hague.
Fourthly, turning to the Security Council and
peacekeeping, the Council must dramatically improve
its daily implementation of women, peace and security
obligations. It must better link protection efforts with
women’s participation and rights, and call on mission
staff to hold regular consultations with women’s local
civil society organizations and with women and girls
in displacement settings. Addressing and preventing
sexual violence in conflict also requires taking steps to
improve peacekeeping and prevent sexual exploitation
and abuse, including through better vetting and
accountability measures for peacekeepers. Moreover,
the Security Council should ensure adequate protection
mechanisms for the courageous whistleblowers who
bring those crimes forward.
The Council must ensure that it prioritizes and
promotes women’s rights and participation through its
work. The Council has made numerous commitments to
those necessary steps, including in recent resolutions.
It is time to implement those existing commitments.
While formal peace negotiations must be transparent
and inclusive of local women peacemakers, their work
must also be supported in the long term. Peace talks
must not merely tick the gender-representation box, but
instead meaningfully and holistically include women
and civil society.
Finally, with regard to the necessary steps on
prevention, we cannot emphasize enough the urgent
need to curb the flow of guns and other weapons,
which exacerbate levels of sexual and gender-based
violence. The Security Council must confront that
issue, including by encouraging States to ratify the
Arms Trade Treaty and establish enforceable national
and regional regulations on small arms, consistent with
general recommendation No. 30 of the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
Prevention efforts must also address the role of
governmental and non-governmental actors alike in

16-155569/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

facilitating trafficking, including the role of military
bases as trafficking hubs.
In conclusion, The horrific sexual violence
perpetrated by State actors, militias and extremists does
not take place in a vacuum. It is part of a continuum
of violence across societies, in which women’s rights
are degraded and gender inequality is the norm. Armed
conflict magnifies those problems. Comprehensively
addressing the rights and humanitarian needs of
women and girls fleeing conflict requires addressing
those pre-existing inequalities. This contextual
analysis sheds light on sustainable solutions to longstanding human rights violations that are exacerbated
by conflict. As we face multiple crises and conflicts
today, this approach to social change will help us, as
an international community, weave solutions out of
uncertainty and build a more equitable foundation for
the future.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Davis
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for chairing and having organized this open
debate and included the perspectives of civil society in
our discussion. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and leadership on this critical issue, and
Special Representative Bangura, Special Rapporteur
Giammarinaro and Ms. Davis for their briefings.
The Council has long recognized that sexual and
gender-based violence not only abuses and violates
the human rights of its victims, but also undermines
the security, livelihood and health of nations by
suppressing survivors’ participation in civic, social,
political and economic life. We have put in many
place many tools for countering conflict-related sexual
violence inflicted by State and non-State armed groups,
improving accountability, bringing perpetrators to
justice, documenting violations against marginalized
groups of victims, including women and girls, men and
boys, ethnic and religious minorities; and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender and intersex individuals. But we
must do a better job making use of these tools.
We commend Special Representative Bangura
for her energetic efforts to translate the Council’s
resolutions into real, on-the-ground action. Her work
with the national militaries of the Democratic Republic
10/66

02/06/2016

of the Congo and armed groups on both sides of the
conflict in South Sudan to help develop structures to
hold perpetrators accountable for their actions has been
particularly noteworthy. We also applaud her efforts to
support the investigation of the 2009 stadium massacre
in Guinea. In addition to the Special Representative’s
efforts, we value the work carried out by the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, which has assisted countries in the areas
investigations and prosecutions, strengthening legal
frameworks and ensuring the protection of victims and
witnesses. However, significant challenges remain in
countering sexual violence in conflict, especially when
it comes to holding non-State armed groups and their
partners and associates accountable for their crimes.
In resolution 2242 (2015), the Council recognized
the nexus of sexual violence, terrorism and violent
extremism, which can be conducive to terrorism. We
have seen steady growth in the use of sexual violence
against women, men, girls and boys by terrorists not
only in Iraq and Syria, but also in Somalia, Nigeria and
Mali. Non-State armed groups like the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) use sexual violence in a
premeditated and systemic way to recruit fighters, raise
money and intimidate and demoralize communities in
order to consolidate their hold over territory. Resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015) not only strongly condemn
such acts by ISIL, Al-Qaida and their associates, but
also work to strengthen accountability by encouraging
all State and non-State actors with evidence to bring
it to the attention of the Council. The Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida,
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities represents a vital tool for us to punish
perpetrators, since any individual who makes funds
or other financial and economic resources available
to ISIL and other terrorist groups, in connection with
sexual violence, is eligible for designation in the 1267
sanctions regime. We must make full use of those tools.
As noted by Special Rapporteur Giammarinaro, we
also need to more to protect displaced women and girls
whose heightened vulnerability puts them at increased
risk of sexual violence and trafficking. Over the past
year, we have seen the continuation of mass migration
from Syria, Iraq and the Horn of Africa. Reports of
smugglers demanding sex as payment of passage are
rampant and part of a global surge in human trafficking.
With regard to Ms. Davis’ intervention, that is why last
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

month at the World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul,
the United States announced an additional $10 million
contribution to the Safe from the Start initiative to
prevent and respond to gender-based violence in
emergency situations.
The United States urges all Member States to
condemn such crimes and those who commit them, to
properly document such horrors so that one day those
responsible can be held accountable, to commit to ending
the conflicts that provide an ideal climate for human
traffickers, and to commit to eradicating the groups
that use human trafficking and conflict-related sexual
violence as a weapon of war. Member States must also
work to ensure that labour practices, such as charging
workers recruitment fees that can lead to debt bondage,
do not contribute to human trafficking. We must teach
people how to actually see the victims of trafficking.
We must also make our resources for victims more
victim- and survivor-centred, incorporating victims
and survivors into policy-making process so as to yield
better solutions.
A further challenge is the lack of global
documentation of the phenomenon of sexual and genderbased violence against all vulnerable communities,
including those that are too often forgotten in this
discourse, namely lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
individuals, as well as men and boys. Those individuals
are not only at a heightened risk of facing harassment,
abuse and sexual violence committed by armed groups
as a result of discriminatory social norms and attitudes,
but they also face a strong stigma against reporting
such abuses. We commend the Secretary-General for
highlighting the victimization of men and boys in his
report (S/2016/361).
The United Nations and Member States must more
fully embrace a general inclusive approach in sexual
violence and gender-based violence programming.
There is scant documentation on the subject, with little
understanding of the prevailing patterns and the severity
of conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence
against males, as compared to sexual and gender-based
violence against girls and women. In addition, the
absence of targeted services for male victims not only
fails to address the needs of boys and men, but could
also contribute to the problem of underreporting.
Bilateral efforts to counter conflict-related
sexual violence and to improve accountability and
documentation are also crucial. In 2014, the United

S/PV.7704

States launched the Accountability Initiative to
support the development of specialized justice-sector
mechanisms to improve access to justice for survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence. We remain
committed to strengthening efforts to protect all people
from harm, exploitation, discrimination, abuse, genderbased violence and trafficking. We must, as all of the
speakers have noted, hold perpetrators accountable,
especially in conflict-affected environments.
The United States has also committed nearly
$40 million for support to victims of sexual violence in
conflict, including in Nigeria, where the United States
supports United Nations agencies, community groups
and local non-governmental organizations that provide
health-care services, including appropriate psychosocial
counselling for women and children who have survived
Boko Haram’s horrific campaign. However, we
recognize that support programmes are not enough.
In order to combat sexual violence in conflict, women
must have a seat at the table in resolving conflicts.
Empowered women provide powerful antidotes to
violent extremism and have critical contributions
to make at every level of our struggle against sexual
violence in conflict.
We also need women in uniform to rebuild trust
between law enforcement and communities, female
correction officers and female counsellors to reach out
to female inmates who are on the path to radicalization,
and women legislators to support more inclusive public
policies that address the unique grievances that drive
individuals to terrorism. As Secretary of State Kerry
has said, fighting the scourge of sexual violence
requires all of those tools, including Security Council
resolutions, better reporting and support to survivors.
It especially requires holding criminals accountable
and ending impunity. Instead of shaming the survivors,
we must punish the perpetrators, and we must be ready
to support and empower the survivors as they work to
rebuild their lives.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in French):
I thank the French presidency for organizing this open
debate on the theme “Women and peace and security:
Responding to human trafficking in situations of
conflict-related sexual violence”. Sir, you can rest
assured that the French presidency will have the full
cooperation of the Spanish delegation. We also thank
the Egyptian presidency for the work undertaken, and I
also thank today’s panellists for their briefings.

16-1555611/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

(spoke in Spanish)
Almost 10 years ago, in 2008, we adopted
resolution 1820 (2008). which has, in my view, the
great merit of being the first resolution in which the
Security Council examined exclusively the tragic
problem of sexual violence in armed conflict. In that
resolution, the Security Council concluded that sexual
violence could be avoided if we establish appropriate
prevention mechanisms, as well as mechanisms of
condemnation, suppression and sanctions. We are now
getting close to the tenth anniversary of resolution 1820
(2008) and, unfortunately, during the time since 2008,
sexual violence in armed conflict has increased. It has
increased in a very disturbing fashion.
What does that mean? It means that the Security
Council has to do quite a bit more, and we members are
those responsible for the actions of the Security Council.
I believe that we have the support of all members of the
Security Council in the commitment to strengthen the
fight against sexual violence. The best example of that
commitment can be seen in the Chamber today. I believe
that we have a very large number of non-members of
the Security Council that are following the debate. That
demonstrate’s the larger membership’s commitment to
the problem under discussion, which is one of the great
plagues of humanity.
As sexual violence has increased in recent years,
my statement will focus on proposing five specific
measures that I believe could strengthen the mechanisms
of the condemnation, prevention and sanctioning of
sexual violence in armed conflict. The first proposal
refers to the very valuable Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, with whom I have always been in very
close contact. She has explained to me on more than one
occasion that, with regard to the 48 parties to conflict
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361), there is a
very important piece of information about those entities,
namely, that of those 48 parties, only five are States.
All of the others are non-State actors, of which seven
are terrorist groups. That means that the nature of the
sexual violence in conflict has clearly changed, in that
we now have new actors — the non-State actors. That
is why Spain’s first proposal would be to strengthen the
mandate of the Special Representative. Let us think, as
members of the Security Council, about how we can
ensure that the Special Representative could have more
12/66

02/06/2016

effective instruments to fight against sexual violence in
conflict, with particular reference to non-State actors.
The second proposal is of a more cross-cutting
nature. Perhaps it affects the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, especially in women and
children, more. I believe that we have all read the
media reports about the $35 to $45 million that Da’esh
obtained for the release of 200 Yazidi women. I believe
that it is important for the international community to
establish cooperation mechanisms, so that the fight
against trafficking in situations of sexual violence
in armed conflict could be prevented better and be
sanctioned. I believe that we have to think about
integrating trafficking into all of our judicial and police
cooperation mechanisms, both internationally and
regionally. I accord a great deal of importance to the
regional level. In the context of judicial cooperation,
a key actor on which we have to count is INTERPOL,
which perhaps should strengthen its mechanisms for
combating trafficking.
The third proposal is directed primarily to the
members of the Security Council, and the Ambassador
of the United States made reference to this. The
Council has at its disposal a set of very important
tools, particularly the sanctions committees. The
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities could
have something important to say about certain very
specific situations. For example, in situations of human
trafficking involving women and girls, it is obvious that
qualified professionals are involved in administering
hormones to and sterilizing women who are then
trafficked. I propose that persons who commit this type
of crime be subject to sanctions by the corresponding
sanctions committee, in particular the 1267 Committee.
My fourth proposal refers to women protection
advisers in all United Nations missions. We all know
that not all peacekeeping missions have women
protection advisers. In some cases, which is even more
serious, when there are women protection advisers,
those positions are funded by voluntary contributions.
Here the Security Council and in particular all of the
penholders have a very special responsibility: to ensure
that when the mandates of peacekeeping operations
are extended, we specify the need for the inclusion of
women protection advisers in each and every one of
them; ideally, they would be financed by the regular
budget of the Organization.
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

Lastly, the fifth measure refers to impunity, but I
would say that it refers even more to the victims, to
the tragedy of the victims of sexual violence whose
chilling accounts we often have the privilege of hearing
in this Chamber.
I would note two very concrete measures. First,
although we have recognized that sexual violence is
used as a tactic of terrorism, why can we not recognize
as well the fact that the victims of sexual violence are
victims of terrorism and, as a result, should benefit
from the same level of protection and attention as
the victims of terrorism, at both the international and
national levels.
The second proposal is of a more cross-cutting
nature, involving awareness-raising in all areas,
in particular when it comes to religious leaders, to
incorporate the fight against sexual violence into
initiatives of interreligious dialogue, such as KAICIID
or the Alliance of Civilizations.
I believe that we have time; I hope that when the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1820 (2008) comes
along, we will be able to say that we responded in
time to reverse the trend of sexual violence in armed
conflict, and that the situation in 2018 will be better
than it is today, thanks to the initiative of the French
presidency of convening this debate, which could not
be more timely.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open debate early on in the
French presidency of the Security Council focusing on
the crime of human trafficking, which is intrinsically
linked to sexual violence, particularly that perpetrated
by terrorists and armed groups.
I should like also to thank the Secretary-General
and Ms. Zainab Bangura for their briefings on the annual
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361).
This year’s report has particular importance, as it is
the first report to be issued following the adoption by
the Security Council of resolution 2242 (2015), which
recognizes sexual violence as a tactic of war and terror,
as well as the inseparability of the strategies for dispute
settlement and the combat against terrorism from
efforts to protect and empower women and girls and
combat sexual violence in armed conflict.
Today’s meeting also has particular importance
because of the inaugural commemoration by the

S/PV.7704

General Assembly on 19 June of the International Day
for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Egypt co-sponsored resolution 2242 (2015) on the
basis of its conviction that the settlement of disputes
cannot be separated from efforts to protect and
empower women and girls and eliminate conflictrelated sexual violence. I would like in this context the
stress the following.
Egypt has supported the efforts made to include
women at all levels of efforts to achieve peace and
security since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the agenda on women and peace and security. This
is reflected in the many efforts made at the national
and regional levels. The national women’s council of
Egypt developed a national policy to follow up the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000); Egypt is one of 17 African States that have
developed similar national plans. Egypt, in the 15 years
since the adoption of the resolution, has organized a
number of relevant activities, including two regional
workshops in cooperation with the United Nations and
the League of Arab States.
Egypt also attaches particular importance to issues
related to training and capacity-building. The Cairo
regional training centre has held seven workshops,
two of them to train the trainers, as well as a workshop
dedicated to training personnel and exchanging
experiences on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) from 2013 to 2015. This will be complemented
by the convening of five additional training courses
in the same field until June 2016. We stress our
commitment to the initiative of the Secretary-General
not to be lenient with regard to sexual crimes, and we
will continue to cooperate with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Security Council to
eliminate all forms of violence against women in the
context of peacekeeping operations.
Egypt stresses the importance of limiting the
report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related
sexual violence to the nature and the mandate given
it under the Security Council resolutions establishing
this mandate. It was noted this year that the report of
the Secretary-General focuses on issues that are outside
the context of these mandates. In the same context,
Egypt believes it important for future reports of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
to focus only on conflict-affected regions and not
touch upon controversial ideas that are not agreed on

16-1555613/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

internationally, so that we can implement the letter and
the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000).
Egypt attaches great importance to unity of purpose
and believes that we should not touch upon issues that
would fragment our focus on core issues related to
sexual violence in armed conflict. Egypt believes that
this issue should be included in every United Nations
mandate. In that regard, we must provide human and
material resources for the implementation of such
mandates. Egypt appreciates the role played by the
Peacebuilding Fund in promoting programmes on
women’s empowerment.
We believe that it is extremely important to discuss
the women and peace and security agenda from the
perspective of women under foreign occupation, in
particular with regard to the status of Palestinian women.
Egypt emphasizes the importance of States raising
awareness of sexual violence as a tactic of terror and
to recognize officially that victims of sexual violence
are victims of terrorism, so that we can develop
counter-narratives and strategies against terrorism and
compensate victims. We must not forget the important
and vital role played by religious leaders in turning the
stigma endured by victims against perpetrators in order
to ensure that terrorism and extremism do not have the
upper hand in the intellectual battle, including attempts
by extremists to justify rape via religion.
With regard to human trafficking, I would
like to note the conclusions drawn by the Special
Representative today. Egypt was among the first States
to join the Belarus initiative of the Group of Friends
United against Human Trafficking. Egypt also supports
the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons, including the meeting to be held in October
2017. Various reports and studies have also shown that
there is a very close link between human trafficking
and terrorism. Egypt therefore calls for concerted
international efforts in support of the Plan of Action
and the valuable efforts made by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to ensure that the actions of
the various United Nations bodies will not be duplicated
or fragmentary.
In conclusion, Egypt expresses its full commitment
to the development and implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda during its membership of
the Security Council. Egypt looks forward to continued
cooperation and full coordination with Ms. Bangura
and her Office on various issues under her mandate.
14/66

02/06/2016

I would be remiss if I were to fail to thank you,
Mr. President, for your kind words to the Egyptian
presidency of the Council. In return, I wish you
Godspeed and success during your own presidency.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank the French presidency for its initiative
in holding today’s open debate. I also thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Special Representative Bangura
and Special Rapporteur Giammarinaro for their
briefings. I also express my thanks for the briefing by
the representative of civil society.
Local conflicts are currently ongoing. Conflictrelated sexual violence, including trafficking in
persons, especially in women and girls, is a very serious
matter. Parties to conflicts are using such activities as
trafficking in persons to raise funds and are utilizing
sexual violence as a weapon of war. Vulnerable groups,
such as women and girls, have become victims and
bear the brunt. As victims, their lives, security, health
and dignity are seriously threatened. China strongly
condemns and resolutely opposes all forms of conflictrelated sexual violence, including trafficking in
persons, especially in women and girls. We support
the international community’s adoption of a zerotolerance policy and its effective implementation of
S/PRST/2015/25, which comprehensively addresses
trafficking in persons, especially in women and girls
in armed conflict. China would like to highlight the
following points.
First, there is a need to put an end to wars and
conflicts as soon as possible in order to achieve peace
and development in conflict areas. That would serve
to eradicate the phenomenon of conflict-related sexual
violence, including trafficking in persons, especially
in women and girls, at its roots. The parties concerned
should adhere to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations by engaging in dialogue
and consultation to settle their disputes peaceably. The
international community should attach importance
to economic reconstruction and development in postconflict countries, facilitate the empowerment of
women and comprehensively raise the status of women
by allowing women to become the masters of their own
destinies and serve as a significant force in promoting
the development of their countries.
Secondly, we must scale up efforts to fight the
forces of terrorism and violent extremism. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and other terrorist
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

organizations take advantage of local conflicts to raise
funds by trafficking in women and girls and engaging
in sexual slavery and exploitation, as well as using
sexual violence as a weapon of war. That is very cruel.
Any and all acts of terrorism — wherever, whenever, by
whosoever committed and for whatever motives — are
unforgivable crimes. The international community
should effectively implement political commitments,
adhere to a uniform standard, resolutely counter
all forms of terrorism and strengthen international
coordination on counter-terrorism.
Thirdly, there is a need to fully respect the sovereignty
of the affected countries and leverage the leading role of
such countries. They are the main parties responsible for
protecting their nationals. They must bear the primary
responsibility for protecting women and girls and
countering trafficking in persons, especially in women
and girls. The international community should support
the countries affected in adopting countermeasures in
the light of their particular conditions and effectively
counter trafficking in persons, in particular in women
and girls. Against the backdrop of the needs of the
countries affected, the international community should
also provide them with assistance, in terms of financial,
human and technical resources, as well as strengthen
their capacity-building in combating trafficking in
women and girls in conflicts, so as to enable the victims
to access social and medical assistance.
Fourthly, there is a need to bolster international
cooperation in countering trafficking in persons,
especially in women and girls. At present, trafficking
in women and girls has generated a chain of interests
involving countries of origin, transit and destination. It
is only through close coordination and full cooperation
among the relevant countries and international
organizations that we can hope to really break that
chain of interests and effectively crack down on this
transnational crime. At the same time, trafficking in
persons, especially in women and girls, in conflict
areas touches on several elements, including the
empowerment of women, child protection, education,
employment and health. The relevant countries and
international organizations should extend a helping hand
and provide assistance, both material and financial. The
World Trade Organization, UN-Women and UNICEF,
as well as other organizations, should provide victims
with medical, legal and psychosocial assistance to help
them to better reintegrate into society.

S/PV.7704

Protecting women’s rights and promoting gender
equality constitute the concrete embodiment of progress
in human society and civilization. China attaches great
importance to the protection of women’s rights. Last
September, China and UN-Women jointly sponsored
the Global Summit on Women. The international
community reaffirmed the solemn commitment to the
Beijing Declaration and Programme of Action. While
implementing the outcome of the Global Summit
on Women, China stands ready to continue to work
with the international community in jointly fostering
an international environment of peace, security and
stability, effectively protecting the rights and interests
of women and girls and eradicating conflict-related
sexual violence, including trafficking in persons,
especially in women and girls.
Mr. Minami (Japan): To begin, I would like to
express my gratitude to the President for convening
this important meeting. I also directly extend my
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General;
his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Bangura; the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, Ms. Giammarinaro; Ms. Davis for their very
informative briefings.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/361), which is very strong and comprehensive.
The most significant element of the report is that it
brings to light new dimensions of sexual violence
employed as a tactic of terrorism by extremist groups
to advance their core objectives.
We find it useful, therefore, that the French
presidency has decided to focus on the nexus between
trafficking in persons and conflict-related sexual
violence, as trafficking in persons for sexual purposes
is being used more and more systematically by such
groups as a tool for recruitment, fundraising and other
strategic objectives. These atrocities not only defame
humanitarian values and violate human rights law and
norms, but also pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. Now is the time for the Security
Council to reflect on how to counter them and what
tools are at our disposal.
In this regard, the Security Council debate of
December 2015 (see S/PV.7585) was a historic occasion,
in that trafficking in persons was discussed for the first
time among the Council members, and it led to the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25. We

16-1555615/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

commend the efforts of the United States to initiate this
process, and fully support the statement. We hope that
the Council continues to deal with this agenda.
Today, I would like to touch upon two points:
first, building up national and international normative
frameworks; and secondly addressing the issue of
non-State actors.
On the first point, it is essential to support
and strengthen national ownership, leadership and
responsibility to counter sexual violence. In this regard,
the reform of national military, police and judiciary
sectors should be emphasized to enforce their capacities
to prosecute and punish perpetrators. We strongly
support the critical work of the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which
Japan continues to assist as its top donor. We value the
tangible outcomes of their activities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other countries.
In the international arena, the Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children are the most important
and universal normative frameworks. We must also not
forget the role of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. Additionally, the International Criminal
Court (ICC) can serve as a tool to hold perpetrators
accountable, while at the same time providing the
victims with psychological and physical support through
its Trust Fund for Victims, to which Japan makes both
personnel and financial contributions. Achieving the
universality of the ICC is necessary to put an end to
impunity and to alleviate the suffering of victims.
Touching upon my second point, we face the cruel
reality that, out of 49 criminal parties named in the
Secretary-General’s report, the majority is comprised of
non-State actors. We therefore cannot put off addressing
the fundamental question of how to bring such parties to
comply with international norms, including subsequent
Security Council resolutions. On this point, we find a
ray of hope in the work of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Bangura, who has achieved
a breakthrough in the strenuous negotiations with
non-State actors in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan and other countries. This is an
important step towards finally making progress against
these challenges. In order to make effective use of these
tangible outcomes in the future, the Security Council
should give its utmost support to the mandate of the
16/66

02/06/2016

Office of Special Representative Bangura, including
through increased technical and financial assistance.
The era of silence should be replaced by
international recognition and concrete actions to turn
resolutions into solutions on the ground. Japan stands
ready to work actively towards this cause together with
the United Nations bodies and other Member States.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on having
assumed the presidency of the Council and to offer you
the full cooperation of the delegation of Uruguay in
your work.
(spoke in Spanish)
I also thank the delegation of Egypt once again, led
by Ambassador Amr Aboulatta and his team, for their
work last month.
I further wish to thank you, Sir, for convening this
debate and for the concept note before us (S/2016/496,
annex). It is very opportune that this meeting should
take place this month, almost a year since 19 June was
designated as the International Day for the Elimination
of Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing, his efforts in this field and his zero-tolerance
policy, which is important to us all, especially those
who have made zero tolerance a key element in our
participation in peacekeeping missions. We recognize
the important and heartfelt briefings made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura; the
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarino;
and the representative of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, Ms. Lisa Davis.
One of the direct consequences of the proliferation
of armed conflicts of various kinds is the existence
of more than 60 million refugees and internally
displaced persons around the world. Equally alarming
is the growing presence and activities of terrorist
organizations. In that context, we are concerned by the
increase in and growing use of violence against civilians
in armed conflict, which are violations of their most
basic human rights. My country condemns all forms
of sexual exploitation and abuse, and believes that
sexual or gender-based violence should be seen not as a
cultural condition or characteristic of any one country,
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

but rather as a form of repression and objectionable and
unacceptable suppression.
Sexual violence in the form of sexual slavery
and forced prostitution, pregnancies, abortions and
marriages is aimed not only at violating and attacking
its victims, but also — and despite the progress that
has been made in international human rights law — at
stigmatizing human beings, with consequences not only
for individual victims but also for their families, selfesteem and personal development. Similarly, victims
of sexual violence may frequently be doubly affected
since, being products of such abuse, their sexual and
reproductive health suffers irreperable damage.
In that context, Uruguay wishes to touch on the
link between sexual violence and the maintenance and
financing of terrorist organizations, which use women
and girls as rewards or incentives to attract and recruit
men and boys, thereby influencing their decision to
join such organizations. Uruguay welcomes the report
(S/2016/361) of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence, in which he carries out an
exhaustive analysis of this scourge and gives special
attention to a growing and alarming trend of acts of
sexual violence committed by terrorist groups, such
as Da’esh, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and Al-Qaida,
among others.
Very few weapons have the destructive capacity
and such devastating effects on the social fabric as
sexual violence. Women are repositories of values and
traditions of their communities and they convey ethnic
and cultural identity through their persons. That results
in their being frequent victims and selective targets of
these crimes committed as war tactics. Such crimes are
often committed by terrorist groups in their effort to
perpetuate themselves and to transmit their ideology to
a new generation.
Uruguay reiterates its firm condemnation of
all forms of trafficking in persons and vigorously
rejects this practice, through which women and girls
are trafficked mainly for sexual purposes, while
terrorist organizations obtain significant sources of
income, which allows them to continue to foster hatred
and violence.
Equally alarming is the reference by the SecretaryGeneral in his recent report to the use by the Islamic
State of medical personnel to administer treatments
that are harmful to women to accelerate their physical
maturation in order to expedite their sale. Given this

S/PV.7704

reality, we believe that the international community has
the duty and moral obligation to take urgent action to put
an end to these deplorable acts. Uruguay also condemns
the actions carried out by extremist organizations
against people who have suffered physical and sexual
violence, in particular minorities including lesbians,
gays, bisexuals, transgender and intersex people as a
result of their real or alleged sexual orientation.
Uruguay understands that fighting sexual
violence in armed conflict must be a collective effort.
Governments must act on the front line, but the
seriousness of this crime and its serious and persistent
consequences make it necessary to obtain the support
of the international community in order to be able to
address it.
Every day, about 500 women who are pregnant and/
or with small children die. Most of them are in countries
affected by conflict or natural disasters. Similarly, such
situations expose them to a growing number of diseases
owing to a lack of health care. We therefore emphasize
the importance of ensuring the sexual and reproductive
rights of women in conflict situations, bearing in mind
the fact that all women have the right to freely decide
when and how many children they wish to have and the
fact that this decision must be respected in every setting
in which it arises. That is why Uruguay supported,
in the framework of World Humanitarian Summit,
the joint statement on sexual and reproductive health
in emergency situations. Furthermore, we believe it
is necessary to underscore the greater vulnerability
to trafficking and sexual violence of girls born in
such contexts.
In considering the critical situations that victims
find themselves in and the lack of trust in legal systems,
Uruguay stresses the importance of discretion and trust
for the people in charge of protecting them. In that
connection, we must work with actors in the field to
ensure the validation of processes that should be carried
out immediately once the action has taken place. The
creation of a joint work chain of local public institutions,
humanitarian assistance and civil society organizations
and local and international non-governmental
organizations, together with peacekeepers, is the only
way to achieve the physical and emotional recovery of
victims of sexual violence, their reintegration in society
without stigmatization and the orderly and appropriate
compilation of data that could be crucial to identify
the perpetrators. We also think it is crucial that people

16-1555617/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

who have suffered sexual violence immediately receive
comprehensive treatment.
Sexual violence is a serious threat to international
peace and security. The Security Council must use
the tools at its disposal to tackle this crime. Uruguay
believes peacekeeping operations are an important
tool for the United Nations in preventing and tackling
sexual violence. In that regard, we underscore the
deterrent effect that peacekeeping operations could
have through their visible presence and monitoring,
the consultations they could carry out among different
segments of society, in particular with women, in order
to compile information and encourage reporting, the
establishment of trust at the community level and their
cooperation with the host State in order to strengthen
gender-sensitive security and justice.
For example, Uruguay participates in the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with approximately
1,000 troops, who fulfil civilian protection tasks and
make use of joint protection teams to monitor and
address human rights violations. Those peacekeepers
collaborate with civil groups that provide support for
different aspects, including the supply of water and
food and medical attention. They also carry out patrols
to prevent and avoid violations of the rights of women
and girls in remote situations and locations.
Greater inclusion of women in peacekeeping
missions is also appropriate, as they possess a greater
sensitivity to these facts and significantly generate trust.
Their important participation in the search for peace
increases the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance,
credibility in peacekeeping, economic recovery
in post-conflict situations and the sustainability
of peace agreements.
However, that acknowledgement of the contribution
that peacekeeping missions can make when it comes
to preventing and responding to situations of sexual
violence also makes us think again about the seriousness
of sexual violence when it is committed by the forces
who make up these missions against those who they are
called upon to protect. The use of sexual and genderbased violence by personnel deployed in peacekeeping
missions is worrying. Given this situation, Uruguay
reiterates its commitment to the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy and its willingness to continue
ensuring that those who carry out acts of sexual
violence be held accountable for them.
18/66

02/06/2016

Another measure the Council can take to counter
sexual violence would be to include this issue in the
work carried out by the Security Council sanctions
committees. Uruguay also understands that it is
critical is to guarantee punishment for those who are
responsible for committing this type of crime. There
is a deep-rooted culture of impunity when it comes to
these crimes, which means that only a few cases are
brought to justice. Rape and other forms of sexual
abuse in the context of armed conflict are banned by
international humanitarian law and clearly violate the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.
The perpetrators thereof must be brought to justice.
The Rome Statute of 1998 includes sexual violence
against women and children within the category of
crimes against humanity and war crimes, as well as the
possibility that it could constitute a crime of genocide.
Crimes of this magnitude must not go unpunished.
My country urges the Council to refer such cases to the
International Criminal Court, in the framework of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court, which in our
opinion must be strengthened and improved. So long as
there is no mandatory jurisdiction to which perpetrators
are subjected, these acts will continue to go unpunished
and will increase under the protection afforded by
impunity. We underscore the importance of renewing
our commitment to fighting sexual exploitation and
abuse, the trafficking in persons and the establishment
of effective international legal processes. We think it
is crucial to mobilize additional financial resources
leading to the adoption of programmes that can respond
to the needs of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse
and that promote cross-cutting gender equity.
It is increasingly clear that, given the serious
upheaval that these crimes create for international law
and world peace, the international community must
be committed to adopting measures and must identify
actions for victims in favour of justice. Otherwise, the
story of the development of conflicts will continue to
be one of the loss of lives, attacks against civilians,
destruction, and social and economic violence. But
sexual violence in times of war tends to be an invisible
crime. The time has come to break the silence and
to bring an end to such objectionable acts, which are
particularly harmful to the freedom and dignity of
women and girls, who find themselves among the most
vulnerable victims of armed conflicts.
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates
the French initiative to hold, in advance of the
commemoration of the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict on 19 June,
an open debate on conflict-related sexual violence.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
information and for his introduction to the debate
today. We also thank all three briefers for their excellent
briefings on the subject.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s April report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361), as well
as his recommendations. As the report states, the reality
on the ground continues to be characterized by an
alarming number of incidents of mass rape, systematic
and widespread sexual violence, and impunity. The data
contained in the report, in particular that relating, inter
alia, to the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia, are nothing short
of deeply shocking and angering. By the way, a lot of
additional information on sexual abuse in the Central
African Republic was brought to my attention during my
own recent visit to the Central African Republic as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic.

S/PV.7704

in 2016, we are facing new disturbing realities. As our
Council stated in resolution 2242 (2015), acts of sexual
violence have become part of the strategic objectives
and ideology of certain terrorist groups and are being
used as a tactic of terrorism and as an instrument to
increase their power, with an impact on financing,
recruitment and the destruction of communities. The
aforementioned Secretary-General’s report shows
that this outrageous trend has only increased. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Shabaab,
Boko Haram, Ansar Dine, the Taliban and Al-Qaida
continue to practice sexual enslavement, abductions,
forced marriages and forced pregnancies. They use
sexual violence as part of their system of punishment
and reward.
Particularly disturbing is a pattern, identified and
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report, linking the
trafficking in persons, particularly women and girls, by
terrorists with sexual violence. In situations of conflict,
extremist and terrorist groups use human trafficking
for sexual purposes to increase their power, revenue
and recruitment base. That is why we share the opinion
that it is essential to understand and counteract that
terrorist strategy of using sexual violence as a tactic
of terrorism.

Sexual violence continues on a strikingly high
level against the most vulnerable groups — children,
refugees, displaced persons and minorities. In 2015
alone, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, sexual
violence against children accounted for 41 per cent of
the reported cases of violence. Conflict-related sexual
violence has a devastating impact on societies that are
already traumatized by war, in particular on people’s
lives, families and communities. In that regard, we
would like to stress again that sexual violence is a crime
under international law, under specific provisions of the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols and
under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. It is a grave breach of the Geneva Conventions
when sexual violence is used as a method of warfare.
It is also important that, in a series of resolutions, the
Council has committed to breaking the taboo around
speaking up about wartime rape and to taking action
to put an end to its use and to shattering the culture
of impunity.

During times of violent conflict, rape is frequently
used to harm, humiliate and shame. All too often, the
stigma and shame associated with sexual violence
remains with the victim rather than the perpetrator.
Special attention should also be given to internally
displaced persons, the majority of whom are women
and children. Owing to the stigma and other factors,
those crimes remain significantly underreported. As
the Secretary-General states in his report, for each rape
reported in connection with conflict, 10 to 20 cases are
likely go undocumented. Many victims suffer in silence
while impunity for the perpetrators remains prevalent.
We must continue to speak out about the stigma so that it
moves firmly onto the shoulders of perpetrators and not
the survivors. We must speak and act to protect children
born out of rape. We should take actions to respond to
the needs of survivors across the legal, psychological,
social, medical and other vital spheres. We should build
justice and security systems that can respond to and
help prevent sexual violence and tackle impunity.

On 19 June, we will mark eight years since the
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), which condemned
sexual violence, which is used as a tactic of war and
constitutes a threat to global peace and security. Today,

Sexual violence has been a feature of most
conflicts. However, only recently has the international
community started to openly discuss it in the discourse
of conflict prevention. Unfortunately, Ukraine has

16-1555619/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

also been affected by conflict as a result of Russian
aggression. Among other serious consequences, we
have seen an increase in sexual violence cases. In order
to address that problem, the Ukrainian authorities
are ready to enhance cooperation with the relevant
international organizations and mechanisms, first and
foremost, with the United Nations. We have noted that
the latest Secretary-General’s report does not contain
any references to the conflict-related sexual violence
in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
of Ukraine under the control of the Russian-backed
separatists, and we strongly believe those omissions
should be corrected. We would therefore like to use
this opportunity to propose that the relevant special
procedures, such as Ms. Bangura’s work, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, include the situation in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in her field
of activities.
Ukraine, as a country that recently adopted
a national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), strongly supports the need to
ensure the equal participation of women and their full
involvement in decision-making with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution, and their active presence
within the justice and security sectors in positions such
as lawyers, judges, police officers and others. We are
also fully committed to contributing to the international
community’s and the Council’s concrete, practical and
effective preventive efforts and response to sexual
violence in conflicts.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, the Senegalese delegation would like to thank
the French presidency for the timely choice of the
topic of today’s debate, namely, responding to the
threats of human trafficking and sexual exploitation in
situations of armed conflict. Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, for the meetings that France has
planned for the Council this month. You will have
our full cooperation as you guide the Council, and we
will have a busy month full of reflections and actions
in the service of peace around the world, particularly
in Africa.
I would also like to thank France’s predecessor in
the presidency, Egypt, for its outstanding presidency of
the Council.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his important statement, as well as our briefers
20/66

02/06/2016

today — Ms. Bangura, Ms. Giammarinaro and
Ms. Davis — for their high-quality briefings and for
the poignant accounts that they have shared with us,
which truly confirm the full gravity of this scourge that
shocks and disturbs the global conscience.
Sexual violence warrants the attention of the
Security Council as a factor behind the displacement
of persons, which changes the composition of
communities, and as a source of financing for armed
groups, in particular terrorist groups, as well as a
means of humiliating enemy ethnic groups]. That is to
say that this debate is most timely because, on 19 June,
we will be marking the second International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict. Although,
for over 10 years, the topic has been a priority of the
Security Council, sexual violence in conflict is a matter
of increasing concern for the international community,
owing to rapes that are being perpetrated on a large scale
with full impunity, unfortunately, in various theatres
of conflict, including in Africa. The phenomenon is
of particular concern, as indicated by the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/361), because, for each
reported case of rape in connection with a conflict,
there are at least 10 others that go unreported, as they
are covered up owing to fear, shame or cultural and
social pressure.
As demonstrated by the report, that type of violence
and its disastrous consequences continue despite
efforts to combat such problems. While expressing the
growing concern about human trafficking committed
by non-State groups and terrorists, the report also
recommends reopening the international debate on the
financing of violent extremism and the fight against that
scourge by taking into account the new circumstances
encountered today. Moreover, it calls attention to the
economic and strategic underpinnings of selling women
and girls. With regard to the matter of sexual violence,
in particular human trafficking, we believe that it
is important that we have a comprehensive strategy
that is guided by the following priorities: prevention,
protection, reintegration and accountability.
Effective protection requires the appropriate means
and mechanisms to provide victims with a feeling of
trust and security, thereby allowing them to report the
perpetrators. With regard to prevention, vigilant and
quick intervention measures in connection with sexual
violence must be bolstered by providing sufficient
financial and human resources commensurate with the
situation at hand. Furthermore, as part of mediation
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7704

aimed at settling conflicts, there is a need to take into
account the challenges spurred on by gender issues so
as to ensure that the issue of sexual violence in conflict
is fully integrated in ceasefire and peace agreements,
the implementation mechanism for such agreements
and, of course, the various phases of peacebuilding.

United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. We also believe that it is imperative
to collaborate with traditional religious leaders, who can
play more than a minor role in implementing strategic
public relations, thereby allowing us to counter and
neutralize extremist and terrorist narratives.

In that regard, my delegation would like to welcome
the increasing presence on the ground of women’s
protection advisers, who are responsible for convening
follow-up meetings focused on information-sharing and
monitoring aimed at dealing with sexual violence in
conflict and at facilitating dialogue between the parties
to a conflict so as to garner commitments to protect
victims. It is also crucial to invest in women’s groups
locally so as to combat extremism and the radicalization
of youth. Accordingly, the example of the monitoring
and early-warning rooms for women — the Senegalese
equivalent of the women’s situation room — a
mechanism that has existed in Senegal since 2012 and
the primary mission of which is to mobilize women and
girls to play an active role in the prevention of conflicts
through mediation, clearly illustrates the role played by
women’s groups.

I would like to recall that the responsibility to
end sexual violence in armed conflicts falls on the
shoulders of the parties to conflict, with the support
of the international community. That will require a
combination of measures, in particular prevention,
assistance and protection. But it is also necessary to act
in a proactive manner to dissuade, detect and eradicate
human trafficking, especially by extremist and
violent groups, as was underscored by the presidential
statement on human trafficking adopted in 2015
(S/PRST/2015/25).

At the regional level, the prevention of sexual
violence should first begin with the implementation of
legal provisions and international texts ratified at the
level of the African Union (AU), such as resolution
283, adopted by the African Commission on Human
and Peoples’ Rights, on the situation of women and
children in conflict. Nonetheless, it is important to note
that, in addition to prevention, suppression is extremely
important, in particular with regard to ensuring that
perpetrators are dissuaded from committing crimes.
There should also be a demonstration of the fact that no
high-level official or military person is above the law
and that no woman or child is without the protection of
the law.
Sadly, terrorist groups have distinguished
themselves in the area of human trafficking, in
particular in connection to sexual exploitation in armed
conflict, as the Secretary-General recalled earlier when
he spoke of the tragic kidnapping of girls in Chibok
by Boko Haram. My delegation remains convinced that
protection and women’s empowerment must be at the
centre of any strategy aimed at fighting terrorism in
order to respond once and for all to the issue of gender.
In that regard, it is urgent to recall the great need to
implement resolution 2195 (2014), on the links between
terrorism and transnational organized crime, and the

In conclusion, I am pleased to reaffirm Senegal’s
continued commitment to the fight against sexual
violence. That commitment is illustrated by the
sponsorship of the President of Senegal, Mr. Macky
Sall, of the launching of United Nations campaign
to that end, with the collaboration with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura,
to whom we reiterate our full support.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting provides a good opportunity
for us to discuss the state of efforts to combat sexual
violence in armed conflict on the basis of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/361)
on thetopic. An important role in that undertaking is
played by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, in particular
with regard to cooperating with the Governments of
countries affected by armed conflicts.
We have carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General on sexual violence in conflict for
2015. Many of the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report dovetail with today’s topic.
Without any doubt, oremost on our minds today is
the problem of the scope and unprecedented brutality
of sexual violence by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and other terrorist armed groups and the
ensuing imperative to attach particular importance to
the matter of rehabilitating affected women and girls.
Dealing a final blow to international terrorism and its
crimes is impossible without consistently strengthening
international cooperation, with the central and

16-1555621/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

coordinating role to be played by the United Nations
and the Security Council.
Women and children in armed conflicts most often
become refugees and internally displaced persons.
Moreover, they face the threat of sexual violence both
in transit and in refugee centres. Of particular concern
are reports — which the report of the Secretary-General
also draws attention to — about the emergence of an
illegal infrastructure for exploiting refugees, including
through networks of illicit trafficking, commercial
sexual trafficking and sexual slavery.
Various aspects of combating sexual violence
in armed conflict, including issues related to human
trafficking, are the focus of a number of United
Nations agencies and international initiatives. As the
Secretary-General has rightly noted, those phenomena
are cross-border in nature. There is a need to strengthen
international efforts to combat human trafficking
in step with existing instruments. In that regard, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is making a
practical contribution by providing technical assistance
to States.
Our country, as a member of the Group of Friends
United against Human Trafficking, attaches great
importance to the system-level work to combat human
trafficking. Given the topical nature of the issue,
especially in the light of the mass influx of refugees
as a result of armed conflicts, the implementation
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action against
Trafficking in Human Beings has particular relevance.
The Security Council should focus its activities on
issues of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict,
especially in situations that are on its agenda, while
avoiding duplication of effort with other United Nations
bodies and other international mechanisms. At the same
time, the matter of combating sexual violence in armed
conflict should be regarded as an integral component of
a whole package of conflict-resolution measures.
Unfortunately, once again, we have to note
the ongoing practice of diverging in reports from
previously Council-approved terminology. Our
delegation drew attention to the issue earlier. We are
talking about replacing Security Council language on
the matter of sexual violence in conflict with the more
blurred concept of conflict-related sexual violence.
That approach has also been followed in the proposed
theme of this debate. That type of attempt to reopen
agreed-upon provisions is a matter of concern for us,
22/66

02/06/2016

primarily because that could also bring with it broad
interpretation of existing mandates, blurring the lines
between the issue of the maintenance of international
peace and security and general matters of combating
organized crime or human rights violations.
We are convinced that the Security Council’s
consideration of sexual violence in conflict, just like
the matter of women and peace and security as a whole,
should not be used to promote documents and debates
that are contentious and do not enjoy consensus among
States in their concepts and approaches and focus
on issues of sexual orientation and gender identity.
That risks distracting attention from tasks that are
directly planned for in the mandates formulated by the
Security Council.
Very soon, on 19 June, we will marking the second
International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence
in Conflict. We hope that the United Nations events,
including today’s debates, will serve to eradicate sexual
and other types of violence with respect to civilians in
armed conflict and help to find more effective ways to
resolve conflicts and to maintain international peace
and security.
In conclusion, I will say a few words relating to the
statement of the Ukrainian delegation. In that statement,
yet another attempt was made to assign blame for the
disasters of Ukrainian civilians on Russia. The suffering
of civilians in eastern Ukraine is the consequence of
full-scale military operations begun by Kyiv in 2014
against the region, as well as the social and economic
embargo against the region. Specifically, regarding the
topic of today’s meeting, we might note, for example,
the matter of the situation of women in Ukraine and that
of internally displaced persons (IDPs). Those matters,
unlike the affirmations of the Ukrainian delegation,
are reflected in documents of international bodies. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for example, has many times called attention
to cases of sexual and gender-based violence against
such women. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine also noted the particular vulnerability of IDPs
regarding human trafficking and exploitation. The list
of such examples goes on.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
thank the delegation of Egypt for its work during its
presidency of the Security Council during the month
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

of May. We also congratulate the delegation of France
on its assumption of the presidency for the current
month. We reiterate our support for the success of your
efforts, Sir, as President of this body. We welcome the
convening of this important debate. We also thank the
Secretary-General for introducing his annual report
(S/2016/361) on conflict-related sexual violence. And we
express our gratitude for the briefings by Ms. Bangura,
Ms. Giammarinaro and Ms. Davis.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
sexual violence in all its forms, in particular violence
that occurs in the context of armed conflict and carried
out by different actors, whether State or non-State actors.
There is no justification of any kind for committing
such reprehensible acts. That crime violates human
dignity and leaves devastating consequences for its
victims. In the majority of cases, they are stigmatized
and face a series of obstacles that result from social
pressure, cultural and religious patterns and the lack
of specialized personnel and infrastructure at the most
basic level to look after them. Furthermore, such acts are
an express violation of international law, international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We cannot allow impunity when it comes to that type
of crime. Our country calls for effective accountability
for all forms of sexual violence. We should impose
exemplary sanctions for all those who instigate or who
are responsible for that kind of crime.
The vulnerability that the civilian population faces
in the midst of an armed conflict is all the more alarming
when we focus on women and children, and even more
when they are displaced or refugees, because in many
cases they end up being the victims of trafficking in
persons and sexual slavery, where an important role is
played by non-State groups and criminal gangs that feed
off each other. The economy of war feeds on human
tragedy and the most vulnerable sectors.
The existence of non-State actors accused of using
sexual violence as part of their war tactic, as pointed
out in the report, is a challenge for the international
community when it comes to determining how to
ensure the promotion of specific commitments in order
to prevent the use of sexual violence by those armed
groups that the Council does not describe as terrorists.
In that regard, we deem it relevant to promote adequate
agreements on that particular topic in scenarios where
peace talks and ceasefire talks under way.

S/PV.7704

Building resilience, in particular with regard to
training and increasing national institutional capacitybuilding linked to justice, health and social welfare
systems in countries that are in armed conflict or
post-conflict situations, plays a fundamental role. It
is therefore necessary to combine our efforts so that,
while fully respecting the sovereignty of the States
concerned, we can develop and strengthen those
capabilities for the proper enforcement of accountability
and the rehabilitation of victims and children of such
violence, so that they are guaranteed the right to
preserve their identity, including, among other things,
their nationality, which is a fundamental right of every
human being.
With regard to the process of institutional capacitybuilding, we acknowledge the important work done by
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
We reiterate our firm condemnation of all incidents
of sexual exploitation and abuse committed by any
foreign force or by military, police or civilian personnel
deployed in peacekeeping operations or special political
missions, as well as by staff of this Organization
considered not to be deployed in such operations.
Hence we support the policy of zero tolerance regarding
any sexual-violence incidents that have taken place
or will take place in any peacekeeping operation or
military mission that has a mandate or support from the
Security Council.
The United Nations must be an example of
consistency and firmness with respect to the importance
of preventing such acts, and, above all, of accountability
with respect to any staff member of the Organization or
of international forces authorized by this body who has
committed this type of crime.
As indicated in the report, sexual violence has
reached new levels. Extremist groups and terrorists in
the Middle East and Africa use it as an instrument of
war and selective attacks against ethnic or religious
minorities with a view to annihilating them, and, in
other cases, to displace populations in order to control
territory and natural resources. The main perpetrators
of such actions are the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS), Jaish al-Islam, Al-Qaida, Al-Nusra,
Boko Haram and all associated groups and militias in
locations where they have a presence.
In this regard, we reiterate our appeal to the
international community to fully respect the provisions

16-1555623/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

of international law and of the resolutions adopted
by the Council related to the ban on supplying arms,
financial or logistical support to these groups, so that
we can effectively neutralize their operational capacity
and their abhorrent practices of sexual exploitation
and violence.
We also agree with the statement made by
the Secretary-General in his report reiterating the
importance of strategically coordinating efforts to
prevent sexual violence and to do so in unison with
efforts to prevent violent extremism and terrorism.
We would also like to add that measures aimed
at the effective prevention and eradication of the
crime of trafficking in persons with a view to sexual
exploitation in armed conflict requires a broad
democratic discussion forum that would ensure
the full participation of Member States, all United
Nations entities with responsibility in this area, and
various regional and subregional mechanisms, so as to
coordinate and establish synergies among these actors.
Finally, we wish to express our support for the
recommendation that the issue of sexual violence in
armed conflict be included in the work of the sanctions
committees, in particular those related to ISIS and
Al-Qaida.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, I
wish to start by congratulating you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of June
and for having convened this open debate on a critical
issue: conflict-related sexual violence. I wish also to
reiterate once again Angola’s full support for your
presidency this month in order to ensure that it is a
successful month in the work of the Council. I should
like also to commend Egypt for the remarkable work
done during the month that just ended.
Let me thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his opening remarks and also thank the briefers,
Ms. Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Giammarinaro, for the very insightful briefings
presented to the Council. This is a way of reaffirming
the standing commitment to the defence and protection
of the victims of sexual violence and trafficking
in persons.
It is totally unacceptable that, since the holding
a year ago of our last open debate on conflict-related
sexual violence and the consensual adoption by the
24/66

02/06/2016

General Assembly of resolution 69/293 establishing
19 June as the International Day for the Elimination of
Sexual Violence in Conflict, sexual violence in conflict
continues to occur extensively and the perpetrators
are rewarded with impunity. As stated in most recent
report of Secretary-General on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2016/361), during 2015 widespread
violations against women and girls were documented
and remain very much without any real action taken by
the mechanisms that we have in the Council.
Crimes against sexual integrity, as well as
systematic sexual violence and abuses in areas in Syria
and Iraq controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), form part of a system of punishment and
reward in the terrorists’ attempts to consolidate their
power in the regions under their control. Moreover,
sexual violence has become a driving factor in forcing
the displacement of civilians, while sexual enslavement
has become a central feature in the recruitment of
males, local youths and foreign fighters to join the
terrorist ranks. Resolution 2242 (2015), on women and
peace and security, pointed out how sexual violence is a
part of the strategies and ideologies of certain extremist
groups aimed at increasing their power, revenue and
recruitment and an instrument aimed at destroying the
social fabric of the target communities.
Resolution 1820 (2008), for its part, recognizes
how sexual violence became a tactic of war and a threat
to global peace and security, underscoring the fact that
rape and other forms of sexual violence can constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The United Nations Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, in its provisions ensuring the
social protection, participation and empowerment of
women in strategies to counter terrorism and violent
extremism, recognizes women as a crucial driving force
in achieving a sustainable peace and the interlinkages
between counter-terrorism strategies and efforts to
protect and empower women and girls and to combat
conflict-related sexual violence.
We must regretfully note that in spite of such strong
pronouncements and the international community’s
stand on this issue, translated into a considerable number
of legally binding decisions such as Security Council
resolutions, strategies and plans of action to counter
terrorism and violent extremism, we are witnessing
the escalation of conflict-related sexual violence,
committed mainly but not exclusively by extremists
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

and terrorist groups such as ISIL, Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram, the Taliban and Al-Qaida.
The report of the Secretary-General highlights
how sexual violence has been a driver of forced
displacement — from the Middle East, the sub-Saharan
region and the Horn of Africa — with 950,000 new
refugees and migrants fleeing to Europe in 2015 and with
such massive displacement and cross-border activities
leading to an increase in trafficking in persons for
sexual slavery. The most distressing aspect across the
entire spectrum of the situation of sexual exploitation
and slavery is the physical and psychological trauma
inflicted upon the victims, with fear and cultural stigma
preventing the reporting of abuses.
National institutions in countries where sexual
violence takes place, namely, the police and the
judiciary, must enhance capacities in order to instil
confidence in victims of sexual violence. I hope that,
with the meeting taking place at the moment involving
our police chiefs, that situation will be carefully taken
into account. Strengthening national institutions is
essential to ensure accountability and trials, which
are critical steps in preventing and deterring potential
perpetrators, building credible judicial and lawenforcement institutions and establishing the rule of
law. In that regard, Angola values greatly the work
of the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in providing
assistance to Governments, including in the areas of
criminal investigation and prosecution, military justice,
legislative reform, protecting victims and witnesses
and providing reparations for survivors.
Another area of major concern is the continuing
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers and non-United Nations forces
acting under Security Council mandates. Of particular
concern are the allegations of sexual abuse of minors
in the Central African Republic and Somalia. It is
indeed regrettable and paradoxical that United Nations
peacekeeping mission personnel, entrusted with the
main task of protecting civilians, take advantage of
women, girls and boys in extremely fragile situations
for such despicable human rights violations. In that
connection, Angola fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation
and abuse, and welcomes the continuous commitment
and the strengthening of measures aimed at their
protection based on the principles of transparency,
accountability and impartiality. We also join the

S/PV.7704

proposal presented this morning by Spain to increase
the presence of women’s protection advisers in the
field to monitor, analyse and report on conflict-related
sexual violence and to facilitate dialogue with parties
to conflict on protection commitments, as an effort to
enhance prevention, early warning and timely responses
to conflict-related sexual violence.
In conclusion, there is still a great disparity
between international human rights standards and
national legislation in conflict-affected countries,
which often minimizes these crimes. In that regard,
Angola encourages the international community to
assist Governments in fighting impunity by developing
and implementing national action plans and strategies
in line with international standards on combating
sexual violence and trafficking in persons.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom) (spoke in
French): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the start of your presidency for the
month of June.
(spoke in English)
I am very grateful that France scheduled this debate
today. The women and peace and security agenda is a
high priority for the United Kingdom, and I am very
glad that my country is the penholder on this issue in
the Security Council.
I join others in welcoming the briefings we heard
from speakers this morning, which I found humbling
and moving. If I may, I would like to quote the words of
an earlier briefer:
“[t]he Islamic State did not just come to kill us ... but
to take us as ... merchandise to be sold in markets ”
(S/PV.7585, p. 6).
“Merchandise to be sold in markets” — those are the
words of Nadia Murad Basee Taha, the Yazidi activist
who addressed the Security Council in December. She
ended her statement saying,
“These crimes against women and their freedom
must be brought to an end today.” (ibid, p. 7)
That was six months ago. Sadly, as the briefers and
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/361) make clear,
we are not there yet. We have not yet brought these
crimes to an end. The crimes continue — in Syria, in
Iraq and in places as far afield as Afghanistan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In response, we
cannot be deterred. Our efforts must be unrelenting

16-1555625/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

and, equally, far-reaching. I look forward to working
with Spain on Román’s five operational points. I have
my own four steps to put forward today.
Step one: we must begin by bringing order to the
chaos that groups such as Da’esh and Boko Haram
thrive in. Those groups do not recognize laws. They
do not recognize borders. They operate with impunity,
with no regard for the legitimate authorities or the
human rights of those they enslave and traffic. That
is why the United Kingdom is playing an active role
in the coalition to defeat Da’esh and take back the
land they claim to govern. It is why we are working
tirelessly on Syria, as part of the Council and part of the
International Syria Support Group, to forge a peaceful
political solution, one that ends the crisis that has driven
the growth of Da’esh. And it is why we are working so
closely with other countries that face the destabilizing
influence of extremists, so that their hatred cannot take
hold. Slowly, our efforts to defeat Da’esh are working.
They have already lost over a third of the territory they
once controlled in Syria and Iraq. But that is just the
first step.
Step two: we also need to ensure that militaries
and security forces can prevent and respond to sexual
violence, and that they are trained and equipped to
do so. For instance, the United Kingdom is training
Peshmerga troops in Iraq so that they can respond
sensitively and appropriately to the needs of survivors
of the sexual violence and trafficking of Da’esh. We
recognize that this is not an issue confined to one
corner of the globe. That is why we are also training
African peacekeepers and soldiers, including the army
in Mali. It is why we are training our own troops,
as well as those from Croatia, Romania, Slovenia,
Morocco and Kyrgyzstan. We all have a role to play.
Our own countries’ police and military need to be more
representative of our societies, with greater recruitment
and greater promotion of women. If the United Nations
itself is to play its full role in ending the scourge of
sexual violence, it cannot — it must not — be a part
of the problem. No one wearing a United Nations blue
helmet should ever take part, or even be associated
in any way, with sexual violence, exploitation and
abuse. Anyone who commits such crimes, whether
a peacekeeper or a Da’esh fanatic, must face justice.
Accountability cannot be selective.
That is why, for step three, the United Kingdom
is building the capacity of Governments, judiciaries,
police, military and civil society to strengthen the
26/66

02/06/2016

prosecution of sexual violence. We have done so in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Kosovo, Nepal, Syria and
Uganda. Such efforts must lead to more investigations
and more prosecutions through the International
Criminal Court and through hybrid and domestic
courts. There can be no impunity for the perpetrators
of those crimes.
In step four, we need to challenge the harmful
stigma directed towards survivors of sexual violence
in conflict. Survivors and children born of rape are too
often ostracized by their families and exiled from their
communities. When a survivor escapes the horror of
sexual violence, she should find hope and support, not
rejection and silence. So together, let us all challenge
any culture that accepts, condones or justifies sex.
Let me close with this final thought. If we are to
succeed in ending these crimes, as the Yazidi acitivist
Nadia Murad implored us to do, we will need the widest
possible support from the grass roots all the way up
to global organizations. To do that means working
with non-governmental organizations (NGOs). They
are vital partners. The United Kingdom works with
such organizations as Tearfund to support survivors
of sexual violence in the most remote parts of eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They help women
and girls in desperate need in places Governments
struggle to reach.
Yet over the past week, over 250 NGOs have had
their bids to gain accreditation with the United Nations
either delayed or rejected — the majority for spurious
reasons. Many of these NGOs lead the charge on
human rights and on women and gender issues. Those
organizations empower women, and they can empower
our efforts to ensure that women and girls are no longer
treated as merchandize in markets. We need to be letting
them in, not shutting them out. I therefore call on the
Economic and Social Council Committee on NGOs to
stop these arbitrary deferrals and let these NGOs in. I
hope all here will join me in that call.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Allow me to begin by
congratulating France on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of June, and by
expressing my delegation’s full confidence in your able
stewardship, Sir. This is already evidenced on the second
day of France’s presidency through the convening of
an open debate on conflict-related sexual violence,
with a focus on the human trafficking dimensions. We
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

commend this French initiative and the useful concept
note guiding our discussions today (S/2016/496, annex).
I also wish to commend the Egyptian delegation for
its successful presidency last month.
My delegation expresses its appreciation to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his remarks, and
reiterates our firm support for United Nations efforts
to combat sexual violence in conflict. I also wish to
acknowledge the commitment, depth of expertise and
testimonies shared by the panel of briefers: the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Zainab Bangura; the Special
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, Maria Grazia Giammarinaro; and
Ms. Lisa Davis in their statements.
Malaysia welcomes the adoption on 16 December
2015 of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25, which
recognized the impact of human trafficking in situations
of armed conflict, particularly on vulnerable groups
such as women and children. It was an important step
towards mobilizing coordinated and sustained actions
to address human trafficking as a threat to international
peace and security. Today’s open debate further reveals
the alarming and pervasive link between human
trafficking and the perpetration of conflict-related
sexual violence. Evidently, the mass displacement of
populations due to armed conflict has exacerbated the
vulnerabilities of women and girls, increasing their
susceptibility to being preyed upon by unscrupulous
actors for sex trafficking.
We continue to witness the horrific impact of
sexual violence being used not only as an abhorrent
tactic of war, but also as a despicable tactic of terror by
non-State armed groups, including through abductions,
forced marriages, sexual slavery and the trafficking of
women and girls. These horrifying trends in conflictrelated sexual violence demand renewed attention and
innovative responses from the international community,
which we hope will be extensively explored during this
discussion, to which we offer the following contribution.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361) presents
further disturbing evidence of the premeditated,
systematic and strategic use of sexual violence targeting
women and girls by terrorists and violent extremist
groups. Sexual violence against women and girls is a
shockingly common reality in conflict zones. In their
world of enslavement, they are used to lure and recruit

S/PV.7704

combatants with the promise of wives and sex slaves
to extract ransom from communities or as a means to
obtain funds through sex trafficking. The blatant and
outrageous exploitation of women and girls to fuel
the activities of terrorist groups calls on us to expend
existing strategies in counter-terrorism, including to
curb the financial flows to terrorist groups arising
from conflict-related sexual violence. We believe that
this issue should be given greater focus at the fifth
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy this month.
While the conceptual debate around terrorism
and violent extremism remains ongoing, we would be
remiss to overlook the crucial role that women can and
do play in the prevention and mitigation of these twin
phenomena. In that regard, Malaysia welcomes the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, emphasizing
the protection, participation and empowerment of
women as central considerations in strategies to counter
terrorism and violent extremism.
In addressing cross-border crime, such as
trafficking, the cooperation of regional bodies and
Member States is imperative, particularly where
trafficking routes span conflict zones and conflictrelated sexual violence is involved. In support of
such concerted action to prevent and combat human
trafficking, the States members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (SEAN) signed the ASEAN
Convention against Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, in Kuala Lumpur in November
2015, with a view to promoting intra-regional
cooperation, including in the investigation and
prosecution of perpetrators, the sharing of information,
and capacity-building.
My delegation is fully aware of the challenges
faced in combating human trafficking, as noted by the
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children. Malaysia remains committed to
addressing this scourge. More importantly, we have
taken and continue to take measures to improve our
response, which is based on a comprehensive approach
involving a wide range of partners and stakeholders. For
instance, the Government of Malaysia directly supports
the work of 75 non-governmental organizations
working to support victims of human trafficking in the
country by providing essential services such as legal,
medical and logistic assistance. At the enforcement
level, we maintain strong links and cooperation

16-1555627/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

02/06/2016

between ASEANAPOL and INTERPOL to disrupt,
degrade and dismantle regional and international
trafficking networks.

month. We also appreciate the presence and valuable
inputs from the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura,
Ms. Giammarinara and Ms. Davis.

The rescue, recovery and reintegration of women,
children and men affected by conflict-related sexual
violence must lie at the heart of our actions. Survivors of
sexual violence often suffer twice over — first from the
heinous acts themselves and then from the subsequent
stigman of being victims. The stigmatization can last for
generations, particularly for children born to victims of
sexual violence, who are sometimes unjustly abandoned
or shunned by their communities. This undeserved
stigmatization must be countered by promoting greater
compassion, understanding and awareness from the
grass roots to the highest political level. We strongly
encourage the engagement of civil society, community
and religious leaders in reversing negative perceptions
of survivors of sexual violence, especially children
born to victims of sexual violence, who have often been
overlooked in reintegration efforts.

The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2016/361)
and the briefers paint a deeply disturbing picture. We
are horrified by the trafficking for purposes of sexual
exploitation by terrorist and violent extremist groups.
Those are not isolated incidents; they represent a
pattern and a policy. Tragically, due to the realities of
today’s conflicts, many victims are beyond the reach
of national and international protection mechanisms.
There are nevertheless steps we can take to address the
drivers of this disturbing trend, to deter and disrupt the
violence that is occurring and to ensure accountability
for those crimes and support for survivors.

In addition, we support the provision of timely and
comprehensive assistance and health-care services for
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence to aid their
recovery and reintegration into their communities.
Furthermore, we encourage donors to channel consistent
funding to reintegration programmes that empower
women and girls, especially livelihood programmes
and education opportunities.
As we mark the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict later this
month, Malaysia joins the international community
in pledging its solidarity with all the survivors and
victims of sexual violence in conflict. Their dignity
and determination in overcoming immense suffering
provide powerful testimony and serve as a reminder for
us to redouble our efforts to eradicate sexual violence in
conflict. I wish to conclude by taking this opportunity to
commend the tenacious work of Special Representative
Bangura and her Office, as well as the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
and United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict in providing analysis and catalysing responses
in this field. We assure them of our continued support
for their work. I also share Ms. Bangura’s concluding
remarks when she says that justice may be delayed, but
it will not be denied.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We wish you very well,
Mr. President, in leading us in the Security Council this
28/66

First, we must redouble efforts to address the
conditions that leave civilians vulnerable to abuse and
exploitation and that allow terrorist and criminal groups
to carry out these crimes with impunity. The surge
in conflict-related sexual violence is often a product
of protracted conflict and the collapse of protection
mechanisms and national judicial frameworks. We
cannot expect a significant improvement until those
conflicts are resolved and the groups themselves that
are responsible for the majority of the crimes have
been defeated.
Secondly, we need to counter narratives that attempt
to legitimise and justify those practices. The promise
of a bride or sex slave is a motivating factor for many
foreign terrorist fighters. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s call to mainstream efforts to combat
premeditated and systematic targeting of civilians,
particularly women and girls, into our strategies for
preventing and countering violent extremism. We also
welcome the inclusion of sexual violence in conflict as
an area of focus in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the strategic threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Thirdly, we need to do more at domestic, regional
and international levels. Domestically, we need to
ensure we have national frameworks and processes in
place to prosecute nationals, including overseas. And
we need to work effectively with other States to identify
such individuals. In New Zealand our focus has been
on criminalizing the trafficking in persons, disrupting
criminal and terrorist networks and addressing related
crimes, including through the tracing and confiscation
of financial assets. As a party to the Protocol to Prevent,
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, New
Zealand’s legislation has been tightened so that our
citizens and residents can be charged for those types of
offenses, even they occur outside New Zealand. That
acts as a deterrent and ensures that human traffickers
can be held accountable.
Strong regional and global cooperation and
information-sharing is vital. In the Asia-Pacific region,
our active contribution to regional efforts to tackle
human trafficking and people smuggling, through the
Bali process, has paid particular dividends. In 2015,
New Zealand led a joint period of action focused on
disrupting trafficking networks in the Asia-Pacific
region through a series of separate but coordinated lawenforcement operations. The initiative proved highly
successful, and a second joint period of action was
initiated last month.
At the international level, the Security Council
has a role to play, including through the ISIL/Al-Qaida
sanctions regime. As the Secretary-General has made
clear, the trafficking in women and girls is a source
of financing for ISIL and its affiliates, as well as a
recruitment tool. Resolution 2253 (2015) sets out a range
of measures for choking off all sources of financing
to those groups, including the option of listing those
who transfer funds derived from sexual exploitation
and abuse. For that to be effective, however, Member
States need to actively propose individuals and entities
engaged in such activities for designation. As chair of
the ISIL/Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, New Zealand
is ready to discuss how sanctions can be more effective
in addressing human trafficking as an enabler of
terrorist groups.

S/PV.7704

based leaders, we must shift the stigma from survivors
to perpetrators. Where survivors cannot be reintegrated
to their communities, resettlement can be an important
protection tool. We call on all States to ensure that
potential exposure to trafficking for the purposes of
sexual exploitation is taken into account in engaging
refugee protection mechanisms. As the Security
Council and as the international community, we must
do everything we can to stop human trafficking and
end sexual violence in conflict. And we must help the
victims to rebuild their lives.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I warmly thank everyone for their concrete and very
useful interventions, which reflect a consensus — a
unanimous will — to halt the unacceptable and revolting
phenomenon of sexual violence and trafficking in
women and children in conflict situations. I would like
to recognize in particular the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the personal engagement of his Special
Representative, Ms. Zainab Bangura. She has not
only met victims of conflict in the field, but has also
had the strength to propose ways of combating sexual
violence in situations of crisis or conflict. The insight
provided in that context by the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in persons, Ms. Giammarinaro, on the
particular plight of women and girls was particularly
striking. Finally, the testimony of Ms. Davis here in
the Council called for intensified efforts to address the
causes and consequences of the various forms of genderbased violence.

Finally, we must not lose sight over the longer term
of the need to heal the scars inflicted on individuals
and communities and to hold those most responsible
accountable. Many crimes have been committed in
recent years in Syria, Iraq, northern Nigeria and
elsewhere. We have to make sure that the perpetrators of
conflict-related sexual violence are brought to justice.
In the meantime, it is crucial that we support efforts to
collect and preserve evidence.

The consequences of sex trafficking in women and
children in conflict have been clearly identified and
recalled today. On the one hand, they destroy lives, entire
families and community social ties and serve to cast
out the victims and children born of rape. On the other
hand, sex trafficking directly fuels terrorism, not just
by increasing the financial resources of such groups but
also by attracting new recruits through forced marriage
promises or “sexual compensation” — abominable acts
carried out by the likes of Da’esh.

Survivors of this violence — women, girls, men and
boys — must also receive adequate support, as others
have mentioned. That is necessary both to alleviate
their suffering and to enable their reintegration into
communities without prejudice or stigma. Through
education and engagement with community and faith-

Faced with those well-known tragic consequences,
the causes of trafficking for sexual purposes should
be better taken into account. They are based on
gender inequality, which is the first stage towards
commodifying the bodies of women and girls. To remedy
that situation, among other things, the empowerment of

16-1555629/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

women must be strengthened in the areas of education
and health, where they must have access to appropriate
services. That includes in particular access to abortion
in cases of rape in conflict situations, including in
refugee camps. It is an essential right for every woman
to make her own decision, which France has made a
priority. It is each Member State’s responsibility to
take all necessary measures to give women autonomy,
political and economic power, and control of their
bodies. That decision-making power and freedom of
choice cannot be nuanced or relativized by culture or
customs in any country or society.
The Security Council also has a collective
responsibility in the fight against sex trafficking.
The Council’s inadequate treatment of gender issues
owing to disagreements among its members hinders
the improvement of the status of women in conflict.
Similarly, sexual violence in conflict situations and the
women and peace and security agenda are too often
considered separate from the threats to international
peace and security considered by the Council daily.
In reality, sexual violence is among the strategies
used by terrorist groups, such as Da’esh or Boko
Haram, and poses a short- and long-term threat to
international peace and security. We see that in Syria,
Iraq, Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia and elsewhere. Children born of sexual
violence today may become the criminals or terrorists
of tomorrow. That is why I would like to present four
proposals for action by the Security Council and the
Secretariat on this topic.
First, we must strengthen the protection of civilians
mandates for peacekeeping operations through
the establishment of specialized monitoring units,
comprised of human rights experts and police and
judiciary cooperation in order to better identify risks
through patrols, detect the markets for women and
dismantle trafficking networks. The open debate to be
presided over by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France, Jean-Marc Ayrault, on 10 June, will provide an
opportunity to talk more about that possibility.
Secondly, we should better integrate the issue of
human trafficking into Council discussions. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25 of December last year was
an important step in that regard, as is the report of the
Secretary-General that the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime is currently working on, which will
be presented to the Council in December 2016. Further
30/66

02/06/2016

work to identify individuals and entities who, through
their involvement in trafficking for sexual violence,
finance terrorist groups is also necessary, including
through the activities of the Sanctions Committees.
Thirdly, we need to more systematically integrate
crimes with a sexual dimension into the mediation and
negotiation efforts of peace or ceasefire agreements.
They must be considered a breach of ceasefires, just
like other atrocities.
Finally, we must strengthen the role and
participation of women in strategies to combat
trafficking and terrorism, particularly in the context
of the tenth anniversary of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Particular attention should
be paid to combating the real and virtual markets in
which women and children are traded and sold with
impunity. Combating impunity in this field is a priority
in and of itself, and our mobilization in that regard
is essential.
Let me conclude my remarks by welcoming the
Secretary-General’s commitment to zero tolerance of
all forms of sexual violence, including sexual abuse
and exploitation. We must all serve as an example, in
the context of United Nations-mandated missions and
elsewhere. It is crucial that the United Nations, just like
Member States, adopt concrete measures to prevent and
fight against all forms of sexual violence. France has
already implemented a broad spectrum of measures in
that regard and has reported on them to the Security
Council and the General Assembly. Our determination
on that issue is unwavering.
Today’s debate is crucial for identifying the
challenges and solutions regarding sex trafficking. The
Security Council now has the collective responsibility
to implement the most effective solutions and to remain
mobilized on those issues. The first commemoration
of the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict is to be held this month on
19 June. It will provide an opportunity to maintain the
mobilization of the international community on this
priority issue for France and for the United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I would like to appeal
to speakers to deliver their statements at a normal speed
so that interpretation can be provided accurately.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): First of all, I thank you,
Sir, for organizing the open debate today, which
builds on the significant efforts undertaken by the
Security Council over the past years, and for the very
concrete suggestions, that you just put forward in
your intervention.
I speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden.
I want to thank the briefers for their briefings
today, but more importantly for the work they do on this
very important topic. I also want to express our strong
support for the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, and her Office, including the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. Their support to Member States in ensuring
support to victims and strengthening the capacity to
address conflict-related sexual violence, as well as
impunity, is crucial.
In spite of our joint efforts and the outrage that we
feel, the scourge of sexual violence continues, with its
many different aspects and manifestations. A common
denominator, however, is that no region is spared. That
compels us to work together in partnership so as to
forge appropriate responses.
We live in a time of extraordinary flows of migrants
and refugees. People fleeing are often desperate and
vulnerable, becoming easy prey for human trafficking,
exploitation and abuse. That compels us to provide
protection to those in need. In our countries, asylum
seekers are supported in various ways, including
basic financial support, health-care services and
accommodation. That is not only an issue of human
rights and preserving dignity, but also a way to combat
the exploitation of vulnerable people.
However, we need to put our national efforts in the
context of a broader agenda to build and sustain peace
and achieve long-term development globally. That
includes addressing the root causes of conflict, fighting
poverty and building national capacity, supported by

S/PV.7704

the allocation of resources that are sustainable over the
long term.
To render such an approach successful, a change in
perspective is needed at various levels. First, we need
to devote more attention to prevention. To that end,
we must shift focus from women as victims to women
as agents of change; we must strengthen the linkages
between women’s economic empowerment, women’s
equal political participation and their full enjoyment
of their human rights; we must transform institutions,
norms and behaviour; and we must engage men and
boys in achieving gender equality.
Secondly, we need a more holistic and coherent
institutional approach. We need to pursue action against
trafficking and conflict-related sexual violence at all
levels. We need to build more dynamic partnerships
with all relevant actors, including within the United
Nations system, and with regional and subregional
organizations. And we need to build capacity and foster
national ownership and inclusive processes. In that
context, we are proud to be among the top contributors
to the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict and the Team of Experts in their work to
strengthen national capacities for prevention and
response efforts.
We also support peace processes where women are
present at the peace negotiating table and where women’s
organizations contribute. Non-State actors also need to
be engaged in that effort. The potential of traditional
and religious leaders should also be harnessed. In that
context, I would like to welcome the fact that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura,
and her Office are working with non-State actors to
combat conflict-related sexual violence.
My third and final point is related to the preceding
one. We need to find the resources and secure strong longterm commitments. The international community needs
to stay generously engaged and to provide predictable,
sustainable and long-term financing for peace and
development efforts, including for strengthening the
capacities of States to address the challenges posed by
trafficking and conflict-related sexual violence. The
Nordic countries provide long-term financing for peace
and development in a wide variety of ways, recognizing
and advocating for the role of women as agents for
peace. Our Nordic Women Mediators’ Network, which
aims to contribute to United Nations mediation efforts,
is one of many expressions of that commitment, as

16-1555631/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

are our generous non-earmarked contributions to the
relevant United Nations funds and programmes.
On 19 June, we will commemorate the International
Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict
for the first time. That date will mark an occasion for
the international community to increase accountability,
raise awareness and demonstrate its resolve to redouble
efforts to address the scourge of sexual violence
in conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany) (spoke in French): I offer
my respects to the French presidency.
(spoke in English)
Let me begin by thanking you, Sir, for convening
this timely debate, right at the beginning of France’s
presidency of the Security Council. Today’s meaningful
briefings have demonstrated yet again that the
elimination of conflict-related sexual violence needs to
be at the heart of the Council’s work. Like others, I wish
to thank Ms. Lisa Davis in particular for her statement
and her excellent recommendations, grounded in the
work of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security, which works tirelessly to achieve gender
equality and to combat sexual discrimination.
It is telling that crimes of sexual violence are
singular in their abhorrence, even in the context of
the brutal conflicts in Syria and Iraq. I am thinking
of the unspeakable plight experienced, among others,
by the Yazidi women and girls, many of whom have
found refuge in Germany. Those women and girls
have been subjected to a particularly perverse form of
human trafficking that requires our fullest attention.
The Council, with its unique mandate and power, has a
primary role to play in dealing with this subject.
First, we have seen that the United Nations sanctions
regimes can be an effective instrument in countering
sexual violence. In 2015, 12 individuals across four
sanctions regimes were listed for sexual violence or
other human rights violations against women. Germany
welcomes those efforts, but we can do even more.
Gender considerations should be integrated into all
sanctions regimes, for example, through the inclusion
of sexual violence as a designation criterion. The
strengthening of the links between counter-terrorism
and women and peace and security was also one of
the key recommendations of a workshop recently
32/66

02/06/2016

organized by Germany in Berlin. We will soon share
with the Council the full outcome of the workshop,
which was attended by key experts from Member States
and civil society.
Secondly, during the high-level review of women
and peace and security in October 2015, Ms. Yanar
Mohammed briefed the Council on the courageous
work done by women’s civil society organizations in
Iraq (see S/PV.7533). She described how, under the most
difficult of circumstances, her organization operates
shelters that function as safe houses from trafficking
and sexual violence. That brings me to my point that
civil society organizations can play a leading role in
responding to conflict-related sexual violence, and
they deserve our full support. Briefings, such as those
by Ms. Mohammed or by Ms. Davis today, offer proof
that civil society can contribute a critical, independent
perspective to the deliberations of the Council.
Thirdly, Special Rapporteur Giammarinaro has
tirelessly reminded United Nations bodies and
Member States of the strong links between trafficking,
migration and conflicts. The call for the mainstreaming
of our response to trafficking must not go unheard. I
would like to reaffirm Germany’s full support for
Ms. Giammarinaro’s mandate and her work.
Germany also welcomes the broader efforts to
mainstream the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) throughout the United Nations system. But we
feel that those efforts could be better linked to other
processes, most notably the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals. We plan on hosting a
discussion soon that will explore ways to better connect
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) to the women and peace and
security agenda.
Fourthly and finally, we urgently need to redouble
our efforts against sexual violence, but we also need
to translate the participation aspects of the women and
peace and security agenda into reality. The language
produced by the Council only infrequently includes
such aspects, and where they do exist, references to
participation often lack detail. In an approach that
could be seen as complementary to today’s discussion
and to the broader debate on resolution 1325 (2000)
each fall, Germany would also encourage the Security
Council and Member States not only to raise the issue
of women and peace and security in the dedicated open
debates, but also to include the active participation of
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

women in peace processes and in the prevention of
conflicts whenever addressing specific conflicts. That
participation could also be a focus in the annual debate
on women and peace and security this September.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Germany’s
unfailing commitment to the protection of women
and girls from conflict-related sexual violence. The
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda is more urgent than ever and will remain one of
our highest priorities.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): At the outset, I would
like to thank France for providing this opportunity
for us to reflect on this very disturbing, very alarming
and very shocking topic. I also thank you, Sir, for the
concrete actions and steps that you have proposed (see
S/2016/496, annex).
Hungary naturally aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the observer on behalf of the
European Union.
Human trafficking, or modern-day slavery, is a
spreading global threat that can be found in every
country. Specifically in conflict and post-conflict
situations, the level of insecurity and the breakdown
in family and community structures and other safety
nets raise the risk of the exposure of women and girls,
in particular, to all forms of violence. We are deeply
troubled that the trafficking in persons, often for sexual
purposes, has become a recurring feature and a byproduct of armed conflict.
The Secretary-General’s recent report on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2016/361) portrays a deeply
disturbing picture of groups, such as Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and Boko Haram, using slavery
and sexual violence as an institution, often targeting
ethnic and religious minorities in order to facilitate
recruitment by promising male fighters access to
women, generate revenue, terrorize local communities
or displace inhabitants from strategic territories. We
find the growing presence of Da’esh in Libyan regions
that function as popular trafficking routes across the
Mediterranean particularly worrying. Hungary is of the
view that a number of steps will need to be taken if we
wish to fight the global threat more effectively.

S/PV.7704

First, Member States will need to play a more
active, leading role in the fight against conflict-related
sexual violence and human trafficking.
Secondly, effective implementation of the relevant
international instruments is essential. In this context,
Hungary recognizes that the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has continued to support
Member States in providing technical assistance, upon
request, in assisting implementation.
Thirdly, prevention and protection efforts, we
believe, are urgently required. Hungary shares the view
that strategies to prevent and protect women and girls
in conflict from trafficking must be gender-sensitive
and gender-responsive. The protection of women and
girls exploited by extremist groups is particularly
critical. We Member States must also make sure that
those we send to protect populations are not complicit
in their exploitation.
Fourthly, accountability for sexual violence and
human trafficking must be ensured. We underline the
strong need to bring those responsible to justice. It is just
too easy to always point at the International Criminal
Court as the forum where such trials should take place;
we must not forget that the primary responsibility lies
with States. States must step up their efforts in finding
the perpetrators and bringing them to justice before
their national courts. Hungary supports the inclusion
of perpetrators of gross violations of women’s human
rights and other forms of gender-based crimes in United
Nations and bilateral sanctions. In this context, we
encourage broader involvement in human trafficking as
a basis for listing in United Nations sanctions regimes.
Fifthly, Hungary strongly support efforts aimed
at enhancing the meaningful participation of women
in crisis prevention and resolution. We are confident
that the effective involvement of women in every stage
of peace processes is an essential tool to address the
phenomenon of sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict.
Hungary looks forward to the report currently
being prepared by UNODC on the implementation of
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25, which will be
presented to the Council in December. We are ready to
participate consistently and actively in discussions on
how to strengthen the United Nations response to this
global threat.

16-1555633/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, I would like to
commend the French presidency for organizing this
debate as we approach the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Zainab Bangura, Maria Grazia Giammarinaro and Lisa
Davis for their briefings.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union and wishes to
add the following remarks in its national capacity.
After the adoption of resolution 2253 (2015)
condemning the abduction of women and children for
sexual exploitation and trafficking and of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/15 in December 2015, Italy
welcomes the consolidated involvement of the Council
on the issue of human trafficking and looks forward
to reading the Secretary-General’s report on progress
in better implementing existing mechanisms to counter
trafficking in persons. The United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, as well as the expertise
of specialized agencies such as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, represent a very solid basis
for the upcoming report and its follow-up mechanism.
The relevance of today’s debate is that it links this
emerging issue with the consolidated set of resolutions
on women, peace and security and sexual violence
in conflict. These include resolution 1325 (2000),
adopted during Namibia’s Council presidency in 2000,
recognizing that peace is inextricably linked with
gender equality and women’s leadership; resolution
1820 (2008), on sexual violence in armed conflicts,
adopted during Italy’s last term on the Council and with
our active involvement in the negotiations to ensure
that the connection between international security and
sexual violence be finally recognized; and resolution
2242 (2015), promoted by Spain last December, on the
gender dimensions of violent extremism.
This link is extremely relevant today. It is recent
news that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham uses
social media to buy or sell sex slaves, as well as as a
means of funding itself. Mass migration flows — a
phenomenon that Italy has been witnessing for a long
time — continue to include conflict-related sexual
violence as a deliberate form of persecution to displace
34/66

02/06/2016

populations, with thousands of new refugees and
migrants fleeing their homeland. Italy’s response to
this very complex issue is multifaceted.
First, we promote an holistic approach. To this
end, we have put forward a migration compact, based
on a strong, unwavering commitment to humanitarian
principles — first and foremost saving lives at sea — and
on concrete and achievable goals to address the root
causes of migration, while at the same time disrupting
the business model of traffickers.
Secondly, we strengthen the justice response by
ratifying and implementing relevant instruments to
combat human trafficking and protect the victims.
Among them, let me mention the Palermo Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Additional Protocols, including those on the trafficking
of migrants and the slave trade. In this regard, I also wish
to underscore the action of relevant Italian authorities
in arresting, investigating and prosecuting individuals
responsible for the crime of trafficking.
Thirdly, we tailor training for peacekeeping
operations. Italy hosts the Centre of Excellence for
Stability Police Units in Vicenza, which since 2005 has
organized training courses for specialized police units,
including courses on the protection and promotion
of human rights and international humanitarian
law and on sexual and gender-based violence. The
trained personnel— over 8,000 so far, mainly from
Africa — join the formed police units to be deployed
in United Nations peace missions or missions led by
regional or subregional organizations.
Fourthly, we are actively engaged in international
initiatives, such as the Preventing Sexual Violence in
Conflict initiative, launched at the 2013 meeting of the
Group of Seven by the United Kingdom.
Given the alarming figures on the use of sexual
violence by terrorists and extremist groups, much
remains to be done. I wish very briefly to make two
points as food for thought.
First, we need to help victims of conflict-related
sexual violence to come forward and report, because
the statistics show that we have are far from being
exhaustive. Practitioners in the field estimate that
for each rape reported in connection with a conflict,
10 to 20 cases likely go undocumented. In this regard,
programmes of economic empowerment specifically
addressed to the victims should be explored.
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

Secondly, we need to strengthen the specific aspect
of mediation in the women and peace and security
agenda. We believe that this aspect has yet to be fully
exploited in all its potential. In line with our strong
belief that we need to mainstream mediation in all
United Nations agendas, we intend to do so by working
together with UN-Women.
In conclusion, these recommendations cannot
be decoupled from specific efforts to protect and
empower women and girls. Only empowered women
can contribute more effectively to sustainable peace
and security and act as a preventive force to eliminate
sexual violence in conflict and related trafficking. Italy
remains committed to achieving the goal of empowering
women and girls.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The upcoming
commemoration of the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict give us a
good opportunity to ask ourselves where we stand in
our fight to eliminate such violence what tools are at
our disposal. What we heard this morning from the
briefers certainly makes it clear that we have a very
long way to go.
Accountability is a key tool of our joint effort.
International criminal justice mechanisms have
significantly advanced the fight against impunity for
sexual violence. In 1998, the International Criminal
Tribunal (ICC) for Rwanda broke new ground when
it found in the Akayesu case that sexual assault
constituted an act of genocide. In March this year, the
International Criminal Court found Jean-Pierre Bemba
criminally responsible for rape committed by his
subordinates both as a war crime and as a crime against
humanity, in accordance with the principle of command
responsibility. These verdicts were significant steps
forward in the criminalization of sexual violence.
They send a clear message that there is no impunity
for sexual violence as a tool of war. We commend the
Prosecutor of the ICC for including charges related to
sexual and gender-based crimes in many of her ongoing
cases and for prioritizing these crimes, as reflected in
her policy paper.
Mr. President, you have asked today to also
focus on the issue of human trafficking. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25, adopted in December last
year, underscores the importance of international

S/PV.7704

law enforcement cooperation, including with respect
to investigation and prosecution. The questions you
have raised in your concept note (S/2016/496, annex)
are a logical continuation of the first-ever presidential
statement the Council has adopted on this issue. We
appreciate in particular the suggestions for concrete
action by the Council in the context of its countryspecific work. Sanctions against individuals and
entities involved in trafficking are an important policy
option that should be examined carefully.
Likewise, we see much potential in monitoring
financial flows generated by human trafficking,
which is not only one of the most serious crimes under
international law, but also one of the most lucrative
organized crime models. We are working with United
Nations University and other partners on these two
questions, and hope that the findings of an event that
we will be organizing in late June can be incorporated
into the Secretary-General’s report for the follow-up
discussion in the Council in December. We should
enable the Council to take concrete next steps in the
fight against trafficking and modern slavery.
Tens of millions of people around the globe live in
conditions that qualify as modern slavery. This crime
takes on various forms, including sexual enslavement,
almost invariably involving women and girls. But in
spite of the jus cogens prohibition against slavery — one
of the most norms under international law — there
is very widespread impunity for this crime, which is
committed as a part of the conduct of war, as well as of
organized crime. Tackling this culture of impunity is but
one element of the effort to eliminate modern slavery,
but an element that is urgently needed. Investigations
and prosecutions can be complex, as the relevant acts
are often committed in several jurisdictions. And
where national jurisdictions fail to play their role,
international criminal justice has to step in.
Under the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), enslavement can constitute
a crime against humanity and sexual slavery a war
crime. The ICC could therefore play a catalytic role in
prosecuting these crimes, while illustrating the truly
global nature of its work. This great potential will be
further explored at a side event on the topic of modern
slavery and the role of international criminal justice,
which we will host on 10 June in the presence of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. I hope
to see many participants in this meeting at that event.

16-1555635/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, the Council’s effort to tackle human
trafficking and modern slavery in situations of armed
conflict must be closely connected to our broader
efforts in this regard, as these crimes are committed
on a very large scale as part of transnational organized
crime and, in most cases, not related to armed conflict.
Various factors such as poverty, displacement, and
discrimination on ethnic and other grounds make a
large number of individuals vulnerable to a crime that
was among the first to be outlawed under international
law. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(ge resolution 70/1) gives the necessary prominence to
this topic and therefore offers an opportunity to finally
eliminate this atrocity, in times of armed conflict
and otherwise.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas: I am speaking on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia
align themselves with this statement.
I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Zainab
Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict; Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children; and Lisa
Davis, of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security for their briefings.
We welcome the report submitted by the
Secretary-General in April on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2016/361) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/25, adopted in December 2015. We look
forward to the Secretary-General’s report on progress
to implement better existing mechanisms countering
trafficking in persons. We commend the work of
Special Representative Bangura and of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as well as of United Nations Action Against
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
As the Secretary-General’s most recent report on
conflict-related sexual violence states, the scope of
sexual violence remains at alarming level, including
recent trends such as trafficking and its close
linkages to broader peace and security. Trafficking
36/66

02/06/2016

is gender-specific. The most recent EU data show
that trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation
is still the most widespread form of trafficking and
targets predominantly women and girls. This type of
trafficking constitutes a structural form of violence
against women and girls and is both a demand- and
profit-driven crime. From the sexual exploitation of
women and girls to other forms of trafficking, such
as forced marriages and many other despicable forms
of exploitation, violence against women and gender
inequality remain at the core of the problem.
There has been a worryingly sharp increase
in the number of victims of trafficking. We as the
international community must spare no effort to combat
the heinous crimes that armed and terrorist groups
impose on populations, including women and girls. The
grim truth is that some individuals and groups choose
to treat women and girls as commodities to be owned,
traded, gifted and trafficked. Due to demand, human
beings become resources to be exploited and their
human rights denied. The cynical political economy
of war dictates that when human life is monetized,
significant resources can be raised to promote violent
and destructive causes. It is well known that the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) uses sexual violence
systematically to mobilize resources and fund its
operations, including the ransoming and sale of women
and girls through human trafficking and slave markets.
In that context it is particularly worrisome that ISIL is
expanding its presence in Libyan areas that in previous
years functioned as major human trafficking routes.
But unfortunately, in addition to ISIL there
are other terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram,
that practise human trafficking. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report makes clear, it is a global threat that
can be found in many conflict areas, including Syria,
Somalia, Yemen, the Sahel, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and as such needs to be responded to at
the international and national levels. The interlinkages
between trafficking in persons and conflict-related
sexual violence, including by violent extremist groups,
need to be understood better and combatted with
improved understanding of the root causes, motivations
of perpetrators, and consequences of their actions on
civilian populations. In this regard, we emphasize the
following points:
First, we must strengthen the preventive dimension
at the global, regional and national levels. In the last
few years, the importance of mainstreaming the gender
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

dimension and of understanding the essential role
of women in the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism has become evident. We need to strengthen
our comprehensive policies and strategies empowering
the role of women in society as a whole and better
understand their specific needs and role in the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism. Government
policies need to be complemented by actions at the
community level, including through partnerships with
civil-society groups focused on women’s empowerment
and raising awareness of their role in fighting terrorism
and violent extremism.
The Internet and new technologies enable
organized-crime groups to access a large pool of
potential victims, hide their activities and carry out a
wide range of criminal acts in a shorter period of time
and on a much larger scale than ever before. Measures
need to be taken in order to prevent and address the use
of new technologies as a tool for recruiting victims of
trafficking in human beings, including in conflict areas
and by terrorist groups. In this context, studies should
also be done on how social media are being used to
traffic women and girls into non-State armed groups
and to recruit male fighters by promising access to
trafficked women.
Secondly, we should strengthen the humanitarian
dimension. The protection of civilians, in particular
vulnerable groups, including pregnant women, children,
persons with disabilities and persons belonging to
minorities, is central to all of our policies. Women
and girls often suffer disproportionally in situations
of conflict and become deliberate targets for terrorist
groups. Women and girls belonging to minorities
are particularly at risk, and sexual violence is often
used strategically to instil fear into, destabilize and
displace entire communities. Greater attention must
be given to their specific situation, including through
humanitarian assistance.
There is an urgent need to adopt a survivorcentred approach to sexual and gender-based violence
in humanitarian aid policies and practices. Assistance
should be comprehensive, including medical care,
psychological support and referral to legal services and
socioeconomic assistance. Moreover, awareness-raising
strategies must be pursued to fight stigmatization of
the survivors and of children born as a result of sexual
violence, so as to challenge negative perceptions and
misunderstandings that cause further suffering and
inhibit the ability of survivors to rebuild their lives.

S/PV.7704

Thirdly, we must strengthen the justice response.
First and foremost, we need to renew and invigorate
our collective effort to implement domestically the
existing legal architecture for combating trafficking in
persons, in particular the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and make use of the
expertise and practical tools of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in this regard.
We also need to make full use of the mechanisms
and tools created by the Security Council to combat
and prevent conflict-related sexual violence, including
by strengthening the implementation of the sanctions
regimes, in particular by ensuring that involvement in
human trafficking is more widely used as a basis for
listing where appropriate. We therefore welcome the
fact that the Council, in particular in its resolution 2253
(2015), introduces terrorist listing criteria related to
sexual and gender-based violence.
Deterring the financing of terrorism by all means
possible, in particular through revenue from trafficking
in persons, specifically in conflict, should remain a key
priority in our justice response. More than ever, there
is a need to end impunity for sexual and gender-based
crimes. The lack of accountability in conflict areas
contributes to an increase in such appalling crimes and
causes further distress to survivors.
We emphasize the significant advancement
in international justice made by the International
Criminal Court (ICC) as well as by the non-permanent
International Criminal Tribunals in combating sexual
violence in conflict. We underline the need for the rapid
and effective investigation and documentation of such
crimes. In this respect, we commend the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICC for issuing a policy paper on
sexual and gender-based crimes in June 2014 and for
establishing a priority in investigating such crimes in
conflict areas. We also note the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia’s work to capture lessons
learned on prosecuting sexual and gender-based
violence crimes. Nevertheless, we bear in mind that the
ICC jurisdiction is complementary to that of States and
that the primary responsibility for bringing perpetrators
to justice resides with States. At the national level,
accountability and transitional justice mechanisms are
also a key to this end.

16-1555637/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

In addition, as transnational illicit networks
trafficking in people, drugs and money have embedded
themselves in many conflicts, feeding on them and
fuelling them with funds and weapons, we find it
important that peacekeeping operations be enabled
to address these issues effectively. In this regard, the
United Nations police component is a critical tool in
assisting host-State police and other law-enforcement
agencies in addressing serious and organized crime and
protecting civilians.
The EU has built a gender-specific, comprehensive
legal and policy framework to combat trafficking
in human beings through the EU anti-trafficking
Directive and the EU Strategy towards the Eradication
of Trafficking in Human Beings. Anti-trafficking
actions also form a key part of our external policies.
The European Commission has recently published a
study on the gender dimension of trafficking in human
beings that identifies the harms of trafficking for the
purposes of sexual exploitation and the most effective
ways to reduce such harm after the fact.
The study concludes that trafficking for sexual
exploitation is a particularly gendered, severe and
sustained form of violence against women with
physical, reproductive and mental-health impacts and
secondary victimization harms. There is a need to
provide specialist services that are gender-specific and
access to mainstream services, such as health services,
in order to address the particular needs stemming from
these gendered forms of trafficking.
Reflecting the EU’s comprehensive approach,
anti-trafficking projects are funded under a number
of EU financial instruments. These include projects
addressing gender exploitation and promoting the human
rights of all women and girls. The EU will continue to
develop partnerships to address trafficking in human
beings worldwide. Accountability and a collective
effort are needed to put an end to this heinous crime.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself with
the statement just made by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to make some additional comments
in my national capacity, but at the outset let me first
thank the French presidency for having organized
this important debate and also thank Ms. Bangura,
38/66

02/06/2016

Ms. Giammarinaro and Ms. Davis for their statements
earlier this morning.
Sexual violence in conflict is one of the most serious
human rights violations that we deem to be a threat to
peace and security. Effectively combating violence
against women and girls and protecting women’s rights
and fundamental freedoms has become a key issue in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Much has been done at the global level in order
to increase the protection of women in conflicts. In
October 2000, the Security Council adopted landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. It plays a crucial role in our joint efforts,
together with the follow-up resolutions addressing the
same topic, including resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), 1960 (2010), 2106 (2013), and the most recent
one, resolution 2242 (2015).
Although resolution 2242 (2015) does not explicitly
talk about the trafficking of women and girls, it does
acknowledge that acts of sexual and gender-based
violence are part of the strategic objectives and ideology
of terrorist groups, used as a tactic of terrorism and as
an instrument to increase their power.
We welcome the recent report by the SecretaryGeneral on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361)
as well as the statement by the President of the Security
Council of December 2015 on human trafficking
(S/PRST/2015/25), which identifies the link with sexual
violence and stresses the need to deter, detect and
disrupt trafficking in persons, in particular by violent
extremist groups. We look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on progress in better implementing
existing mechanisms to counter trafficking in persons.
The Government of Georgia spares no effort to
develop and implement higher standards for the full
protection of women’s rights. We fully recognize
the benefits of enhancing women’s leadership and
participation in decision-making in conflict-resolution,
prevention and management processes. As an
illustration of our strong commitment, in 2012 Georgia
adopted its national action plan on women and peace
and security for the period 2012-2015 and became one
of the first countries to have a separate policy document
on that important topic.
Gender-specific violence is part of the bigger
picture related to conflict and insecurity. In that regard,
let me draw the Council’s attention to the human rights
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

and humanitarian situation in the occupied territories
of Georgia, which represent black holes where no
international monitoring mechanisms are allowed to
operate or have access to. Unfortunately, protecting
women’s rights continues to be a serious challenge as
well. Women in the occupied territories continue to
suffer from grave violations of their fundamental rights
and freedoms, such as the freedom of movement and
the right to education and other civil, social, economic
and cultural rights.
Worldwide, including the Middle East and West
Africa, conflict and post-conflict situations often
provide favourable conditions for human trafficking
and sexual violence. In order to prevent sexual violence
against women, special attention needs to be paid to
prevention. Georgia shares the view that, as stated in
the global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000),
“[e]ffective conflict prevention must therefore
start from an understanding of the broad and deep
insecurities that permeate women’s lives prior to
conflict, and the ways that pre-conflict structural
inequality can facilitate violence and insecurity.”
With the aim of raising awareness among
peacekeepers, the Ministry of Defense of Georgia has
included gender-related issues and United Nations
resolutions in special training courses for peacekeeping
predeployment. The topics cover violence against
women, prevention and protection in operations,
a gender perspective in reconnaissance and peace
operations and general fulfilment and consideration of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our commitment to
further contribute to our joint international efforts to
prevent and combat conflict-related sexual violence
and human trafficking.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): It is distressing that, in the
twenty-first century, the scourge of human trafficking
and slavery not only remains one of the gravest dangers
facing women and girls in conflict zones around the
world, but that it is on the rise. As highlighted in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/361), a key
driver behind that horrifying trend is the increase in
extremist movements and their use of both trafficking
and sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism in locations

S/PV.7704

such as Syria, Iraq and Nigeria. For that reason,
Australia welcomes the focus on gender equality in the
United Nations Plan of Action on Preventing Violent
Extremism. We urge the Security Council and Member
States to take practical steps to implement the Plan
and to counter the use of sexual violence as a tactic
of terrorism.
The Secretary-General’s report provides useful
recommendations on how that can be achieved.
Australia fully supports efforts by the United Nations
and the international community to engage with all
parties to armed conflict with a view to securing
concrete commitments aimed at addressing conflictrelated sexual violence. We also see a need to improve
the Council’s early-warning and prevention capacity
on conflict-related sexual violence in its monitoring of
conflict situations.
Recent incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeepers undermine the very fabric of the United
Nations peacekeeping system. Together with Member
States, the United Nations must continue to implement
comprehensive reforms to prevent them.
Ending violence against women is a priority of
the Australian Government. It is part of our foreign
policy and aid programme. Tackling human trafficking
and slavery is an important means of ending violence
against women. Central to Australia’s efforts is our
international strategy to combat human trafficking
and slavery, launched in March. Under the strategy,
Australia is working with partners in the Asia-Pacific
region to strengthen justice responses to human
trafficking and slavery. Our approach focuses on four
pillars, namely, prevention and deterrence, detection
and investigation, prosecution and compliance and
victim support and protection.
In formulating a concerted global response to the
growing menace of human trafficking in situations of
conflict, we must ensure that the voices of the survivors
themselves are heard.
In conclusion, let me thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. Let me also thank Special
Representative Bangura for her tireless efforts. We
welcome the opportunity provided by this debate for
all Member States to reaffirm their commitment to the
elimination of sexual violence in conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.

16-1555639/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I congratulate your country, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and for convening
this open debate on sexual violence in conflict — as
needed as it is, as we have heard. I also welcome Special
Representative Zainab Bangura and express my
gratitude for the valuable report (S/2016/361) of the
Secretary-General, which gives us a very good basis for
strengthening our efforts against that scourge. I am also
grateful for the briefings by the Special Rapporteur
on trafficking in human beings, Ms. Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, and by Lisa Davis of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security.
The interventions we have heard, along with
your concept note (S/2016/496, annex), Sir, and the
conclusions of the report presented by Ms. Bangura,
attest to the challenges we face in eradicating trafficking
in persons in armed conflict, which, as we have seen,
disproportionately affect women and children. The
increasing links between this crime and phenomena
such as violent extremism and terrorism forces us to
redouble our efforts to ensure that no more women and
children fall victim to such crimes.
The three reports issued last year on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture (see S/2015/490), the
review of peacekeeping operations (see S/2015/446)
and the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, all emphasize the
need to place greater focus on prevention in order to
address threats to international peace and security.
Sexual violence is not the exception. In that regard, I
want to underscore that all efforts we adopt to combat
terrorism and violent extremism, along with the links
to human trafficking, must include a central element of
prevention centred on generating better conditions for
the empowerment of women and a greater commitment
to ensure their rights.
We condemn all forms of sexual violence in
conflict. We join in the calls from all the members
of the Security Council and other countries that have
spoken here about zero tolerance.
We agree with you, Mr President, that efforts
aimed at responding effectively should include the
participation of civil society organizations, especially
women’s groups working at the local level in conflict
areas. As Ms. Davis and her group have said, supporting
such organizations in their work and involving them
in efforts to provide adequate care for victims and
40/66

02/06/2016

increase women’s participation in peace negotiations
should be part of any strategy at the national, regional
and international levels.
All of us must contribute to this fight. In Colombia’s
own context of a long-standing internal conflict, to
which we hope soon to find a political solution with the
support of the Council and the international community,
I would stress that the national Government has in
place an inter-agency strategy against trafficking in
persons that, in addition to prevention, includes among
its objectives supporting investigations, trials and
sentencing with regard to groups that commit this
crime, as well as to protect and assist victims.
Allow me to turn to the paragraphs relating to
Colombia in the report of the Secretary-General and
to highlight the acknowledgements about the progress
in my country’s peace process and on women’s
participation in that process and the unique nature of
the gender commission established to ensure that the
views and concerns of women are reflected in the final
peace agreement and its implementation. I should also
like to point to the references to the normative measures
adopted by armed and police forces, and the process of
care and compensation to victims, particularly victims
of sexual violence. We dearly hope that recent measures,
represented by the very significant agreement reached
on May 15 for the departure of children from the camps
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia,
will also also be a step forward in our efforts to build a
solid and lasting peace and move towards reconciliation.
We recognize the enormous challenges that lie
ahead, and thank Special Representative Bangura for
her tireless resolve to support our efforts to promote
the eradication of conflict-related sexual violence.
We thank the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict for its support. We
know that international cooperation is key to finding
solutions, and my country is therefore proud to have
had the opportunity to contribute to the work of the
Team, providing our contribution through the National
Institute of Legal Medicine by sharing with other
countries the experience and best practices developed
by Colombia in the use of forensic analysis to advance
the fight against impunity.
As highlighted in the concept note before us
(S/2016/496, annex), this debate is taking place
within the framework of the first commemoration of
the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

Violence in Conflict, to be held on 19 June. For
Colombia, we will complement that commemoration
with our own celebration of the National Day for the
Dignity of Women Victims of Sexual Violence in the
Armed Conflict next 25 May. For us, this Day will
be an opportunity for the entire country to praise the
dignity of the surviving victims and highlight the need
to strengthen actions to care and rehabilitate them.
The Security Council can count on Colombia to
ensure that the contributions and proposals arising
from this timely debate will be reflected in concrete
actions of prevention and protection.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the French presidency for organizing this
important open debate and all those who have provided
us with their insights and testimony.
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement of
the European Union.
While we will commemorate on 19 June the
International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence
in Conflict, the situation on the ground unfortunately
continues to be out of step with the resolve repeatedly
expressed by the international community to end
this scourge.
As for the situation of children in armed conflict,
the vast majority of parties listed in the annexes of
the Secretary-General’s annual reports are non-State
actors, extremist groups and terrorists such as Da’esh
or Boko Haram. However, States too are known to
use this type of violence. Thus, the Syrian regime’s
resort to sexual violence in detention centres and
interrogations — including against men and boys — is
part of an arsenal of terror that contributes to massive
displacements of people, which make the situation of
already vulnerable groups even more precarious.
In recent years, the horror has reached new
climaxes with the implementation of a veritable
regulated political war economy, in which trafficking
in persons for sexual purposes plays a central role.
Sexual violence — which serves as remuneration for
fighters, a way to sustain the group and a source of
income — is part of the system whereby Da’esh remains
in power in the territories it occupies. This highlights
the importance of the Security Council’s decision in
resolution 2253 (2015) to include on the sanctions list

S/PV.7704

anyone who transfers funds to Da’esh in the context of
sexual exploitation, trafficking or trade.
As you rightly note in your concept note (S/2016/496,
annex), Mr. President, beyond the obvious physical and
psychological trauma, sexual violence poses significant
risks of the socioeconomic marginalization of victims
and can perpetuate the vicious circle of conflict.
Children born of rape, who are often not registered at
birth, are at increased risk of being radicalized in their
turn and recruited by armed groups. Birth registration
is the most effective mechanism for determining the age
and preventing the recruitment of minors. That is why
resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict,
adopted on 7 March 2014 under the Luxembourg
presidency of the Security Council, stresses the
importance of recording all births, even belatedly.
We fully support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/361), including
its call for on Security Council to add sexual violence
as a criterion for designation for all relevant sanctions
committees, and on the sanctions committees to
systematically register alleged perpetrators of sexual
violence on their lists. Moreover, the Council should
see to it that the alleged perpetrators of systematic
sexual violence, or those who sponsor them, are
brought to justice, for example by referring situations
in which such acts are committed to the International
Criminal Court.
We also support the call of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, on the Security Council this morning to
provide her with the resources necessary to provide
a comprehensive and multidimensional response to
the challenges, old and new, posed by conflict-related
sexual violence. I take this opportunity to reiterate
our ongoing support for the Special Representative’s
outstanding work and for her Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Denial and impunity are the two major obstacles
in the fight against sexual violence in conflict. To deny
that sexual violence has an impact on security and
peace is to grant impunity to the perpetrators. We will
denounce this double injustice on 19 June and every
19 June until the reality on the ground finally reflects
the aspirations of the international community.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.

16-1555641/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan
commends the French presidency for convening
this open debate and will resolutely join the United
Nations system, other Member States and numerous
partners to prevent and combat human trafficking in
situations of conflict-related sexual violence. We thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers Ms. Zainab
Bangura and Ms. Lisa Davis. My special thanks go
to Ms. Maria Giammarinaro, with whom I had the
privilege to serve at the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. We thank all speakers for
highlighting human trafficking as an unconscionable
violence against human dignity and a threat to stability
and the prospects for reconciliation and peacebuilding.
My delegation would therefore like to propose the
following recommendations.
Today, conflict-related sexual violence must be
fully addressed in all its dimensions as it is linked,
directly or indirectly, to the following factors: first,
the nature of conflict; secondly, the profile of the
perpetrators, including combatants, traffickers,
terrorists and violent extremists; thirdly, the victims,
including those from ethnic and religious minorities
in Africa and the Middle East; and fourthly, a climate
of impunity or State collapse, cross-border dimensions
and/or violations of the terms of a ceasefire agreement.
The escalation of human trafficking for sexual
purposes has reached alarmingly unprecedented
proportions and requires cross-national interventions.
All efforts of the United Nations will require
coordination with the African Union, the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
the Caribbean Community and subregional structures,
whose effort and commitment we also applaud. We
support the African Union’s momentous commitment
to women’s empowerment and development to fulfil
Africa’s Agenda 2063. Kazakhstan is ready to contribute
to those efforts.
The State has the primary responsibility by enacting
legislation in response to trafficking in persons and
strengthening the criminal justice system. This calls
for the full implementation of the Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, and all relevant Security Council resolutions,
including 1325 (2000) and subsequent ones.
42/66

02/06/2016

The criminal codes of countries should also be
updated and national legislative responses around
the world harmonized and made compatible for
cross-regional action. Human trafficking should
be criminalized in all countries with severe and
consistent punishments and an end should be put to
all impunity, accompanied by the training of law
enforcement and criminal justice officers. Inspired
by the strong commitment of France, the current
President of the Council, we have joined the code of
conduct for mass atrocities of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group and call on all to
abide by international principles of the rule of law and
human rights.
Resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2253 (2015), which
make it illegal to donate money to terrorist groups,
trade in oil and antiquities and make ransom payments,
should be implemented in full and by all Member
States. States need to work with sanctions committees
and also freeze the assets and finances of organized
networks by working in close cooperation with
INTERPOL, parliamentary groups, non-governmental
organizations and others. Kazakhstan believes that
some recommendations of the high-level review of the
united nations sanctions (S/2015/432, annex) adopted
in June 2015 could serve to improve the impact of
sanctions against individuals and entities involved in
trafficking for the purposes of sexual violence.
We also fully support the United Nations zerotolerance policy on all forms of sexual exploitation
and abuse and strongly believe that preventing sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers should be an
absolute priority. All peacekeeping missions need to
have women’s protection as fundamental elements to
their mandates with greater employment of women
military and police officers, with full training prior
to deployment. A gender focus must also be intrinsic
to human rights, the rule of law, transitional justice
and security sector reform units in multidimensional
operations. Kazakhstan is presently contributing to
the process by fielding its highly qualified military
observers with gender competence to the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara and the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. We hope to
expand that deployment in the future. Women should
be fully engaged in processes of conflict prevention,
resolution and social reconstruction, even at the highest
levels of peace agreements.
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

Sexual violence affects every aspect of a survivor’s
life, both as a child and an adult. The victims of
human trafficking and sexual violence should receive
full, competent and speedy attention with increased
access to health care, psychological support, legal
assistance and socioeconomic reintegration. Often the
entire community also needs healing. Women with
disabilities face heightened vulnerability to sexual
violence and exploitation, owing as much to isolation,
the lack of support, physical immobility or infirmity.
In recognition of the risk faced by women maimed or
wounded by anti-personnel landmines, special services
will need to be mobilized for them as well.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Kazakhstan
shares the conviction of other Member States that the
dignity of and respect for women must be upheld in
times of conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Ms. Lind (Estonia) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the French presidency for having organized
today’s open debate.
(spoke in English)
Estonia welcomes the report submitted in April
by the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2016/361) and commends the work of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, as well as the efforts of the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict.
With heavy hearts, we read the Secretary-General’s
latest report. Sexual violence in conflict is a continuing
concern and the drastic increase in the number of
victims of trafficking is striking. As a European Union
(EU) member State, Estonia fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered here today by the Deputy Head of
the EU delegation. Given the cross-border dynamics
of human trafficking and an evolving criminal
infrastructure designed to exploit refugees, it is critical
to have good regional and subregional cooperation. We
support closer collaboration between countries and
organizations on this matter.
The global context of peace and security is
changing and the international community is facing
new challenges. Therefore, let me briefly touch upon
two aspects to effectively tackle conflict-related sexual
violence and the growing trend of trafficking in persons.

S/PV.7704

First, we need to keep on promoting gender
equality and women’s empowerment in order to address
the root causes of conflict-related sexual violence. It
is important to raise awareness and end the prevalence
of stereotypical attitudes, social norms and practices
that support and reproduce discrimination and violence
against women. Estonia has included the protection of
women in national strategies on conflict prevention
and last year adopted its second national action plan for
years 2015-2019 to implement resolution 1325 (2000).
Secondly, there must be no room for impunity for
sexual and gender-based crimes. Perpetrators must
be held accountable. In this regard, Estonia reiterates
the important role of the International Criminal Court
in situations where States are unable or unwilling to
bring perpetrators to justice domestically. However, if
perpetrators are to be held accountable, it is important
that those who have suffered from conflict-related
sexual violence report such violence and not be held
back by fear and stigma. This once more emphasizes
the importance of awareness-raising and changing
social norms.
It is of utmost importance to continue to recognize
and address the nexus between trafficking in persons
and conflict-related sexual violence. Too many
individuals, families and communities have been
affected and devastated. Preventing and responding
to sexual violence is vital to resolving conflicts,
enabling development and building sustainable peace.
The international community has to work together
to respond to the urgency of this issue and Estonia is
ready to actively engage in those efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): I am pleased to have the
opportunity to speak at this very timely debate and I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening it.
I also align myself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union earlier and I offer the
following remarks in a national capacity.
Eight years after the adoption of resolution
1820 (2008), which recognized conflict-related
sexual violence as a war crime and a crime against
humanity, we continue to find ourselves in a deeply
troubling situation.
The use of sexual violence as a tool of war and terror
continues unabated in many conflicts and an increase in

16-1555643/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

human trafficking, including the trafficking of women
and girls for the purposes of sexual exploitation, has
emerged as an alarming trend. Last December, the
Council heard harrowing accounts of how the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Da’esh, the Lord’s
Resistance Army and Boko Haram, among others, are
deliberately employing tactics of human trafficking
and sexual abuse in conflict contexts. Today, we heard
distressing evidence from Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bangura underlining the scale and
gravity of the issue. This is despite the availability of
a range of instruments to address this problem. Chief
among them is the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda.
Resolution 2242 (2015) and resolution 1325
(2000), along with other important documents, such
as the Council’s December 2015 presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/25 on human trafficking, have established
a strong normative framework and provide a basis on
which to tackle the contexts in which trafficking takes
place. Norms are of little use without action. We must
focus on action. Taking an optimistic view, we are
beginning to see some positive results on the ground.
For example, Colombia not only ensured the active
participation of women around the peace table, but it is
also taking steps to secure the participation of women
in the political, social and security dimensions of its
impending peace agreement. Just two months ago, we
heard in New York from civil society representatives
from Kenya and Indonesia, who related their experiences
of the role of women in preventing violent extremism.
As we speak, Ireland is hosting in Dublin the first
workshop of gender advisers from the United Nations
and regional organizations engaged in peacekeeping
operations. The purpose is to enable the advisers
to share lessons from the field and to consider next
steps for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
on a regionally coherent basis. However, for every
positive example, we have many more examples of
the worst forms of sexual violence going unchecked,
unaccounted for and unpunished. We need more action
and we need more justice, especially when it comes to
human trafficking.
We have seen from discussions in the Chamber that
cases of human trafficking in the context of conflictrelated sexual violence proliferate in the absence of the
rule of law. The buying and selling of human beings, of
women and young girls, cannot be treated just like any
other crime. It is one that sees the victim continue to be
44/66

02/06/2016

victimized long after the initial offence is committed.
Too often, we have seen that women who have been
rescued from trafficking continue to be devalued,
stigmatized and ostracized by their own communities.
There are no easy answers here, but simple justice
must prevail. There is no excuse for not investigating
and prosecuting cases of trafficking. If an individual
State cannot or will not do so, then we must ensure
that the international community is in a position to
pursue justice through all available means, including
international criminal law, sanctions and cross-border
legal and law enforcement cooperation. However, a
drive to meet the psychological and physical needs of
victims, who are mostly women and girls, must play a
central role in any such actions. If victims cannot meet
their basic needs for shelter, food and protection, the
pursuit of justice and accountability rings hollow and
cannot succeed.
In September, all of us will participate in the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly on mass
movements of refugees and migrants. It will offer
Member States an opportunity to declare how they are
responding and how they will respond to the scourge of
human trafficking, which so often takes place under the
cover of such large-scale movements. In preparing that
meeting as a co-facilitator, Ireland will do whatever it
can to ensure that the questions of justice and protection
for the victims of human trafficking are fully addressed,
including in the outcome document for the meeting.
Finally, we can see that the scourge of trafficking
cannot be eliminated unless we step up broader efforts
on conflict prevention and conflict resolution. Ireland
sees the three major reviews from last year as an avenue
through which the United Nations can be brought closer
to fulfilling its mandates. The very reason we sit in the
Chamber is that we seek to end wars, to prevent their
recurrence and to mitigate their consequences. Even if
we fall short in those respects, it is vital that we do
everything we can to protect the most vulnerable people
caught in the midst of conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank the French
presidency for convening this open debate. I also
thank the briefers for their critical contributions
and testimonies.
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Primitive yet effective, the use of rape as a tool of
war is raging in the twenty-first century. Women and
girls sold as cattle in slave markets are beaten, killed
or burned to death simply for resisting their abusers.
Children born of rape, hated and shunned by their
own peers, are living reminders to their mothers of the
horrific ordeal they have been through. Men and boys
are sexually abused to break them down and to humiliate
their communities. As crises rage, human traffickers
are expanding their hunting grounds, preying upon the
displaced, the refugees and the most vulnerable.
Yet, according to all statistics, sexual crimes are
rarely reported, be it for fear of stigmatization or
rejection, insecurity, especially if the rapists hold
positions of power, or simply because there is no one
around to report to. Even in the Council, addressing
rape as a tool of war can be difficult. Suffice it to
remember the case of Tabith in the Sudan, where some
delegations, instead of putting women’s safety and
dignity first, chose to doubt that abuse took place at all.
We cannot allow indifference to set in, because
indifference is the mother of impunity. Even the best of
tools at our disposal will not work if women continue
to be bystanders of peace negotiations, peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction. Making a difference
requires the full integration and mainstreaming of the
gender perspective into the work of the Council and the
United Nations, with coherent, consistent and credible
actions at all levels. Inter alia, a gender perspective is
also key to all efforts to counter terrorism and violent
extremist. We are on the right track, but the road ahead
remains much longer than the one we have covered.
With regard to human trafficking, it does not
take place in isolation. The same routes, the same
criminal networks and the same ploys are used by the
traffickers, be it for arms, drugs or human beings. To
curb human trafficking, comprehensive efforts are
required to tackle cross-border crime and terrorist
networks, including through enhanced regional and
subregional cooperation.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2015/25 spells out
a whole range of measures aimed at tackling human
trafficking, but as our Irish colleague has said, norms
are useless without actions. Therefore, I believe that
the Council, instead of iterating what needs to be done,
should look more deeply into what is being done, how

S/PV.7704

it is being done, whether it works, whether it does not
work on the ground and how to make it work. Such an
implementation-focused, impact-oriented debate would
have specific added value.
Victims cannot wait a lifetime to obtain justice. As
noted in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2015/361),
individual countries are taking steps to pursue
accountability — small ones compared to the scope of
the problem, yet important steps and a good start. We
appreciate the work done by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which
continues to assist countries in strengthening their
capacity to address conflict-related sexual violence and
to ensure the protection of victims and witnesses.
However, most conflict-affected countries, as
many have said, lack the adequate national capacity
and expertise to prevent, investigate and prosecute
sexual violence and human trafficking. Where actions
at the national level are not yet possible, international
justice mechanisms, including the International
Criminal Court, should step in. The historic trial of
Bosco Ntaganda and the Court’s judgment issued in
the case of Jean-Pierre Bemba are encouraging signs
for accountability.
We call on the Council to make better use of its
sanctions tools to seek accountability as well. Even
though rape is included in the listing criteria of many
sanctions regimes, the actual listings on that basis
are few and far between. The lengthy procedure of
sanctioning the Lord’s Resistance Army, for example,
which is on Secretary-General’s list, is just one of
the many reminders that a more vigorous approach is
needed. Listing criteria should also be further refined
to include human trafficking for sexual enslavement.
Because of the very nature of sexual abuse, speaking
out is especially difficult, even in societies where
women are fully empowered. It is hard to imagine doing
so in situations of conflict and serial discrimination of
women and girls. But some do, such as Nadia Murad,
a Yazidi survivor of sexual enslavement. Her courage
and fortitude should be an example for many victims
seeking to break out of the stigma and shame. To help
them do so, there is a dire need for public, religious and
community leaders to personally engage to help shift
the stigma from the victims to the perpetrators of those
heinous crimes. The good practices that exist in the field,

16-1555645/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

such as the work of Organization of Women’s Freedom
in Iraq and many others providing shelter to trafficking
victims and promoting their destigmatization, need to
be supported and shared.
United Nations country teams and peace operations
on the ground can be instrumental in helping to
overcome the damaging stereotypes through specific
education and advocacy programmes, and they can
assist in creating the necessary victim support, care
and reparations mechanisms to offer sexual violence
and trafficking victims a new chance at life.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. Al Musharakh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in French): I thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this important debate on conflict-related
sexual violence.
(spoke in Arabic)
Also allow me to thank the Arab Republic of
Egypt for its efforts in the presidency of the Council
last month.
We also wish to thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and all those who have
provided briefings on the subject of this debate.
Today’s debate is being held in the context of
the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict. On that day, the world pays
homage to survivors and supports their efforts to end
that inhuman crime. Several years ago, the international
community came to recognize the threat posed by
conflict-related sexual violence to international peace
and security. In resolution 1820 (2008) and subsequent
resolutions, the Security Council recognized sexual
violence as a tactic of war, constituting a threat to
international peace and security. The various forms of
sexual violence are considered to be war crimes and
crimes against humanity, and therefore require the
international community to firmly address them.
The international community’s consideration of this
important issue and the establishment of mechanisms
to assist national authorities to combat such crimes,
confront their perpetrators and provide support for
victims require us to make further efforts, especially
in the light of the growing phenomenon of the traffic in
women and girls for the purpose of sexual violence by
46/66

02/06/2016

extremist terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, and the escalating use by terrorists
and extremists of sexual violence as a tool to terrorize
civilians in the countries affected by internal conflict,
where the smuggling of and trafficking in women and
girls have become part of the political economy of
those wars, as well as an ideological strategy to subdue
and humiliate communities under the control of those
extremist groups.
The United Arab Emirates believes that conflictedrelated sexual violence can be ended only by including
relevant stakeholders. In that regard, the United
Arab Emirates emphasizes that the protection and
empowerment of women and girls, the promotion of
women’s participation and support for women’s role in
local contexts are essential to ensuring the success of
those efforts. We also stress the importance of adopting
strategies to combat extremism online and in social
media, which are exploited by extremist groups to
promote all forms of sexual violence against women
and girls and trafficking.
In addition to settling conflicts and finding
peaceful solutions, we therefore believe that we have
to counter extremism and terrorism at all levels,
including online and in social media. Through the
Sawab Center — a joint initiative of the United Arab
Emirates and the United States to combat extremist
messages through social media — we are intensifying
the online debate and presenting moderate and tolerant
voices from across the region to amplify inclusive and
constructive narratives. The Sawab Center has launched
numerous campaigns aimed at revealing the crimes
committed by terrorist and extremist organizations
against women and exposing their inhumane treatment
and exploitation of women to achieve their appalling
and despicable ends.
The responsibility for promoting gender equality
and the empowerment of women to build more stable
and secure communities lies with the international
community and national authorities. That requires
strengthening regional and international cooperation
and coordination, particularly in the exchange of
experiences of and information on the services provided
to victims and survivors, the capacity-building of
relevant sectors, holding perpetrators accountable, the
rehabilitation of victims, and providing the necessary
assistance to the affected countries in order to enhance
their ability to respond. The United Nations recent
conclusion of agreements and memorandums of
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

understanding with a number of regional organizations
is an important step in strengthening the desired
cooperation. Those agreements seek to increase the
exchange and analysis of information, provide training
and capacity-building, and extend the necessary
medical, psychological and social services to the
victims and their families.
In that regard, I commend the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. I also
wish to express the appreciation of the United Arab
Emirates for the important role played by the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict in providing assistance to the Governments of
affected countries to enhance their ability to address
conflict-related sexual violence. By building national
capacities, we can assist Governments in strengthening
accountability for crimes of sexual violence.
In conclusion, I reiterate the support of the United
Arab Emirates for the efforts of the United Nations
and international partners to address and end conflictrelated sexual violence.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for having convened this open debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General; his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Mr. Bangura; the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially in women and children, Ms. Maria
Grazia Giammarinaro; and Ms. Lisa Davis for their
very comprehenisive briefings this morning.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement made
earlier on behalf of the European Union. I would just
like to add some remarks in my national capacity.
As several Security Council resolutions underline,
ending conflict-related sexual violence is crucial to
improving international peace and security. Conflictrelated sexual violence has been used as tactic of
warfare in numerous armed conflicts, especially by
terrorist and extremist groups, affecting entire peoples
and societies. We note with concern that trafficking
in persons, particularly women and girls, in situations
of conflict-related sexual violence has become an
increasing trend, according to the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/361).

S/PV.7704

Trafficking in human beings is one of the most
serious violations of human rights. It is a complex
reality — transnational in most cases — often committed
within the framework of criminal organizations
that prey on the vulnerabilities and weaknesses of
trafficked persons. Moreover, trafficking for sexual
exploitation turns individuals into commodities, which
dehumanizes them and exacerbates the multiple and
protracted harmful effects of conflict-related violence
committed against victims. And it must be stressed that
the consistent mark and trend of this crime is that most
victims are women and girls.
The recent review processes of United Nations
peacekeeping have recognized the disproportionate
impact of armed conflict on women and girls and the
existing link between peace and gender equality and
women’s empowerment. Ensuring respect for women’s
and girls’ human rights and fundamental freedoms,
and women’s active, full and equal political, social
and economic participation, including in conflict
prevention and resolution processes, is in our view
very critical to ending sexual violence in conflict and
trafficking for sexual exploitation. It also contributes
positively to peace processes and to the achievement
of sustainable peace, accelerates economic recovery
and development, and helps counter violent extremism.
The full implementation of resolution 2242 (2015)
and the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism should also be an integral part of
the strategy to prevent and resolve conflicts and protect
women and girls from sexual violence and trafficking.
The overwhelming majority of victims, both of
conflict-related sexual violence and of associated
trafficking, never see justice for what they have endured
or receive the necessary assistance and support. We
must fight to end the culture of impunity for those
who commit such crimes. Those responsible must be
brought to justice. That is a critical element of our
prevention efforts, and in that regard Portugal believes
that the International Criminal Court continues to play
a fundamental deterrent role
As a complement to the roles of international and
national tribunals, the Council should also make full use
of the existing tools that provide concrete mechanisms
for addressing issues of conflict-related sexual violence
and suggest ways to ensure accountability that could
benefit the broader implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda. That could be done, for
example, by guaranteeing the deployment of women’s

16-1555647/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

protection and gender advisers in peacekeeping
operations, by enhancing the monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence and by continuing to strictly implement a
zero-tolerance policy with regard to sexual abuse
and exploitation.
For any intervention to be deemed effective, it must
be based on common efforts, which must be coordinated
in the areas of prevention, awareness-raising, support,
research and representation at international, regional
and national levels. That includes training law
enforcement and other officials to identify and protect
victims, prosecuting traffickers and their accomplices
and securing justice for the victims.
Portugal reiterates its pledge to continue conducting
training programmes for national personnel and
members of the armed and security forces and to those
assigned to positions in international peacekeeping
missions that deal with gender equality and violence
against women and girls, including sexual violence,
gender-based violence and trafficking in human beings.
Portugal was one of the first European countries
to adopt the Blue Heart Campaign against Human
Trafficking at the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. We are currently implementing our third
national action plan to prevent and combat trafficking
in human beings, which covers the period up to 2017. It
reflect my country’s commitment, in particular within
the framework of the United Nations, the Council of
Europe, the European Union and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries.
In conclusion, millions of men, women and
children continue to suffer at the hands of those who
benefit from conflict and violence. Preventing conflictrelated sexual violence and trafficking in human beings
is crucial to achieving a future of dignity, freedom
for all and sustainable development, in line with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) and with our collective
efforts towards the consolidation of peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on an
issue that is of serious concern for the international
community. I also thank all the speakers who briefed
us earlier today.
48/66

02/06/2016

In the past two decades, a considerable strengthening
of the normative framework on the various aspects
relating to women and peace and security has occurred
at the Security Council and the within the broader
United Nations system. Nevertheless, the scourge of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict has yet
to abate. That is partly on account of the proliferation
of armed conflicts and their evolving nature, involving
various non-State actors and the spread of terrorism
in such situations across large parts of the world. The
more vulnerable sectors of society, especially women,
suffer ever more in such violent conflicts.
The rapidly expanding transboundary nature
of terrorist financing, supply of arms, recruitment
and training of foreign fighters has led to a situation
where whole regions are impacted and no country is
in a position to effectively counter that menace alone.
Many parts of the world are experiencing large-scale
refugee crises that emanate from situations of armed
conflict and terrorism. Large trafficking networks run
by transnational criminal groups compound the misery
of vulnerable communities, especially women.
Tackling such complex challenges demands closely
coordinated and collaborative efforts among nations.
Sadly, we are far from being able to come together to
overcome such challenges collectively. One glaring
example is the lack of progress on the issue of finalizing
a comprehensive convention to counter international
terrorism that can strengthen the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
As we have pointed out on earlier occasions and
at other forums, the issue of women and peace and
security must also be seen in the wider societal context
that involves gender and development issues, which
are dealt with outside the Council. In view of the
cross-border dynamics of armed conflicts, it is in our
collective interests to contribute to the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), which would
greatly help prevent conflict situations. Gender equality
and empowerment, access to health care, education and
employment and strengthening democratic institutions
and processes are all important aspects of a holistic
approach to prevent conflict. The normative work done
in that regard outside the Council is as important as the
need for the Council to do more.
Over a shorter term, the need to institutionalize
the involvement of women in conflict prevention
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

and resolution is well recognized. However, such
involvement will be more effective only when it
emerges from local initiatives and national efforts.
When imposed from outside, their effectiveness will
remain limited. The international community has a
role to assist and facilitate such efforts across regions.
That requires not only normative advice, but capacitybuilding and institution-building at the grass roots level
of governance.
As pointed out in the Secretary General’s latest
report on the subject,
“[p]rosecution is ... essential to prevention, because
it can deter potential perpetrators and contribute to
restoring faith in the rule of law.” (see S/2016/361,
para. 10).
The absence, obstruction or protracted pace of justice
is unhelpful. The international community has an
important role in helping build adequate resources
and capacities for criminal investigation, prosecution,
justice-delivery systems, protection of victims
and witnesses and legislative reform to improve
accountability across countries. In addition, the
sanctions committees of the Security Council need
to address the issue of proactively listing terrorist
individuals and entities involved in situations of
conflict-related sexual violence.
India is strongly committed to a zero-tolerance policy
on sexual violence and abuse and provides adequate
predeployment training and gender sensitization to its
peacekeeping forces. The deployment of Indian female
police peacekeepers in Liberia served as a role model
to the local women to participate in policing and the
relevant rule of law frameworks. Such participation
enables improved intelligence about conflict-related
sexual violence and trafficking.
As part of our continuing efforts to strengthen the
relevant legal frameworks within India, earlier this week
India unveiled comprehensive draft legislation aimed at
the prevention and protection of trafficking of persons
and the rehabilitation of trafficked persons. The draft
legislation aims to unify our existing anti-trafficking
laws and to protect victims and prioritize their needs.
India continues to work closely with United Nations
agencies, including UN-Women and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, on related issues.

S/PV.7704

India stands ready to engage with its partners to
work towards addressing the issue of sexual violence in
armed conflicts and to help build a sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to to congratulate France on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
Thailand welcomes the French initiative to hold
this open debate to hear the views of Member States
with regard to how to respond to sexual violence and
trafficking in persons in conflict situations. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his detailed report
(S/2016/361) on conflict-related sexual violence, as well
as all the briefers for their respective presentations.
The prevalence of human trafficking in conflict
situations is alarming, be it for sexual purposes, to
finance criminal or terrorist activities or to attract
or reward fighters. This complex issue raises grave
concerns and requires our immediate response and a
holistic approach.
States have the primary responsibility for prevention
and for protecting their citizens and persons under its
jurisdiction from falling victim to human trafficking.
States must build their operational capacity to detect,
investigate and disrupt human trafficking and migrant
smuggling. One of the priorities is to tackle the root
causes of conflict.
Focus must be placed on those most at risk,
including undocumented refugees and displaced
persons, as well as unaccompanied women and children
affected by conflict. They are in most cases victims
of sexual violence and human trafficking prior to and
during their flight, in exchange for crossing borders,
passage to camps or shelters, and access to personal
documentation and refugee status. Such crimes are
often committed by Government officials. States must
ensure that preventive measures are in place and strictly
enforced and that those involved are prosecuted.
The sharing of intelligence among States of
origin, transit and destination, as well as with regional
and international organizations, is crucial in the
fight against sexual violence and human trafficking.
Civil society, particularly networks of women’s
organizations, can play an active and efficient role in
preventing such crimes. States must work closely with

16-1555649/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

them and other stakeholders so as to address this issue
in a more integrated manner.
The use of sexual violence as a tactic of war and
terror constitutes a war crime and a crime against
humanity. Perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Putting an end to impunity is one of the most urgent
tasks at hand.
The Security Council should strengthen its regime
of targeted sanctions against individuals and entities
involved in conflict-related sexual violence and
human trafficking. After sanctions are imposed, it is
also necessary to put in place effective monitoring
mechanisms to ensure that sanctions are fully and
effectively implemented.
The presence of female peacekeepers helps create
a safer environment for women and girls. Given the
importance of reporting and monitoring mechanisms
in addressing conflict-related sexual violence, female
peacekeepers can also be a trusted channel for reporting
and information-sharing. This is crucial to enable
victims to gain access to legal assistance and medical
treatment and to allow the authorities to identify and
prosecute those who have committed sexual violence or
are involved in trafficking networks.
Against that backdrop, Thailand has made
consistent efforts to train Thai female peacekeepers
to address conflict-related sexual violence and human
trafficking, as well as to increase their number in the
contingent. We also support the efforts of the United
Nations to appoint more gender adviser and women
protection officers, as well as to integrate a gender
perspective into the implementation of peacekeeping
mandates, both at the policy and operational levels.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
international community can count on Thailand’s
commitment to and active engagement in this
important issue.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): The Secretary-General’s 2016
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361)
is a catalog of stories and statistics that shock the
conscience: a Da’esh competition on memorizing the
Koran, with a Yazidi woman as the grand prize; public
auctions where women are sold to the highest bidder; and
a widely distributed magazine containing “questions
and answers” on the Da’esh code of sexual enslavement.
50/66

02/06/2016

This level of cruelty and denial of basic humanity
is almost unimaginable. But for women and girls living
under the barbaric rule of Da’esh, this is a daily reality.
The conflict-related horrors that women face are by no
means limited to Da’esh-controlled territory.
Accounts of rape; sexual slavery; child, early and
forced marriage; and other forms of sexual violence
are widespread and attest to the impunity that the
perpetrators enjoy.
Over and over again, in conflicts around the
world, we have seen that sexual violence is not just a
byproduct of conflict; it is a deliberate weapon of war
and a tactic of terror. In Syria, sexual violence has been
systematically employed. Government forces use rape
to suppress anti-Al-Assad resistance in communities
associated with opposition forces. Detention centres
and checkpoints throughout the country have become
notorious sites of sexual violence.
Instead of protecting Syrian women, the Al-Assad
regime is using terror tactics against them.
The world is facing the most severe refugee crisis
since the Second World War. The crisis has left millions
without a home, without money and without hope.
Criminal elements have taken advantage of the plight
of these refugees to engage in the trafficking of women
and girls for commercial sex and sexual slavery. In some
notorious cases, smugglers require sex as payment for
transportation across national borders.
The dreams of mothers and fathers, sons and
daughters, of a new life on safer shores are shattered by
the nightmare of sexual violence and exploitation.
Violent extremist terrorist groups such as Da’esh
and Boko Haram have adopted the most depraved forms
of sexual violence as a key part of their official ideology.
The systematic sexual enslavement and trafficking
of women is part of their method of recruitment,
their source of revenue and their means of terrorizing
the population.
Da’esh lures young men and boys, including foreign
fighters, with the promise of sex slaves. Yazidi women
recount being forced to marry new recruits and being
exchanged as gifts between veteran fighters. Many
girls and women have attempted suicide to avoid forced
marriages or religious conversion. For them, falling
into the hands of Da’esh is a fate worse than death.
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

Trafficking in women and girls knows no
boundaries. Extremist groups are utilizing social media
to advertise the availability of women for sale. Da’esh
posts pictures of kidnapped women on its Facebook
page, listing their background, their skills and a
price tag.
All perpetrators of sexual violence should be held
to account, especially when they are the ones sent to
prevent such heinous crimes from happening in the
first place.
We strongly support the zero-tolerance policy of
the Secretary-General. United Nations peacekeepers
and non-United Nations forces who have broken the
very trust that has been bestowed upon them must be
brought to justice.
Let me also emphasize that Israel believes very
strongly in the protection and empowerment of young
girls and proudly sponsored resolution 68/148, of 2014,
on child, early, and forced marriage to help put an end
to the practice of child marriage.
It is hard to believe that such human cruelty, in the
form of sexual violence, even exists. At times you want
to tell yourself that these atrocities are happening in
another universe. But they are not. They are happening
in our world, in our time and on our watch. Think of
the 219 girls of Chibok, Nigeria, still missing from their
homes; think of their fathers and mothers praying every
night for the day they will see their daughters again.
Think of the thousands of Yazidi girls abducted, sold as
slaves, raped and impregnated.
Now think of what each and every one of us would
do if these were our own daughters and our own wives.
And now, let us not just think of them; let us act, and let
us act as if they were our own. This kind of evil has no
place in our world. Let us unite to defeat it.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to start by conveying its gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for having organized this debate
as well as for the opportunity afforded Belgium to
participate therein.
The fight against sexual violence is a priority for
Belgium. My country wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2016/361) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual

S/PV.7704

Violence in Conflict for her untiring commitment to
the cause. My country welcomes also the presence of
the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in human beings
and thanks her for briefing this morning.
My delegation fully supports the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore limit my remarks to a few points of particular
importance for Belgium.
First, Belgium endorses the conclusion of the
Secretary-General that suppression is an essential
element in preventing sexual violence related to
conflict, including by terrorist and violent extremist
groups. The Special Rapporteur also underscores that
when it comes to trafficking in persons in conflict
situations, and she identifies fragile or non-existent
justice systems as a contributing factor to trafficking.
That is a reason that Belgium has made the fight against
impunity a priority. In that regard, my delegation would
like to mention that, on 7 June, along with UN-Women,
it will hold an event on the occasion of the publication of
the book entitled Prosecuting Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence: Lessons Learned From the ICTY.
The integration of the gender dimension is another
key element in the fight against sexual violence.
Along with protecting women and girls against sexual
violence, that is one of the main goals of our second
national action plan, covering the period 2013-2016,
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It is
against that backdrop that Belgium intends to support
the call of the Secretary-General to give women the
means to participate in efforts to encourage families and
communities to resist the terrorist strategy on sexual
violence. My country also believes that it is imperative
to work with traditional and religious leaders, who can
help to turn back on the perpetrators of sexual violence
the stigmatization with which victims are being
regularly targeted.
Belgium also wishes to point out, as does
the Secretary-General, the importance of clearly
understanding the link between human trafficking
and sexual violence during and after conflict. Current
conflicts are increasingly linked to human trafficking,
especially in women and children, whose vulnerability
is exacerbated by the conflicts themselves. Belgium
is therefore pleased that this link between human
trafficking and conflict was chosen by the Special
Rapporteur as the theme of her latest report, whose
great relevance my delegation would like to highlight.

16-1555651/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

For its part, Belgium is committed to implement
its new national action plan against human trafficking
for the period 2015-2019, in which the gender
dimension has also been taken into account. As noted
by the Special Rapporteur, the nature and form of
trafficking in conflict situations differ by gender, and
trafficking for sexual exploitation affects women and
girls disproportionately.
Furthermore, Belgium shares the concerns
expressed about the impact of conflict on child
trafficking. Belgium is particularly concerned about
the Secretary-General’s observation concerning the
danger posed by the fact that in countries where women
do not have the right to pass on their nationality to their
children, where births are not registered and where
children, particularly those born of rape, find themselves
marginalized, children are even further exposed.
Finally, my delegation would like to conclude by
emphasizing the importance of the recommendation of
the Secretary-General calling on the Security Council
to fully include the issue of sexual violence in conflict
in the work of the sanctions committees and to ensure
that they avail themselves of the advice of experts in the
field. The indisputable legitimacy of sanctions adopted
in this context will greatly enhance our collective
efforts in the fight against this scourge, which Belgium
is committed to continue unabated.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I would like to thank
you, Mr President, and the French delegation for the
convening of this timely open debate on sexual violence
in conflict.
Sexual violence in conflict remains one of the
most harrowing and serious problems facing civilian
populations, who have to endure the wanton targeting
of vulnerable groups in times when State authority is
undermined. Women are often considered the bedrock
of any society. When they are targeted, the very heart
of the population is threatened. It is therefore vital
that we do all we can to refine our policies, but also to
support States, which have the primary responsibility
for ensuring the safety of their people.
In order to generate greater sensitivity with
regard to women who are affected by the breakdown
of State authority that many contemporary conflicts
entail, it is necessary that they be included in the
52/66

02/06/2016

political decision-making mechanisms of any country.
Furthermore, women have an important role to play
in both peacekeeping and the mediation of conflicts.
With regard to the former, greater participation by
women at all levels in United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping missions would help provide a stronger
approach to the implementation of the protection-ofcivilians mandates of United Nations mission, in
particular as it relates to sexual violence against women.
South Africa welcomes the recommendation made by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/361) on
conflict-related sexual violence to ensure that troopcontributing countries abide by the measures required
in resolution 2106 (2013).
We are also encouraged by the leading role played
by the African Union (AU) through its commitment to
gender mainstreaming and its development and adoption
of the Gender Training Manual for AU Peace Support
Operations. That is in line with the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to train all peacekeeping
personnel on gender sensitivity and address conflictrelated sexual violence.
South Africa has been actively involved in the
training of women mediators in conflict. However,
we strongly support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that mediators be called upon to
include gender and conflict-related sexual violence
expertise as part of their mediation support teams.
Furthermore, the appointment of senior-level women to
mediation roles is also sorely needed.
We recognize that the scourge of conflict-related
sexual violence can be used as a tactic of war and of
terrorism. While we agree with the Secretary-General
that measures to address that should be aligned, allowing
for broader strategies to prevent violent extremism,
we believe that, like terrorism, sexual violence as a
tactic is based on society’s broader approach to how it
treats women — in particular misogynistic tendencies
inherent in patriarchal societies that allow for women
to be treated with disdain and inhumanely. Therefore,
the interests of women and notions of gender equality
should be mainstreamed into our governance and
leadership mechanisms. Women should be involved in
decision-making and participate in the economies of
their societies so as to end the trend of sexual violence
again women. Women’s voices need to be heard, and
they also need to be at the forefront of the war against
impunity and the fight against poverty and finding
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

the right solutions to ending such abuses during and
outside of conflicts.
While sexual abuses and exploitation in conflict
situations need to be urgently addressed, due attention
to the post-conflict situation, and in particular to the
survivors of such abuses, needs greater attention. We
concur with the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that relief and recovery programmes should be put in
place to begin to heal the psychosocial wounds that
result from such heinous violations. A zero-tolerance
approach should be adopted, and stricter and effective
punitive mechanisms need to be put in place, such as
improving conviction rates and integrating legal support
options, as well as removing obstacles to reporting of
such cases.
We also support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to support capacity-building for
civilians and military justice systems in order to
safeguard against impunity. Furthermore, women’s
legal status and rights must be ensured in postconflict situations. Strengthening the legal framework
to address issues of discrimination against women
with respect to land ownership, access to economic
opportunity and employment, education and health
care is an essential component of gender-responsive
peacebuilding. Ultimately, Member States have the
primary responsibility to put an end to impunity and
to prosecute perpetrators responsible for crimes against
humanity and war crimes, including those related to
sexual violence against women and girls.
In conclusion, South Africa remains committed
to addressing the scourge of conflict-related sexual
violence against women in all its manifestations, and
will work tirelessly in supporting the broader global
response to ending this blight within the wider context
of addressing the root causes of both conflicts and
sexual violence in general.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes this debate on sexual violence in conflict,
which focuses in particular on trafficking in human
beings, in anticipation of the commemoration of
the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which will take place on 19 June.
Unfortunately, we know that sexual violence
affects women, men and children in conflict situations

S/PV.7704

throughout the world. Canada unreservedly condemns
such practices and seeks to end them, to help victims and
to hold those responsible accountable for their actions.
We also know that women and girls are the main victims
of rape, slavery, forced marriages and trafficking in
human beings, including the most flagrant violations
committed by such extremist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram.
Sexual violence in all its forms is highly detrimental
to the ability of women to make a useful contribution
to the life of their communities and their country, yet
the contribution of empowered women is an essential
precondition for lasting peace and prosperity.
(spoke in English)
We welcome the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2016/361)
in some 19 countries, in which he makes important
recommendations to the Security Council and the
Member States. We also welcome the testimony of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and thank her for her
tireless work in assessing situations of grave concern
around the world, including in the Middle East, and her
work as Chair of United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We are pleased to be supporting
the work of her Office with a contribution of $3 million
over three years. We also note the important work
done by experts deployed through the partnership
between UN-Women and Justice Rapid Response in
investigating and documenting sexual violence. Canada
is also pleased to support this work.
As a leading advocate in raising international
awareness of the costs of child, early and forced
marriage, Canada is especially concerned by reports
of increased rates of such marriages in situations of
conflict and displacement. To better understand the
reasons for this increase, Canada funded research by
the Women’s Refugee Commission on how traditional
practices associated with these types of marriages
change during conflict and displacement. The study
determined strategies for integrating the prevention of
and response to child, early and forced marriages in
conflict and emergency situations.
Canada also believes that human trafficking, an
affront to human rights and dignity, should be confronted
with the full weight of domestic and international law.
Traffickers view their victims not as human beings, but
as commodities to be exploited for their own financial

16-1555653/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

gain. Women and children are particularly vulnerable
to human traffickers, and even more so in times of
conflict. Refugees and migrants also face great risks.
As one of the first countries to ratify the United Nations
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, Canada takes
very seriously its obligations under Protocol to prevent
human trafficking and prosecute the perpetrators, and
calls on all Member States to do the same.
Sexual violence committed by peacekeepers also
causes serious harm to vulnerable populations and
threatens the effectiveness and credibility of United
Nations peace operations. Every effort must be made to
support the implementation of the United Nations zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
(spoke in French)
Finally, I note that the Government of Canada
has launched a review of its international assistance
to determine the best way to help the poorest and
most vulnerable, to support fragile States and align
our priorities in international assistance with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1). We want to know how the
empowerment women and girls and the protection
and promotion of their rights through action in favour
of gender equality can be integrated into Canada’s
international aid activities. Recognizing the importance
of the participation of all concerned, we invite the
different actors — Canadian and international — interest
in international assistance to participate in the review.
They have until the end of July to submit comments.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): At the outset, I
would like to express my gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict and the Special Rapporteur on trafficking
in persons, especially women and children for their
important statements on this urgent matter.
My delegation welcomes the report on conflictrelated sexual violence that was submitted in April by
the Secretary-General (S/2016/361). We also welcome
this debate on responding to human trafficking in
situations of conflict-related sexual violence, which is
taking place a few days before the International Day for
the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict. This
is an important Day that reminds us all of the horrible
54/66

02/06/2016

experiences which survivors of human trafficking
face daily.
Responding to human trafficking in situations of
armed conflict is key. We look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the implementation of mechanisms
to counter trafficking in persons, and express support
for the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Current conflicts, like those in Syria or South
Sudan, are one of the root causes of the increase in
human trafficking. As a consequence of armed conflict,
refugees and migrants attempt to find safety and security
outside their countries. Criminals have established an
infrastructure to extort these people in their search
for a safe place. Reports show that people-smugglers
demand sex as payment of passage. The sexual
exploitation of a growing group of vulnerable women
and girls in a cross-border context makes it essential
to combat trafficking in persons nationally, regionally
and globally.
Also the motivations for extremist groups to commit
human trafficking are disturbing. Vulnerable groups of
women and girls are trafficked and used to compensate
fighters or to finance operations. As extremist groups
often perceive civilian populations as a resource
for commodities, women and girls are seen for the
commodities they can deliver, which is their sexuality
and fertility. As a result, women and girls become a
commodity in the supply and demand of the political
economy of war. Women and children often become
victims of human trafficking in situations of conflictrelated sexual violence. In addition to the physical
scars, the stigmatization and marginalization might
leave even deeper scars on these vulnerable groups.
In our vision, women and women’s organizations
have great potential to contribute to ending human
trafficking, as the Security Council has acknowledged
in its resolutions on women, peace and security.
We believe that commitment to keep implementing
these resolutions is important in responding to
and for the protection of vulnerable groups against
human trafficking.
To make protection sustainable we should also
focus on prevention. We cannot protect women if we do
not empower them and include them in decision-making
processes. This is not a symbolic gesture, but a reality
that we have to acknowledge within the Security Council.
Women should be enabled to protect themselves, and
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

their rights should be acknowledged and promoted. It is
time that the international community acknowledge the
intertwined relation between women’s protection and
women’s participation in issues of peace and security.
The Netherlands would like to present four ways
forward in which we, the international community,
can better prevent and respond to human trafficking in
situations of conflict-related sexual violence.
First of all, we need to systematically cooperate
with civil society and local communities in the
prevention of, and responses to, human trafficking.
Local communities and civil society are important
stakeholders and advocates. They know how to reach
the survivors and the perpetrators. We have to continue
preventing and responding to human trafficking, but
we also have to decrease the negative consequences
of human trafficking for local communities. We
need to support women and girls in overcoming the
stigmatization, discrimination and prejudices that affect
their access to services, and eventually their human
rights. In order to reintegrate victims, Governments
and the international community have to work together
with local communities.
Secondly, United Nations peacekeeping missions
are often confronted with human trafficking. It is time
that we mandate them to help address the problem.
Thirdly, the perpetrators of human trafficking
and other conflict-related sexual violence should be
brought to justice. To strengthen local justice systems,
the Netherlands supports, for instance, Iraqi women’s
organizations that train local courts and other criminal
justice authorities on how to deal with cases of sexual
violence related to armed conflict. The Netherlands
attaches great value to legitimate and professional
justice systems and supports rule of law programming
in several countries.
Fourthly, we feel that countering human trafficking
and sexual violence against women during their
journeys should be prominently addressed in the
context of the forthcoming United Nations summit on
addressing large movements of migrants and refugees,
to be held in September.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands has been a partner
of the the international community’s for peace, justice
and development, and we will continue to be so.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.

S/PV.7704

Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this debate.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, as
well as Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Ms. Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro and Ms. Lisa Davis for their briefings.
The scourge of sexual violence in conflict continues
to jeopardize the dignity and integrity of vulnerable
populations around the world, predominantly women
and girls. This despicable phenomenon is connected
to a widespread culture of impunity towards sexual
violence that continues to exist in all countries.
Brazil vigorously condemns all acts of rape, sexual
slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced
abortion, enforced sterilization and forced marriage in
the context of armed conflict. These abuses represent
violations of international humanitarian law and may
constitute crimes against humanity. There can be no
excuse or justification for the deliberate use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war, as an instrument of
subjugation or as a tactic of terror.
In the context of the ongoing global refugee crisis,
the link between human trafficking and sexual violence
in conflict, as recognized recently by presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/25, represents a particularly
serious concern. We welcome the most recent
multilateral initiatives to raise awareness about this
distressing issue. Let me highlight the establishment
by the General Assembly of the International Day for
the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict, to be
celebrated on 19 June, following an initiative led by
Argentina and supported by Brazil from the outset.
The global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) revealed in great detail how the impact
of war, including sexual violence, is compounded by
pre-existing gender inequalities and discrimination
against women and girls.
Last March, the International Criminal Court
concluded its first trial that specifically emphasized
the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war, in
connection with war crimes and crimes against
humanity perpetrated in the Central African Republic.
In its agreed conclusions, the sixtieth session of
the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), which
I had the honour of chairing, strongly condemned

16-1555655/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

all forms of violence against all women and girls as
impediments to the full achievement of gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls. Furthermore,
the review theme of this year’s session of the CSW was
the elimination and prevention of all forms of violence
against women and girls, including sexual and genderbased violence.
While acknowledging those positive developments,
Brazil stresses that the most effective way to avert the
use of sexual violence as a weapon of war would be
to intensify political and diplomatic efforts to prevent
and resolve conflicts. A decisive step towards this
goal would be to pursue a gender-sensitive approach to
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, with
women fully recognized as actors, not just victims. In
that regard, we underline the adoption of resolution 2282
(2016), in which the Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to promote the gender dimensions
of peacebuilding and calls upon the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to integrate a gender perspective
into all of its work — an approach that already guides
the PBC.
The Brazilian Government is currently drafting
its first national action plan on women and peace and
security through a joint effort by the Ministries for
Foreign Affairs, Defence, Justice, and Citizenship, as
well as UN-Women and civil society. Policies to protect
women and girls from the consequences of war and to
prevent sexual and gender-based violence, including
sexual violence in conflict, will be a key component of
our national action plan.
Our South-South cooperation agenda is closely
attuned to the need to offer legal, medical, psychosocial
and mental-health assistance to the victims of sexual
abuse arising from war and instability. In GuineaBissau, Haiti and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
we have supported projects to assist victims of sexual
and gender-based violence and to uphold criminal
accountability for these serious violations.
In coordination with UN-Women, Brazilian
peacekeepers and civilian personnel undergo rigorous
predeployment training to ensure the highest standards
of conduct and discipline. We fully support the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy concerning
sexual exploitation and abuse, and we emphasize the
need to emphasize preventive measures in that regard.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Brazil’s
commitment to preventing and combating the heinous
56/66

02/06/2016

use of sexual violence as a weapon of war. We stand
ready to cooperate with all United Nations bodies
involved in this campaign, including the entities whose
efforts are coordinated by the UN Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate France on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June and to thank it for organizing this open debate on
sexual violence in conflict situations.
This debate has been organized at the right time,
as it coincides with a comprehensive overhauling
of peacekeeping operations and the peacebuilding
architecture. It is right that the consideration of those
reforms should take into account the aspect of sexual
violence, which often victimize civilians populations.
Regardless of who the victims are, violence has
always been condemned, but sexual violence in times
of conflict must be condemned even more because of
its social and cultural implications for a population
that is already very vulnerable. The Security Council
has been seized of this matter for more than 16
sixteen years through the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) and related resolutions that followed it. Those
resolutions have allowed for a historic breakthrough in
more than one respect, as they unanimously condemn
sexual violence and call for greater efforts to protect
women and fight impunity. They also stress the need
to involve women in peace negotiation and national
reconciliation processes and in the political and
economic reconstruction of their societies.
Following the adoption of those resolutions,
international awareness on this issue has been raised
to the maximum and significant progress has been
made. Member States have shown themselves to be
united and committed to addressing sexual violence
and to supporting the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy with regard to any form of sexual exploitation
or violence. Similarly, the United Nations has tackled
the issue of the fight against trafficking with, inter
alia, the establishment in the Human Rights Council
of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, and the Special
Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, thereby
underscoring the need to carry out cooperation at the
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

international level in the fight against this transnational
and varied phenomenon.
Despite the progress made in the protection of
women and girls against sexual violence, we have not
reached the end of the road — far from it. The multiple
reoccurrences and persistence of sexual violence in
current conflicts remain alarming. Women and children
especially are deprived of protection and support during
conflict and face destructive forms of sexual violence.
They are systematically exploited to achieve military
or political objectives. They suffer the most from the
devastating consequences of conflicts and pay a heavy
price because of their great vulnerability.
Published reports on the issue of sexual violence
in conflict situations clearly show that the past few
years have been charachterized by an exacerbation on
an unprecedented scale of rape, sexual slavery, forced
marriage and human trafficking by extremist groups
as a terror tactic. Terrorist groups and non-State armed
groups are increasingly using sexual violence as a form
of persecution or to forcibly displace populations.
Women and children, in fleeing violence and
fighting, find themselves yet again exposed to the
risks of sexual exploitation, rape and prostitution.
Even worse, today they are sold in slave markets to
the highest bidder. Information obtained in the case of
thousands of women and children kidnapped and held
in captivity by terrorist movements, such as Da’esh and
Boko Haram, with the intent of selling them as slaves
or to meet the sexual needs of their fighters, remain
shocking and clearly show the barbarous and inhumane
practices experienced by those victims.
The majority of the victims of sexual violence
remain silent because they fear threats, reprisal or
intimidation. It is not just to the victims who talk who
face such risks, but also their families, witnesses,
human rights defenders and any other individual who
seeks to denounce this silence.
Sexual violence, as well as the threats of such
acts or the incitement to commit them, constitute a
serious violation of international humanitarian law
and of human rights law, and it is a serious violation
of the Geneva Conventions. Prevention and the fight
against sexual violence cannot be effective without
international political will and firm measures for
accountability against those who continue to act with
disregard for international law and the norms on the
protection of women and children. Judicial preceedings

S/PV.7704

and the fight against crime are insufficient to fight
human trafficking. It is imperative to prosecute it and
ensure the protection of the victims.
We should like today’s debate to contribute to
enriching the reflection on ending to this global scourge.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank France for having organized this open debate
of the Security Council on such an important topic for
the international community. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura, Ms. Giammarinaro
and Ms. Davis, who provided briefings this morning.
(spoke in Spanish)
For Argentina, it is an honour to attend this
open debate within the framework of the first formal
commemoration on 19 June as the International Day for
the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict, which
the General Assembly approved in resolution 69/293
of 19 June 2015. Allow me to recall that the adoption
of that resolution was an initiative of my country,
with 114 Member States sponsors, which represents
a clear demonstration of the gravity and importance
the international community assigns to this issue. At
the same time, the Security Council, especially on the
basis of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2122 (2013), has
reaffirmed its increasing commitment to the prevention
and eradication of sexual and gender violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations, as well as to the
search for justice and reparation for the victims.
Argentina firmly supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and endorses the recommendations
in the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2016/361)
relating to the combat and elimination of all forms
of sexual violence against women and children in the
context of armed conflicts and post-conflict situations
and the actions of violent extremist groups.
The increasing crimes of sexual violence perpetrated
by violent extremist groups as a strategy to terrorize,
intimidate and stigmatize specific groups — such as
women, girls and boys, religious minorities, lesbian,
gay, bisexual or transgender people, displaced persons
and others — are international crimes of the greatest
gravity. At appropriate times international tribunals,
such as those for Rwanda and for the former Yugoslavia

16-1555657/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

and the Special Tribunal for Sierra Leone, have
achieved decisive progress by defining sexual violence
as an act of torture, a war crime and a crime against
humanity. Crimes of sexual violence in conflicts must
be prevented and punished within the strict framework
of legality, making use of the available tools and
mechanisms, including sanctions and referring cases
to the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court.
We reiterate that it is necessary to continue joining
the efforts of all actors involved to prevent, combat
and eradicate crimes of sexual violence in situations
of conflict and human trafficking; to bring to justice
the perpetrators of such war crimes and crimes against
humanity; and to protect, assist and reintegrate the
victims of such violations and restore their dignity and
human rights. That must continue to be our priority,
and it must be taken into account when defining the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, as well as in the peacebuilding efforts
of this Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
integrating specialists into the different missions set up
by the Council.
When we speak of sexual violence in conflict
situations, we scannot fail to refer to the cases of sexual
abuse and exploitation that, unfortunately, continue to
occur in United Nations peacekeeping missions. This
is a grave situation, and it constitutes the greatest
challenge, in our opinion, for the future of those
missions and for the image of the United Nations as
a whole. In that regard, Argentina continues to firmly
support the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy,
as well as the distinct measures he proposes in his
various reports and those contained in resolution 2272
(2016) — zero tolerance, of course, but also maximum
prevention and support for victims. In that regard, we
welcome the appointment of Ms. Jane Holl Lute as the
new Special Coordinator on Improving United Nations
Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, as well
as the creation of a fund to support victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse.
Sexual violence in armed conflicts is one of the most
elementary and terrible violations of human dignity,
which constitutes an unmistakable and inescapable
threat to international peace and security. That is
why we must continue to combine efforts to ensure
the protection and full enjoyment of all human rights
of men and women, girls and boys, in the conditions
of equality.
58/66

02/06/2016

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): I congratulate you, Mr. President, on France’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. It is a great pleasure for my
delegation to take part in this debate on sexual violence
in conflict situations. We thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2016/361), and through him we also
wish to thank Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura and her team
for their commitment and determination to figh sexual
violence in the context of conflicts. I also wish to thank
and congratulate Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro and
Ms. Lisa Davis for their excellent respective briefings.
The rise and recurrence of sexual violence during
conflicts are without doubt one of the major problems
facing countries in conflict and those emerging
from conflict. That violence, which has disastrous
consequences for the victims, their families and
the community, is unacceptable and constitutes a
grave violation of international humanitarian law,
international criminal law and international human
rights law. Sexual violence in conflict must therefore
be vigorously combated, and the perpetrators must be
prosecuted before the competent courts to answer for
their actions.
My country, which has undergone nearly a decade
of crisis, has unfortunately recorded cases of sexual
violence, essentially in the form of individual and mass
rapes. In its firm will to combat that phenomenon, the
Ivorian Government has, in addition to availing itself of
the existing legal frameworks, implemented a national
strategy against gender-based violence. Accordingly,
the reported cases of sexual violence in Côte d’Ivoire
committed during the period of conflict have today a
legal framework in which they can be put on the docket.
Along with the ongoing capacity-building of the
judiciary, the majority of perpetrators — whether their
status be civilian or military — once apprehended, are
prosecuted before the competent courts.
With regard to military personnel in particular, the
Ministry of Defence has implemented several specific
measures since 2011, including a plan of action for
the Forces républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire (FRCI) in
connection with violence linked to conflicts. The plan
of action is defined along four major lines, namely,
strengthening the capacities of the FRCI to respond
to conflict-related sexual violence; strengthening
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

the institutional framework for the prevention and
suppression of sexual violence within the FRCI;
increasing outcomes in the fight against impunity in
connection with crimes of sexual violence committed by
the FRCI; and monitoring and evaluating the activities
and efforts aimed at fighting sexual violence committed
by the FRCI. The the plan of action of the FRCI aimed
at fighting sexual violence enjoys significant budgetary
support from the State.
As I have just indicated, the Ivorian Government is
determined both to act to suppress sexual violence linked
to conflict and to work to prevent it. My country adheres
to the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy and to
the relevant provisions of the subsequent resolutions of
the General Assembly. My delegation welcomes the fact
that the report of the Secretary-General mentions the
efforts undertaken by the Government of my country
and the entire readiness of the Ivorian authorities to
cooperate in complete transparency with the competent
entities within the United Nations system.
Nevertheless, my delegation has questions with
regard to certain allegations contained in the report,
such as that of a victim of 2 years and 10 months of
age. As far as it is concerned, the Ivorian Government
is fully committed to continue its tireless efforts aimed
at combatting sexual violence within its military units.
Accordingly, it has urged the FRCI senior command to
adopt a code of conduct intended for all members of the
armed forces.
In conclusion, given the progress made in the fight
against sexual violence and the return to stability and
peace in Côte d’Ivoire, my Government requests the
delisting of the FRCI from the list appended to the
forthcoming report of the Secretary-General to be
published this year.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Haidara (Nigeria): I thank the delegation of
France for having convened this open debate and for the
excellent concept note (S/2016/496, annex) provided to
guide our discussion. I commend the Secretary-General
for his remarks earlier this morning. The SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2016/361) presents an
operational context for conflict-related sexual violence.
My commendation also goes to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bangura, Ms. Giammarinaro
and Ms. Davis for their informative briefings.

S/PV.7704

In recent times, the myth that only men suffer from
the scourge of war has been broken. Contemporary
violent extremism in all parts of the world has rendered
women and girls exceedingly vulnerable. In today’s
armed conflicts, women living in areas of conflict,
who are essentially non-combatants, suffer as much, if
not more, than soldiers in active service. It is therefore
essential to include in our search for answers broader
questions about the prevalence of conflict-related
sexual violence.
In our quest to proffer enduring solutions to the
issue, we must focus our searchlight beyond situations
of active conflict and onto all human situations. As
conflicts do not exist in isolation, it is unlikely that
we can understand sexual violence outside the larger
context of human society. We must seek a full, moral
and helpful understanding of the correlation between
sexual violence in societies on either side of the conflict
divide. Preventing sexual violence is a critical element
in fighting this ugly phenomenon, regardless of the
context. We therefore commend United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict for having adapted
its framework of early warning indicators of conflictrelated sexual violence for use in several countries.
Acts of terrorism have today become a major cause
of displacement of persons, both within nations and
across borders. Through their actions, terrorists have
endangered the well-being of thousands of women
and girls. We condemn, in the strongest terms, the
abduction, trafficking and mistreatment of women and
girls by extremist groups. That underscores the urgent
need for the international community to fight violent
extremism and the ideologies that fuel it.
The date 14 April 2016 marked the second year of
the infamous abduction of 276 Nigerian school girls
by the terrorist group Boko Haram. The Nigerian
Government, as well as the Nigerian people, is united in a
strong determination to find and free them all and other
victims of sexual violence perpetrated by that terrorist
group. To date, remarkable success has been recorded.
Together with our neighbours Chad, Cameroon and the
Niger, we are winning the war against Boko Haram. We
are confident that the group will be crushed and that
its leaders and members will be held accountable for
the war crimes and crimes against humanity that they
have committed.
Nigeria takes note of the recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General’s report and expresses its

16-1555659/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

support for them. We note that, in resolution 2242
(2015), the Security Council recognized sexual violence
as both a tactic of war and of terrorism. That is evident
in the actions of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
Boko Haram and other extremist groups. We therefore
see merit in aligning efforts to address conflict-related
sexual violence with efforts to prevent extremism.
As part of the efforts of the Nigerian Government to
counter violent extremism, steps are being taken under
a multidimensional approach that encompasses peace,
security and development. The main focus of that
approach is de-radicalization, countering the extremist
narrative and advancing economic regeneration.
We are convinced that the United Nations remains
the central forum for addressing the women and peace
and security agenda. We acknowledge the progress
made to date through the continuous, concerted efforts
of various United Nations mechanisms in addressing
conflict-related sexual violence. Nigeria stands ready
to continue to work with our United Nations and
international partners in this important endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
should also like to express my thanks to the delegation
of the Arab Republic of Egypt for its presidency of the
Council during the past month.
At the outset, my delegation commends the French
presidency for organizing this open debate on the
theme of “Women and peace and security. Responding
to human trafficking in situations of conflict-related
sexual violence”. We also welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s briefing this morning.
I hope that the four minutes assigned to me, as to
all other delegations, will allow me to set out before
members what the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict has
failed to do. Since I presented my credentials to the
Secretary-General in August 2015, I have requested a
meeting with her more than once. To date I have had no
reply. Nevertheless, we thank her for her attention to that
issue and for her draft report of 11 February. We replied
to the paragraphs related to the Sudan in the report on
19 November 2015, in both English and Arabic. To date
we not received no answer, despite our wish to discuss
those paragraphs with her. Furthermore, no references
60/66

02/06/2016

are given for the facts presented in paragraphs 63 to
67 on the Sudan in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/361), nor could we find any information that we
presented to her in those paragraphs.
Today I am certain that the Secretariat — which
is supposed to be the Secretariat of all Member States,
large and small, of countries that established and
created the United Nations, with which the Secretariat
should cooperate closely — instead of working with
all countries, targets only certain States. Without such
information the Secretariat’s, reports would mean
absolutely nothing. We find them distasteful. We
therefore believe that the Security Council should take
account of the following facts.
First, a report of the Secretary-General is presented
to Member States only 24 hours before the Security
Council takes it up.
Secondly, the aforementioned report claims to
cover the period from January to December 2015
while it reiterates its accusation against the Sudanese
Armed Forces of collective rape in Tabit village in
October 2014, while also claiming that the rape began
in October 2015. We find it odd that this rape began and
never ended despite the fact the United Nations-African
Union Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) report
of 9 November 2015, I recall, denied that the Sudanese
Armed Forces had perpetrated any such crime. The
fact that some have called for a new investigation
into the Tabit events merely shows that they intend to
take this opportunity, and certainly not to squander
it, to condemn the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudanese Armed Forces, and to insist on condemning
them based not on facts but on very narrow interests.
Thirdly, why does the report not take up the
accusations and allegations that some individuals
associated with the United Nations perpetrated acts of
sexual violence despite the zero-tolerance policy that
has been in place since 2003?
Regardless of what the Secretary-General’s report
may say, my Government is particularly concerned
with women’s issues. That is demonstrated by a number
of initiatives that have led to the implementation of a
number of strategies and national plans, such as the
25-year strategy for women, the national strategy to
combat violence against women, the national policy
to empower women and the national policy to protect
women. In addition, the Government has established
both a unit to combat gender violence and a national
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

independent human rights commission based on the
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups. We have accorded
particular attention to the issues of violence against
women, particularly for women in camps for internally
displaced persons in Darfur, the Blue Nile region and
South Kordofan, in cooperation with the United Nations
Population Fund and the human rights division of the
country team in the Sudan.
In order to mitigate the threat of human trafficking
in women and girls, and since Sudan is a sub-Saharan
transit country that has witnessed a number of such
crimes, my Government approved a national law
on human trafficking aimed at women and girls in
particular. In 2014, my capital, Khartoum, hosted
the high-level African Union Regional Conference
on Human Trafficking and Smuggling in the Horn
of Africa, with broad international and regional
participation, leading to the Declaration of the
Ministerial Conference of the Khartoum Process. The
Government also signed treaties to secure its borders
with a number of neighbouring countries in order to
prevent the movement of arms and to curb the actions
of rebel groups that violate human rights.
I shall be brief in my few remaining minutes.
We believe that this issue is very important and that
it should be accorded the appropriate degree of priority,
but we regret the information provided in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on conflict-related sexual violence, in
which information from unreliable and biased sources
is used to distort the truth. It makes reference to events
of collective rape that took place in 2014. How ironic it
is that the information provided in the report came from
UNAMID, which has denied the occurrence of such
crimes following a visit by its officials to the area and
the conduct of an urgent investigation. We observe such
a lack of credibility in a number of reports presented
by the Secretary-General. Paragraph 63 of this report
states that 53 per cent of acts of sexual violence take
place in “isolated areas”, that is outside State control. It
is illogical for the State to be held responsible while, at
the same time, the report states clearly that the activities
of rebel groups led to the isolation of those regions and
those groups failed to provide security to the citizens
living there.
Finally, the report also refers to the difficulty of
reaching areas where the alleged violence takes place.
It references cases of stigmatization and a fear of

S/PV.7704

retaliation, but can cite no data to back up such claims,
revealing the flaws in its methodology. The report and
the figures it cites lack credibility. It denies that the
police forces followed up on reports of the incidents,
and instead blames them for not following up.
Regardless, we shall continue to cooperate with the
Secretary-General and the United Nations to achieve
the objectives of the Organization in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland wishes to thank the French presidency for
having organized this debate and welcomes the latest
report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2016/361) and its recommendations.
Switzerland would like to emphasize three
elements: first, protection challenges in the face of
large movements of migrants and forcefully displaced
persons; secondly, trafficking in persons, in particular
women and children, as a means to fuel armed conflict,
terrorism and violent extremism; and thirdly, the
importance of ending impunity for sexual and genderbased violence.
Switzerland is deeply concerned by the accounts
of exploitation and trafficking in the context of
large-scale movements of refugees and migrants. For
this reason, we welcome the presence of Maria Grazia
Giammarinaro, Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially in women and children, among
us today.
Unregistered individuals on the move and displaced
persons are particularly vulnerable to trafficking,
especially women and girls. They are easy victims
for criminal networks, including organized crime.
We need to adopt a broad perspective and include all
relevant actors: peacekeeping forces, border police,
immigration officials and humanitarian actors. Indeed,
they all have a role to play in preventing and fighting
trafficking. These actors should work on the basis of
a gender-sensitive approach that includes the use of
female officers and personnel.
Restrictive
migration
policies
that
limit
opportunities for women and girls fleeing conflict
zones increase the latter’s vulnerability to exploitation
and trafficking. Through increased dialogue and
cooperation, we should find ways to adjust these

16-1555661/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

policies and to ensure that women and girls coming from
conflict-affected areas are not subject to trafficking.
As underscored in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, the trafficking of women and girls
has become a full-fledged element of the economy of
war and terrorism, as well as violent extremism. We
know that armed groups, including terrorist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, are
financing their activities through trafficking, and that
women and girls are used as incentives and rewards
for fighters.
On the one hand, it is important to understand that
trafficking in persons, in particular of women, girls and
children, fuels armed conflict, terrorism and violent
extremism. On the other, it is fundamental to ensure
the participation of women and girls in the development
of anti-trafficking and counter-terrorism strategies and
strategies aimed at the prevention of violent extremism.
The Secretary-General’s report and his Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism highlight the
importance of empowering women as a force for
sustainable peace. We believe that the fifth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
is an opportunity to address this issue.
The list of non-State armed groups engaged in
conflict-related sexual violence contained in the current
report of the Secretary-General remains long. This
underlines the importance of strengthening dialogue
with armed groups so as to improve their compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law. To this end, Switzerland supports, for example,
the non-governmental organization Geneva Call,
which engages with armed groups so as to enhance
the prevention and reduction of sexual violence by
having them sign voluntary commitments to abide by
international norms.
Switzerland is concerned by the climate of
impunity in terms of conflict-related sexual violence. It
supports the efforts made by the International Criminal
Court and its Prosecutor to fight against impunity for
sexual and gender-based crimes. It also advocates for
a holistic approach to the treatment of survivors of
sexual violence.
Finally, I wish to highlight the importance of broadbased action against trafficking in persons and sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel. We
call on the Secretary-General to continue unswervingly
62/66

02/06/2016

to pursue his efforts in this respect. We would recall
that it is the responsibility of States to investigate and to
prosecute all alleged violations and to bring perpetrators
to justice. The Justice Rapid Response roster could
be used to ensure that adequate human resources are
present to enforce the zero-tolerance policy.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate France on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their highly informative statements.
Today, the severe effects of conflicts in various
geographical areas on women and girls continue to
constitute a significant problem that must be thoroughly
examined by the international community. We consider
resolution 1325 (2000) to be an important milestone in
terms of addressing the disproportionate and unique
impact of armed conflict on women. The international
community should pay particular attention to how to
prevent and respond to sexual violence, which is often
used as a weapon of war and a strategy to deprive human
beings of their most basic rights: their safety, security
and dignity. These crimes should not go unrecorded
and unpunished.
The horrific acts perpetrated against women and
girls by terrorist organizations such as Da’esh and Boko
Haram require a comprehensive and inclusive approach
in order to eliminate the root causes of the problem.
This approach should include women’s equal and full
participation, as active agents, in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
Furthermore, all actors should take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence,
particularly rape and other forms of sexual abuse, in
situations of armed conflict.
On this understanding, Turkey actively promotes
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
succeeding resolutions in international forums,
including in the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and NATO.
Deliberations and efforts are also under way aimed at
drafting a national action plan for the implementation
of the resolution.
The focus of today’s open debate is timely and
pertinent. We are witnessing new complexities
surrounding the changing nature of conflicts. An
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

increasing number of intra-State conflicts, protracted
crises, forced displacements and humanitarian
emergencies unfortunately create an environment
conducive to the trafficking of women and girls.
Turkey attaches great importance to the fight
against human trafficking, which constitutes a
violation of human rights and an offence to the dignity
and integrity of the human being. Owing to its unique
geographical location bridging two continents and with
a fast-developing economy, Turkey has lately become a
destination country in human trafficking.
In order to reverse this trend, we have introduced
numerous administrative and legal measures regarding
the main pillars of combating human trafficking:
prevention, protection, prosecution and cooperation.
Turkey is a party to the relevant international legal
instruments to combat human trafficking. The
necessary amendments have been made in order to align
its domestic legislation with international instruments.
We believe that efforts aimed at providing support
to victims of human trafficking are essential. On this
understanding, Turkey is providing two main categories
of support to victims of human trafficking. The first
one is its victim support programme, and the second
is its voluntary and safe return programme. Victims
of human trafficking can benefit from the support
services provided in Turkey upon their consent or can
return to their home countries if they choose to do so,
on a voluntary basis.
Turkey has also opened women’s shelters in
various cities in cooperation with the International
Organization for Migration and has put into service a
helpline for victims of human trafficking.
We are of the opinion that human trafficking cannot
be prevented by Governments acting individually.
In order to combat human trafficking, a welldesigned, coordinated and comprehensive response
and international cooperation are required. In this
context, acceding to international instruments and
their implementation in a good spirit of cooperation and
goodwill, using pragmatic approaches rather than strict
formality, are essential for success.
Turkey supports the empowerment and well-being
of women and girls in various emergency, conflict or
post-conflict situations through its comprehensive
development assistance programmes. The projects
we are carrying out in Afghanistan and Somalia,

S/PV.7704

in particular in the fields of education and healthcare services, are concrete examples of our efforts to
this end.
As the crisis in Syria enters its sixth year, millions
of Syrians, including women and girls, continue to live
under the threat of sexual violence. Turkey is making
every effort to provide security and safety to Syrian
women and girls who have fled the conflict in Syria.
I take this opportunity to mention some of the
best practices we have implemented to tackle forms
of sexual violence relevant to our debate, based on our
experience in responding to forced displacements in
our region.
Between 2013 and 2015, a humanitarian aid
programme for eliminating and responding to genderbased violence for Syrian women and girls was
conducted by the Turkish Ministry of Family and
Social Policies in cooperation with the United Nations
Population Fund. Similar programmes regarding
Syrian women and girls in Turkey will continue in the
upcoming period.
In terms of participation, we prioritize women’s
participation in the temporary protection centres,
with their inclusion in both decision-making
and administration.
With regard to protection, an adequate number of
women staff are employed in the centres to maintain
quality health, education and security services for
women and girls.
On prevention, special measures are in place to
prevent assaults within the centres and to protect
vulnerable groups. Outside the centres, measures are
taken to promote the monitoring and prevention of
domestic and sexual violence.
In terms of empowerment, the enrolment of girls in
schooling and continuing education for women remains
a policy priority.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support for international, regional and national efforts
to end sexual violence in situations of armed conflict
and to respond to its consequences.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

16-1555663/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank France for organizing this debate.
I also commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and his Special Representative Zainab Bangura, as
well as all those who spoke before me, for their very
useful presentations.
Sexual violence in conflict situations is a scourge
from which my country, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, has long suffered. For more than a decade,
my country has experienced especially bloody armed
conflicts in the eastern part of its territory. Those
conflicts, which have caused many human casualties,
are at the source of the practice of using rape as a weapon
of war. The lives of thousands of girls, women, boys
and men have thus been disrupted. The consequences
of the situation psychologically, economically and in
medical terms are enormous.
This debate affords us an opportunity to once again
touch on the efforts of my country’s Government to
combat this situation. The restoration of peace in the
part of the country formerly occupied by rebel armed
groups has brought major change. Enormous progress
has been made both in the fight against sexual violence
and at the level of responding to the needs of victims.
In referring to my country, the report (S/2016/361) of
the Secretary-General attests to that in mentioning
the appreciable 80 per cent decline in the number of
cases of sexual violence in conflict areas. Among other
things, my Government attributes those results to the
following elements: the appointment of a personal
representative of the President of the Republic in charge
of the fight against sexual violence and the recruitment
of children; the adoption of a plan of action to combat
sexual violence among the armed forces and the
signing of a joint communiqué on the issue between the
Government and the United Nations; the adoption of a
zero-tolerance policy; and the signing by the Minister
of National Defence of a decree on the responsibility
of the unit commanders of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo for combating
sexual violence.
All of those steps reflect the will of the Government
to end this scourge and honour its international
commitments. Against that backdrop, the Government
is committed to addressing the various problems,
including delivering justice in the fight against impunity.
In that connection, 111 cases were decided in 2015 by
the military justice system, without regard for the rank
64/66

02/06/2016

of the accused. We have also established a compensation
fund, while two Senate committees, on sexual violence
and on political, administrative and judicial issues, are
working on a bill proposed by the office of the personal
representative of the Head of State. On preventing
sexual violence, a regional campaign called “Breaking
the Silence” will be launched by September. On
socioeconomic reintegration, with the collaboration of
our national institute for professional training, training
was organized at Kibumba last September in various
economic sectors for survivors and demobilized
fighters. That type of training will continue this year
in Rutshuru in North Kivu and in Bunia and Aru in
Ituri and will train 2,000 people. A $35,000 credit fund
was set up to meet the financial needs of some women
in Bunia. That progress has been made possible thanks
to the Government’s own resources, with the technical
support of the international community, including
assistance from Japan via Ms. Bangura’s office,
and the United Nations Population Fund and various
other partners.
In conclusion, my country is determined to continue
its efforts to completely eradicate sexual violence. We
highly value the support provided to us in that regard
by the United Nations and the international community.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Qassem Agha (Syria) (spoke in Arabic):
We have noted with interest the report (S/2016/361)
of the Secretary-General presented by his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura. We appreciate Ms. Bangura’s
efforts in that regard, in particular following her visit to
the Syrian Arab Republic last April at the invitation of
the Syrian Government, which has worked to cooperate
and coordinate with her Office and with the United
Nations to ensure the success of her important task.
We have also worked to set the facts straight and refute
all allegations made via media propaganda, which
is complicit in the shedding of Syrian blood — an
approach adopted by some members of the Security
Council for pure political objectives and to demonize
the Syrian Government.
The Government of Syria hosted Ms. Bangura and
afforded her all the necessary facilities. It opened all
doors to its corrections and rehabilitation facilities. It
gave her opportunities to meet numerous prisoners who
had committed killings, looting and other acts against
16-15556

02/06/2016

Women and peace and security

Syrian law. All of that was out of the Government’s desire
to cooperate with the Special Representative. While we
see some improvement in this report in the approach
adopted by the Special Representative with regard to
Syrian women victims of sexual violence, we would
nevertheless like to make the following observations.
First, the report does not look into or recount the
plight of Syrian women and girls living in refugee camps
in neighbouring countries — something that is crucial.
In that regard, we must express our deep concern at the
ongoing rape of women and the phenomenon of sexual
slavery in the camps. We also express our deep sorrow
at the continuing trafficking in the human organs of the
vulnerable — above all, as that is taking place before
the eyes of the entire international community.
Rapes of Syrian women and children, sexual
harassment and trafficking in organs also take place
in Turkish camps. In particular, according to Turkish
news agencies, such crimes have taken place in the
Nizip camp, Gaziantep governorate, which, ironically,
the Turkish governorate considers a model camp. That
was reported by the Dogan news agency as well, while
the BirGün newspaper has reported that approximately
30 children between the ages of 8 and 12 were raped, as
well as the forced recruitment of young people to join
terrorist groups.
Secondly, we reiterate our request that Ms. Bangura’s
team carry out investigations into the plight of the
hundreds of women and girls who have been abducted
by the terrorist group Jaish Al-Islam in Adra, in the
rural part of Damascus, which has also committed
heinous crimes in that town. Jaish Al-Islam has paraded
those women handcuffed in iron cages in the town of
Duma. That is in addition to other enslaved women
taken from areas surrounding Latakia and others killed
in cold blood in the Za’ara massacre, which armed
takfiris carried out a few weeks ago outside Hama. In
our letters to the Security Council, we have appealed
time and again for information on the outcome or status
of those abducted women.
Thirdly, the report completely disregards the plight
of Syrian women in the occupied Syrian Golan and the
gross practices against Palestinian women in occupied
Arab lands, who are subjected to the most heinous
violations of human rights, exclusionary policies and
other forms of degrading treatment. Thousands of
Palestinian women and girls have fallen victim to the

S/PV.7704

atrocities committed by the wanton regime of the Jewish
entity in Gaza and other occupied Palestinian territories.
I am convinced that the members of the Council
are well aware of the case of the Palestinian woman
who gave birth to her child as she waited hours at a
checkpoint of the Israeli occupation forces. I could cite
numerous other examples of human rights violations
perpetrated by the immoral Israeli regime, which kills
and detains children, refuses to allow some 50 Syrian
women in the occupied Golan to visit their siblings and
other relatives in Syria, and provides ongoing and open
support to the terrorist Al-Nusra Front.
To conclude, Syria is committed to supporting all
international efforts to put an end to all forms of sexual
violence to bring the perpetrators and inciters to justice,
and to break the silence and unjustified disregard of
many United Nations specialized entities. We stress
our desire to continue to cooperate in a depoliticized
context. The authorities concerned are ready to provide
further assistance with names or incidents to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General so as to ensure
the appropriate implementation of her noble mandate.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Turkey has asked for the floor to make
a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): Our delegation has asked
for the floor to reply to the statement made by the
representative of Syria. In order to do so, I shall read
out a section from the report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence. The paragraph
concerns the Syrian Arab Republic.
“The Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic reported
in September that women, men and children
continued to be subjected to sexual violence by
Government personnel at checkpoints and in
detention (see A/HRC/30/48). The United Nations
received accounts of the systematic sexual torture
of men in detention centres, including rape with
wooden sticks, and electric shocks to, and burning
of, genitals. Such sexual torture was aimed at
obtaining confessions of the men’s involvement in
alleged anti-Government activities. In some cases,
female relatives were also arrested and forced to
witness the torture.” (S/2016/361, para. 68)
I read out this passage because I want to alert
everyone to what the Syrian regime truly represents.

16-1555665/66

S/PV.7704

Women and peace and security

02/06/2016

The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give him the floor.

not draft those news items. This information has been
propagated through social media and at the highest
level of the Turkish media.

Mr. Qassem Agha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): All statements contained in the report on
violations of human rights, including those of women
and children, in Turkish refugee camps are included
in documents issued by the Turkish media. We did

We underline this request to Ms. Bangura. She
knows very well what happens in refugee camps in
Turkey and other neighbouring countries. It is written
on the wall. I would ask her to cite those instances, too.

66/66

The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

16-15556
