S/2020/727

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 July 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 21 July 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict; Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees; Ms. Khin Ohmar, Founder and Chair of Progressive
Voice, on behalf of NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security; and
Ms. Nadia Carine Therese Fornel-Poutou, Executive President, Association des
Femmes Juristes de Centrafrique; as well as the statements delivered by Their
Excellencies Mr. Philippe Goffin, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence
of Belgium; Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany;
Mrs. Naledi Pandor, Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of South
Africa; Ms. Elback Zeinabou Tari Bako, Minister for the Advancement of Women
and Child Protection of the Niger; and by the representatives of China, Estonia,
France, Indonesia, the Russian Federation and Viet Nam, in connection with the
video-teleconference convened on Friday, 17 July 2020 on women and peace and
security: conflict-related sexual violence.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Cyprus, Denmark, Egypt, the European Union,
Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and Uruguay.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 2 April 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the enclosed briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Christoph Heusgen
President of the Security Council

20-09874 (E) 220720 210920

*2009874*

S/2020/727

Annex 1
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten
We meet today to find effective ways to turn commitments into compliance
and resolutions into results. We meet in the spirit of pursuing a survivor-centred
approach, which ensures that survivors of wartime sexual violence will not be
forgotten, even in the midst of an unprecedented pandemic that has captured the
attention of the world.
In that respect, I would like to sincerely appreciate the leadership of Germany
in convening this debate during exceptionally challenging times, and to particularly
thank His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is
presiding over this meeting for the second consecutive year (see S/PV.8514). I also
extend my appreciation to the Dominican Republic for its support and collaboration
at all stages of the planning process. I warmly welcome the civil society briefers
from Myanmar and the Central African Republic, as well as Special Envoy Angelina
Jolie, who will lend their unique voices to our collective search for solutions.
The annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487) before us today
paints a sombre and harrowing picture of sexual violence used as a tactic of war,
torture and terror and a tool of political repression to dehumanize, destabilize and
forcibly displace populations. This is a crime that shreds the very fabric that binds
communities together, leaving social cohesion and safety nets threadbare. It is a
biological weapon, a psychological weapon and an expression of male dominance
over women and of one group over another. Conflict-related sexual violence is a
crime that sets back the cause of gender equality and the cause of peace. These are
interlocking issues. More gender equality means greater social stability, and the
inverse is also true.
The report before us documents almost 3,000 United Nations-verified cases of
conflict-related sexual violence committed over the course of a single year. The vast
majority of incidents — 96 per cent — targeted women and girls, although more than
100 confirmed cases also affected men, boys or lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer or intersex individuals. Eight hundred and forty-eight cases were attacks on
children. Behind every figure presented in the report is a human story. Too often it
is the story of a survivor who walks in shame, while the perpetrator walks free. It is
the story of a military or political leader who feels above the law and a civilian who
has fallen beneath the scope of its protection.
Accordingly, the report emphasizes the imperative of a survivor-centred
approach, as articulated by the Council for the first time in resolution 2467 (2019).
A survivor-centred, rights-based approach requires tailored solutions that build
resilience, restore voice and choice to survivors and address the diverse experiences
of all affected individuals. In this way, it tackles the intersecting inequalities and
root causes to ensure that no one is left behind or excluded from the dividends of
peace and development.
As I have seen first-hand in the field, war does not speak with just one
voice. There are countless stories that are shrouded in silence and left out of the
historical record. Diverse life experiences must inform policy, operational and
funding decisions. If these decisions are not gender-based in their design, they will
be gender-biased and exclusionary in their effect.
The report spans 19 countries of concern. Each country section includes
a targeted recommendation, which can be cited at relevant moments, such as
peacekeeping mandate authorizations, country-specific deliberations, sanctions
2/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

decisions or the design of peace negotiations, ceasefire agreements and transitional
justice processes.
To highlight a few key examples, following my visit to the Central African
Republic in May of last year, I advocated for the Government to nominate a special
adviser to the President to work with my Office on advancing the implementation
of the joint communiqué on conflict-related sexual violence. In other settings, key
legislative reforms are recommended, such as the adoption of the long-pending
sexual offences bill in Somalia and the draft law on the prevention of violence against
women in Myanmar. In South Sudan, the United Nations has been engaging with
armed groups following the abduction of hundreds of women and girls in Western
Equatoria. Many are still languishing in military bases, and the report calls for their
immediate release. Likewise, in Syria and Iraq, many Yazidi women and girls have
not yet been released from captivity by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
remain missing and in desperate need of services and family reunification. In postconflict contexts, such as Bosnia and Herzegovina, survivors of sexual violence are
still fighting to realize their rights and status as legitimate victims of war in order to
access reparations and redress. Moreover, although sexual violence has been widely
used as a tactic of terrorism in contexts such as Iraq, Nigeria, Mali, Somalia and
Syria, it has not been prosecuted as such.
Every report about wartime rape also testifies to its underreporting. This is
linked with fear of stigmatization and reprisals, lack of access to services and the
justice system, and harmful social norms around honour, shame and victim-blame.
The monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements have deepened the evidence
base for action. Yet such arrangements are only as effective as the resources and
capacity behind them. Women protection advisers, who convene the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements, have improved the quality and quantity of
information. Eighty-six per cent of cases documented in the report come from
settings where women protection advisers are deployed.
The report also lists 54 parties credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of sexual violence in situations on the agenda of the Council.
More than 70 per cent are persistent perpetrators, having appeared on the list for
five or more years. For the first time, this year’s report features an assessment of
compliance gaps, which notes the prevailing disregard for international norms and
obligations by parties to armed conflict. It finds that the majority of persistent
perpetrators have not made meaningful commitments to curbing violations.
Accordingly, there is an urgent need for greater coherence between the
practice of listing and the practice of imposing targeted and graduated measures
to leverage behavioural change. We know that sexual violence is characterized by
staggering rates of impunity and recidivism. It is time to usher in a new era of
enhanced monitoring and enforcement, bringing all tools to bear. It is time to change
the calculus of belligerents who operate on the assumption that rape remains costfree. Eight sanctions regimes now include sexual violence within their designation
criteria. Designating parties for these crimes sends a powerful political signal.
Since 2009, my mandate has engaged constructively with numerous parties,
resulting in the signing of 10 joint communiqués or frameworks of cooperation with
States, and has encouraged the adoption of unilateral communiqués and codes of
conduct by several non-State armed groups. This experience has shown that strategic
dialogue is most effective under the shadow of a credible threat of accountability
and enforcement.
As the report notes, we have rarely seen linear progress from commitments
to compliance owing to an increasingly complex global security environment.
20-098743/124

S/2020/727

Sexual violence does not occur in a vacuum but is tied to broader risks, such as the
resurgence of hostilities, rising violent extremism, militarization, the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, population displacement and collapsed rule of law.
These factors trigger renewed patterns of sexual violence, which the report finds
to be concentrated in contexts of abduction, captivity, displacement and detention
and in remote, rural areas where women undertake essential livelihood activities.
In addition, there is a constant oscillation between progress and regression, forward
momentum and backlash, on women’s rights.
We began 2020 anticipating a jubilee year for the women and peace and
security agenda with the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the
twentieth-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
of 1995 and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations of
1945, with its founding promise of gender equality. Yet we find ourselves fighting
to prevent the rollback and reversal of hard-won gains. The report draws attention
to the global political climate of pushback on women’s rights, evident in reprisals
against women’s human rights defenders, physical and financial risks to women’s
civil society organizations and shrinking civic space.
Anniversaries and annual reports are not just about looking back but also
about looking forward. They serve not only to measure progress but to inspire and
accelerate it. It has been said that the one thing stronger than all the armies in the
world is an idea whose time has come. The women and peace and security agenda,
reflected in 10 robust resolutions, is that idea. It is not an issue that can wait until
urgent matters are resolved; it is a strategy for resolving them more equitably and
fully. It is a way of adapting to the changing face of conflict in the twenty-first century.
Of course, the coronavirus disease pandemic has dramatically affected the
work of the United Nations, and my mandate has not been spared. But what the
virus has not changed are the needs of survivors. What has not changed is the right
to physical integrity and bodily autonomy. Also unchanged is the fact that war and
rape rage on in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, South Sudan and elsewhere. In this climate of intersecting crises, one thing
is clear — it is time to silence the guns and to amplify and unmute the voices of
women. The Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire means that all parties
must cease the use of sexual and other violence.
Today’s debate sets the stage for a new decade of decisive action along
three main lines: first, empowering survivors and those at risk through enhanced
resourcing and quality service provision to foster an enabling environment in
which they can safely report violations and seek redress; secondly, acting on the
reports and information received to bring parties into compliance with international
norms; and, thirdly, enhancing accountability as a critical pillar of prevention and
deterrence, ensuring that parties are duly held to account when they fail to comply
with their commitments.
Prevention is the best response. Yet we have struggled to measure, or even
define, progress on the prevention pillar of this agenda. Compliance is a concrete
example. Sexual violence persists not because the existing frameworks and obligations
are inadequate, but because they are inadequately applied. Resolution 1820 (2008),
in paragraph 2, demands nothing less than the “immediate and complete cessation
by all parties to armed conflict of all acts of sexual violence against civilians”. This
resolution defined a new norm and drew a red line. Now we must clearly demonstrate
the consequences of crossing it. We must keep these crimes and their perpetrators
in the spotlight of international scrutiny. As the well-known legal maxim reminds
us, justice must be done, and be seen to be done. Survivors must be seen by their
societies as the holders of rights that will ultimately be respected and enforced.
4/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 2
Statement by the Special Envoy of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Angelina Jolie
I am grateful to Germany and the Dominican Republic for holding this
debate within the framework of the women and peace and security agenda. I am
honoured to speak alongside Special Representative Patten and our brave colleagues
from Myanmar and the Central African Republic. Entrenched discrimination in
society and the gendered impact of sexual violence demand that actions be taken for
survivors. I would like to speak today about one of the most overlooked groups of
survivors: children.
When resolution 2467 (2019) was adopted last year, it was the first to put
survivors and their needs and rights at the centre of all actions. But resolutions,
words on paper, are just that — promises. What counts is whether the promises are
kept. As every member of the Council knows, there is nothing worse than to break a
promise to a child. Yet that is what we are doing year after year to countless children.
The fact that we will never meet them does not lessen the betrayal.
I have met child survivors of sexual violence, as well as domestic violence,
trauma and abuse, everywhere. There is no continent untouched by these crimes, and
there is no country, rich or poor, that should not take a hard look at its own laws, its
own agencies, its own media reporting of these issues, its own treatment of survivors
and its own social attitudes.
But I want to start, if I may, with one example. When the so-called Islamic State
attacked the Yazidi community in Iraq in 2014, it abducted, enslaved and tortured
thousands of women and children. Many children were murdered, but nearly 2,000
have returned. Many suffer from post-traumatic stress, anxiety and depression. They
experience flashbacks and recurrent nightmares that are typical for children who
have experienced trauma and abuse. Many of the children witnessed the murder of
their relatives and the rape of their mothers.
One doctor, who has provided medical care for hundreds of Yazidi women and
girls, said that almost every girl she had treated between the ages of 9 and 17 had
been raped or subjected to other sexual violence. In some cases, victims were girls
under the age of 9. They suffer serious health issues, including traumatic fistulas and
scarring, in addition to trauma, difficulty accessing education and even a struggle
to prove their identity.
Yet according to a forthcoming report by Amnesty International, based on
interviews with survivors, humanitarian workers and other experts, there are still
very few services available for Yazidi child survivors and children born of rape.
What few services there are have been largely focused on women survivors, who
have immense trauma and unmet needs of their own, made worse by displacement,
poverty and the lack of access to sexual and reproductive health and rights. The
reality is that no one is getting the care they need. But there is a specific lack of
dedicated care for children. One mother, whose daughter was abducted when she was
6 years old and survived three years of beatings and abuse, could not get medical
help for her, because she was considered too young to treat.
Every humanitarian worker interviewed for the Amnesty report said that
psychosocial services and programmes currently available to Yazidi children fall
far short of meeting their long-term, specialist needs. I have heard this replicated in
every conflict setting I have visited in nearly 20 years with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

20-098745/124

S/2020/727

To be clear, the lack of services flows from the failure of the international
community to provide the funds to make this possible, as well as a lack of political
will. Sexual and gender-based violence is the most chronically underfunded sector
of the humanitarian appeals of the United Nations, receiving less than 1 per cent of
humanitarian assistance. Just think how many lives could be saved if we even simply
doubled that percentage.
I pay tribute to all the humanitarian workers, medics, lawyers and human
rights defenders doing everything in their power to help survivors around the world,
often with next to no support. But my concern and my question to the Council is this:
If we are not able to live up to our promise of a survivor-centred approach for Yazidi
children, who make up just one relatively small group of survivors, then how many
more children and young adults are suffering in silence at the global level? And how
many more will suffer because of violence exacerbated by the coronavirus disease
and a distracted international community? The answer is, we do not know.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict has said that sexual violence crimes against children — which are only
one of the ways that children’s rights are being violated globally — are “vastly
underreported”. The Secretary-General’s report on conflict-related sexual violence
last year described a “disturbing trend ... of sexual violence perpetrated against very
young girls and boys (S/2019/280, para. 18) in multiple countries. It added that girls
and boys are targeted
“in order to terrorize their communities, because of perceived affiliations of
their parents or their perceived utility or market value.” (supra)
Nobel laureate Dr. Mukwege speaks of treating babies as young as six months old in
his hospital for rape victims.
For all the efforts that have been made, we live in a world where child survivors
of these crimes — and violence of all kinds — live with stigma and the fear of
retaliation at the hands of powerful perpetrators; where, in some countries, rape is
not illegal and girls are forced to marry their rapists; and where survivors face an
endless cycle of denial of their rights, as well as stigma and ostracization — lasting
decades after the conflict has ended, as in Bosnia and Herzegovina or Uganda, and
passed down across the generations, to innocent children. More often than not,
in many settings, including Syria and Myanmar today, not a single perpetrator of
alleged systematic conflict-related sexual violence has been held to account. These
are all choices, the choices of United Nations Member States, our choices.
We have to be prepared to admit where we have failed, and do the hard work to
support survivors, change laws and attitudes and bring perpetrators to account, over
many years. Resolution 2467 (2019) also promised sanctions, justice and reparations
for victims, and recognition for children born of rape. These are all promises that
must be kept.
I urge the Council to recommit to these promises today: to move beyond
rhetoric and to implement their decisions. Please hold perpetrators to account. Please
address the root, structural causes of gender-based violence and discrimination in
your countries. And please urgently increase funding for programmes that address
the needs of all survivors, and especially the invisible victims — children.

6/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 3
Statement by the Founder and Chair of Progressive Voice on
behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
Khin Ohmar
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak to the Security Council
today and deliver this statement on behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.
For over 30 years, I have advocated for democracy, human rights, gender
equality and peace in my country, Myanmar. I have met with countless survivors
of the unspeakable crimes committed by Myanmar’s military against minoritized
ethnic and religious communities. I stand here today in solidarity with my sisters
and brothers still waiting for justice.
Myanmar’s military has long used rape as a weapon of war against ethnic
communities. The horrific accounts of Rohingya women during the 2016 and
2017 so-called “clearance operations” remain urgent, shocking and unique in their
ferocity. They are also representative of the military’s pattern of using gender-based
violence in their campaigns against other ethnic communities, including the Kachin,
Shan, Ta’ang and Rakhine.
These facts are well known. Ethnic women’s organizations, international
organizations and the United Nations have all documented the military’s systematic
and persistent use of rape as a weapon. One of the first comprehensive pieces of
documentation of the military’s use of rape as a weapon of war was produced nearly
20 years ago by the Shan Women’s Action Network, which detailed incidents of
sexual violence committed by Myanmar’s military against 625 Shan women and
girls. Of the rapes that were documented, 61 per cent were gang rapes and 25 per cent
resulted in death. Women were detained and raped repeatedly for months. Conflict in
Shan state continues today. Similar findings by Kachin, Karen and Ta’ang women’s
organizations, as well as by the Women’s League of Burma, an umbrella organization
composed of 13 ethnic women’s groups that I co-founded, corroborate many of these
findings. These organizations have unequivocally concluded that sexual violence is
part of a deliberate, systematic pattern to target ethnic women and girls.
This fact was confirmed last year by the independent international factfinding mission on Myanmar, which found that “sexual violence was a hallmark of
the Tatmadaw’s military operations” (A/HRC/42/CRP.4, para. 2). The Fact-finding
Mission further documented systematic and widespread sexual and gender-based
violence against Rohingya women and girls, transgender persons, as well as men and
boys, in the three waves of violence that ultimately brutally uprooted over 800,000
Rohingya from their land and homes. The Fact-finding Mission stated that the use
of rape and sexual and gender-based violence against the Rohingya “was part of
a deliberate, well-planned strategy to intimidate, terrorise and punish a civilian
population and force them to flee.” (ibid., para. 72) It concluded that there were
reasonable grounds to believe that these acts “constituted crimes against humanity,
war crimes, and underlying acts of genocide accompanied by inferences of genocidal
intent.” (supra)
Despite this well-documented pattern of the use of sexual and genderbased violence and the Government signing a joint communiqué with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict in
December 2018, Myanmar continues to deny that such crimes are taking place
at every opportunity. It rejected allegations of rape as “wild claims” in its report
to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women in 2019
20-098747/124

S/2020/727

(CEDAW/C/MMR/EP/1, para. 11) and ignored sexual violence against the Rohingya
entirely at the International Court of Justice hearings in December 2019. Myanmar’s
Independent Commission of Enquiry also categorically dismissed rape and sexual
violence in its final report in January 2020, furthering the impunity accorded to the
military for this crime. As Professor Philippe Sands, a lawyer for the Gambia, told
the International Court of Justice last winter, Myanmar’s “silence says far more than
[its] words.”
The Fact-finding Mission also noted that sexual and gender-based violence
is being carried out within the broader context of endemic and structural gender
inequality and discrimination against women and girls across all levels of society,
and that the “net result is a climate of impunity that enables sexual and genderbased violence to continue unabated.” This impunity permeates every corner of the
domestic legal system and judiciary and is grounded in a Constitution that further
entrenches it. Investigations, if they have even begun, are blocked, and witnesses are
threatened or even targeted for violence in order to silence them. And when there
are convictions, they are exceedingly rare, often not for sexual violence and the
penalties are not commensurate with the gravity of the acts committed.
This was seen in the case of two Kachin schoolteachers who, in 2015, were
tortured, raped and murdered in northern Shan state. The primary suspect was a
commanding officer in a local Myanmar military contingent; yet at every turn,
efforts to seek justice were thwarted. Independent investigations were blocked by
the highest levels of Government. The Kachin community is still seeking justice.
Civil society has consistently called for addressing the egregious structural
gaps in the domestic justice and legal system without any progress. A law on
violence against women that took over seven years to draft, which failed to consult
meaningfully with women, particularly from conflict-affected communities, and
fails to meet Myanmar’s international obligations, was only recently submitted to
Parliament to debate. Further, the Myanmar National Human Rights Commission,
which falls short of meeting the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, has exhibited a lack of will to
investigate violations carried out by members of the military.
Despite the coronavirus pandemic and the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire, the conflict in Myanmar has reached an intensity not seen in decades; as
recently as late June, the military announced clearance operations against the ethnic
Rakhine and the Arakan Army in western Myanmar. The conflict has resulted in
widespread displacement and human rights abuses, including restrictions on access
to the Internet. The situation of displaced Rohingya, Kaman, Rakhine, Chin and
other ethnic communities, which was already dire, has been exacerbated by the
restrictions enacted in response to the pandemic. Barriers to accessing sexual and
reproductive health care have only grown, compounding the already life-threatening
lack of services for survivors of sexual and gender-based violence, and putting
such services even further out of reach for women and girls from marginalized
ethnic communities.
Serious international crimes continue to be committed throughout Myanmar,
but particularly in Rakhine state, by the same perpetrators who committed genocide
against the Rohingya. Yet no one is being held to account as the military continues
to act with total impunity. As the Fact-finding Mission has repeatedly said, domestic
accountability is not possible in Myanmar. Neither does the country have an effective
national framework for protecting women’s rights or upholding gender equality.
Unless the international community acts now, these human rights abuses will
continue and could have lasting consequences. The lives of thousands of survivors
8/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

of violence by Myanmar’s military and those of their families are potentially forever
changed by long-term disabilities from conflict-related wounds. The confiscation
of land, compounded by patriarchal land-owning practices, Government-led
development plans and the encroachment of business interests, means that women’s
dispossession risks becoming permanent.
I therefore urge the Security Council to refer the situation in Myanmar to
the International Criminal Court (ICC), or create an ad hoc international tribunal
to more fully investigate the crimes suffered by the Rohingya, as well as those
against other ethnic communities, beyond the ICC’s current, limited investigation.
In addition, the international community, including the Security Council, must make
a concerted effort to ensure that Myanmar complies with the provisional measures
ordered by the International Court of Justice. Far more action is needed to ensure
that discriminatory laws are repealed, citizenship is restored to the Rohingya and
restrictions on the freedom of movement and humanitarian access are lifted. These
are the necessary preconditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of
the Rohingya.
I commend the brave efforts by the Fact-finding Mission and the former
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar to draw attention
to atrocities against all ethnic and religious communities. However, as the Rosenthal
inquiry, which examined the United Nations failure to halt atrocities, rightly
recognized, it is vital that the United Nations see this moment as a key turning
point — when such lessons are finally learned — and speaks in a united, decisive and
principled voice that prioritizes human rights to ensure that there is never another
“systemic failure”, such as the one in 2017.
Unfortunately, to date, the recommendations of the Rosenthal report have not
resulted in any observable changes from the United Nations system. In this regard, I
urge the Special Envoy to resist the Government’s dangerous nationalist and divisive
narrative and not to lend legitimacy to the National Verification Card process that
aims to deny the Rohingya’s very existence.
I am not the first woman from Myanmar to speak before the Council. My
Rohingya sister Razia Sultana addressed Council members (see S/PV.8234) at
this very debate in April 2018. In addition, many of my brave ethnic sisters have
repeatedly called on the international community to act on behalf of other ethnic
communities. The Karen, the Kachin, the Rohingya, the Rakhine and others have
all faced great suffering at the hands of the Tatmadaw. Who is next? Who else must
come before the Council to urge it to hold the Myanmar military to account?
As women human rights defenders and community leaders from different
ethnic backgrounds, we will continue to work together for a peaceful, democratic
Myanmar. This is a decisive moment in our history, ahead of national elections this
year. We urge the Council to support our efforts for peace, justice and accountability,
which serve all the people of Myanmar.

20-098749/124

S/2020/727

Annex 4
Statement by the Executive President of the Association of Central
African Women Lawyers, Nadia Carine Therese Fornel-Poutou
I am Nadia Carine Therese Fornel-Poutou, Executive President of the
Association of Central African Women Lawyers. Our organization works for
the protection of human rights and the care of sexual and gender-based violence
survivors by providing legal assistance, psychosocial support and medical referrals.
Among other ways, this is provided through our so-called “listening centres”, where
paralegals and psychosocial workers aim to improve the accountability of perpetrators
and help survivors coping with their traumatic experience — for example, through
psychosocial support. As an active member of civil society, I have several years of
professional experience in the promotion and defence of the rights of women and
children, the fight against impunity and the legal treatment of gender-based violence
in the Central African Republic.
I would like to thank the German Government for this opportunity to share
some thoughts on the situation regarding sexual violence in the Central African
Republic. I hope that my statement will encourage all those present to continue our
important work to put an end to these horrific practices.
To understand the situation we face on a daily basis in the Central African
Republic, I would like to share the story of one of the women and girls we supported
over the past few years.
“I am 17 years old. I grew up in Bangui. In 2013, the Séléka entered
the city. Four men arrived at our home, while I was there with my mother
and my little sister. They were tall and dressed in military garb, their faces
veiled by black cloth. One of them asked where the men of the family had
gone. My mother replied that there were no men left. They slapped my mother
and walked up to my little sister and threw her to the ground. While she was
crying, one of the soldiers ripped off her clothes and brutally pushed her to
the ground. As I watched with tears in my eyes, their leader said they should
do the same thing to me. I was in a lot of pain and despite my screams they
did not stop. The pain in my belly lasted a month. I was taken to the hospital
in Bimbo, where I was told that I was pregnant but the child had died in
my belly.”
In 2019, the total number of gender-based violence cases managed and
recorded by organizations working on sexual and gender-based violence in the
Central African Republic was 13,028 cases, among which 12,249 involved females,
compared to 779 cases concerning males. Physical assaults, rape and sexual violence
accounted for half of the cases.
Among the sexual and gender-based violence cases recorded by the Association
of Central African Women Lawyers, 15 per cent concern men and 85 per cent women.
This is potentially an underrepresentation of men, who are even more stigmatized
when they fall victim to these crimes. These serious human rights violations are
rooted in conflicts and prevailing gender and sociocultural norms.
For more than two decades, the Central African Republic has faced repeated
armed conflicts, with disastrous consequences for the population, not to mention
widespread sexual violence, mainly committed against women and girls. The
perpetrators are mostly members of armed groups. Often, they target people based on
their ethnic or religious background, or because their area of residence is supposedly
populated by rival militias. In some cases, the security forces that are deployed

10/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

to protect civilians, both national and international, also commit such atrocities,
deepening public distrust of these security forces.
Survivors are of all ages, including children under 10 years of age. Rape is
often committed by multiple perpetrators, sometimes as many as 20 per person, in
public, in front of family and community members, ripping apart the social fabric. In
addition to the security and socioeconomic consequences of the conflict throughout
the country, the civilian population in general, and women and children in particular,
are affected by serious human rights violations, such as the confiscation and
occupation of land and the recruitment of children into armed groups.
Since the beginning of the crisis, protection services have been either
dysfunctional or absent entirely.
Measures have been taken by the Government with the support of the
international community, including the creation and establishment of a State
structure, the Joint Rapid Intervention and Repression Unit for Sexual Violence
against Women and Children, and the creation and operationalization of the Special
Criminal Court. The reform of the justice sector contributes to the restoration of the
authority of the State and the confidence of the population in the justice system.
Similarly, the Government is attempting to implement resolutions 1820 (2008)
and 1888 (2009), which recognize and condemn rape as a weapon of war and a crime
against humanity.
The issue of security remains a major concern for true and fair justice in the
Central Africa Republic, where perpetrators and survivors of these crimes live side
by side in the community. Impunity cannot be fought in a context of insecurity, nor
can we talk about justice in a context where weapons circulate freely.
We ask the members of the Security Council to ensure that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic will effectively ensure the protection of civilians against serious violations
of international humanitarian law, as stipulated in its mandate and strengthen the
Central African Armed Forces and the internal security forces so as to ensure their
effectiveness, inclusiveness and accountability, especially on sexual and genderbased violence and sexual exploitation and abuse violations.
Secondly, we ask members of the Security Council to support local civil
society organizations by strengthening their efforts — in particular those of
women’s rights organizations — for survivors of sexual and gender-based violence
in their economic empowerment and reintegration into society; consulting local
organizations in a meaningful way so as to improve and ensure access to United
Nations mechanisms for the prevention of sexual and gender-based violence; and
strengthening investments in holistic care for survivors, for example, by investing
in funding for comprehensive sexual and reproductive health services and access
to justice.
Thirdly, we ask members of the Security Council to support the development
of the judicial system by strengthening the Joint Rapid Intervention and Repression
Unit, which fights sexual and gender-based violence, so that it is autonomous and
able to objectively handle the cases submitted to it; supporting the ordinary national
courts and the Special Criminal Court by encouraging them to consider cases of
conflict-related sexual violence with the utmost attention and ensure the protection
of survivors and witnesses throughout the judicial process; and, finally, advocating
for conflict-related sexual violence to be given special attention by all transitional
justice mechanisms, judicial and non-judicial alike. Survivors, in particular, need a

20-0987411/124

S/2020/727

functioning, effective and gender-sensitive justice system and other mechanisms to
bring perpetrators to justice and provide reparations to survivors.
Lastly, the Council must inquire about the efforts of the peacekeeping mission,
in line with its solid women and peace and security mandate, to address this critical
gap in services and justice for survivors and to ensure the equal and meaningful
participation of women in the peace and electoral processes, including in the
implementation of the peace agreement and in the upcoming presidential election.
We look forward to working together for a future without sexual violence in
the Central African Republic.

12/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 5
Statement by the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Defence of
Belgium, Philippe Goffin
[Original: English and French]
In recent years, the international community has taken important steps to
address the problem of conflict-related sexual violence. However, in his annual report
(S/2020/487), the Secretary-General once again reports a large number of cases of
sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict areas. In addition, a large number of
abuses go unreported due to fear and stigmatization of victims or restricted access.
The coronavirus disease pandemic further exacerbates the situation. In many
places, the crisis has resulted in reduced social control, more difficult access to
assistance or judicial authorities, and obstacles to sexual and reproductive rights.
Belgium thanks Germany for organizing this important debate. We also thank
the briefers. Their statements remind us that the current situation requires additional
efforts and renewed commitment.
I would like to address three points: the importance of a survivor-centred
approach, the need for effective implementation of our commitments, and the need
to address the root causes of sexual violence.
First, survivors of sexual violence are not a homogenous group. Whether boys
raped in the Central African Republic, sex slaves of Da’esh or mothers of children
born out of violence in South Sudan, survivors all have their own stories. They
all need tailor-made solutions. They need justice, access to health-care services,
psychosocial support, meaningful reparations or socioeconomic support to
reintegrate into society.
Although the issue of reparations after conflict-related sexual violence has
received increasing global attention, the actual provision of reparations remains,
unfortunately, an exception. Yet efforts to provide reparations to survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence have had positive effects in Colombia. The same
goes for Iraq, where a relief programme for survivors saw initial grants disbursed
last year.
We must learn from the experiences of survivors to better prevent further
violations; better recognize early-warning, signs such as discrimination, hate speech
and incitement to violence; and improve the gathering of evidence, and Belgium
welcomes the draft Murad code in this regard.
My second point is on the effective implementation of the commitments. The
level of compliance with Security Council resolutions remains low — too low. The
figures speak for themselves; no more than one State actor has been removed from
the list annexed to the annual report since its inception, while 71 per cent of the
parties having made no commitment have been on the list for more than five years.
What survivors want, though, is an end to impunity. They want justice.
Documenting crimes is an essential step. We commend the efforts of the
Special Representative in this regard. The presence of women protection advisers on
the ground has also contributed to improving the quantity and quality of information.
Let us safeguard the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflictrelated sexual violence.
Access to justice is also crucial. However, such access in conflict areas is
often insufficient due to inadequate normative frameworks, the limited capacity
20-0987413/124

S/2020/727

of rule-of-law institutions or a lack of trust in State actors, who themselves may
perpetrate violence. Belgium supports and commends the work of the United
Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in that
regard. In the Central African Republic, for example, the experts contributed to the
organization of a session of the Bangui Court of Appeals on sexual and gender-based
violence cases.
The Security Council can also act directly. In all its resolutions on sexual
violence, it refers to the instrument of targeted sanctions against parties committing
sexual violence. To date, however, no perpetrator has ever been targeted by sanctions
for acts of sexual violence. What is the point of our intentions if they are not translated
into concrete action to the benefit of survivors?
Crimes of sexual violence will stop only if we address the root causes of
sexual violence. Let us therefore work together for gender equality, for the genuine
participation of women in peace processes, for the inclusion of women’s empowerment
at the heart of prevention measures, for increased support for women’s organizations
and human rights defenders, and for greater efforts to further pursue the path set out
by resolution 1325 (2000).
A decade after the first United Nations report on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2010/181), sustained action and continued political pressure are still
needed to change the situation. Ending sexual violence against women and girls
and ensuring sexual and reproductive health and rights are also key elements of the
Belgian National Action Plan on women and peace and security. I wish to reconfirm,
here and today, our continued commitment. Belgium, the European Union and the
United Nations remain partners in this important fight.

14/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 6
Statement by the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
Heiko Maas
Today, we are talking about a pandemic — a global virus much older than the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) but equally devastating. Sexual and gender-based
violence in conflicts has been destroying lives and communities for years, with no
vaccine in sight.
Twenty years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and more than a year
since the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019), progress remains painfully slow. Rape,
forced prostitution and sexual slavery continue to be used as weapons in conflicts
around the globe. I can only commend the courage and strength of our briefers in
speaking up and sharing their experiences with us. I thank them very much.
We have all heard how COVID-19 is making survivors’ situations even worse.
Lockdowns are restricting survivors’ access to medical and legal services. The
underreporting of sexual violence has become even more alarming. And while we
are able to uphold safe distances between us, many women, girls and boys cannot
escape the brutal proximity of their tormentors.
Today’s debate is therefore overdue. And I want to thank the Dominican
Republic for co-organizing it with us. As co-chairs of the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security, our message is clear. Implementing the women and
peace and security agenda, including resolution 2467 (2019), is a duty for all of us
and for the Security Council — even more so in the era of COVID-19. Four points
will be key.
First, we need to ensure that survivors get the medical and judicial assistance
they deserve. As an example, Germany is working closely with the Dr. Denis
Mukwege Foundation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Together, we are
defending survivors’ sexual and reproductive health and rights, including access to
medical services and reparations.
Secondly, women must play a central role in peacebuilding. Without gender
equality and human rights, lasting peace and reconciliation remain impossible.
Germany therefore supports such non-governmental organizations as Together
We Build It in Libya, which promotes the political participation of women in the
peace process.
Thirdly, sanctions can and must play a greater role in ending sexual violence.
The two United Nations listings brought forward since 2019 can only be a first step.
Fourthly, impunity must end. Perpetrators must be brought to justice. We
support creative solutions, such as the mobile courts in South Sudan, which put
rapists around the country on trial. And I am glad to report that in Koblenz, Germany,
a court recently opened the world’s first trial against two former officials of the
Syrian regime, on charges of torture and sexual assault.
These examples show that, while we may not have a vaccine against the
pandemic of sexual violence, we are certainly not powerless. What we need to
do is act on the commitments we made in resolution 2467 (2019) to protect and
empower survivors of conflict-related sexual violence and to place them at the heart
of our actions.

20-0987415/124

S/2020/727

Annex 7
Statement by the Minister for International Relations and
Cooperation of South Africa, Nalendi Pandor
I would like to thank the Federal Republic of Germany for convening today’s
open debate on “Women and peace and security: sexual violence in conflict”. The
theme for the debate, “Turning commitments into compliance”, is important to note,
as our focus must continue to be on implementing the commitments we have made
to address sexual violence in conflict.
South Africa wishes to express its sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his detailed annual report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487), which
forms the basis for our deliberations today.
This open debate serves as a useful monitoring mechanism to assess the progress
made in addressing the scourge of sexual violence in armed conflict situations and
the challenges that continue to require the attention of the international community.
Armed conflict situations across the world have had a devastating effect on
women and girls due, in particular, to their unequal status in society. One traumatic
crime to which women and girls are vulnerable is sexual violence committed
by parties to armed conflict as a means of advancing their political, social and
economic objectives.
Over the years, global awareness about the effects of armed conflict on women
has increased, owing primarily to the adoption in 2000 of the groundbreaking
resolution 1325 (2000) and all other subsequent resolutions and decisions on women,
peace and security. Through those outcomes, the Security Council has recognized,
and correctly so, that sexual violence as a tactic of war, when used systematically
to achieve military or political ends, constitute a threat to international peace
and security.
Regrettably, sexual violence continues to occur in most conflict and postconflict situations, which remains a subject of grave concern for my country and
must be so to for the Council. Ending that scourge, addressing the resulting trauma
and stigma, and holding accountable those responsible for committing these heinous
acts, as well as attending to the needs of the victims and survivors, should remain
our priority.
While the situation of women and girls, particularly those in conflict
situations, remains desperate and unacceptable, we must not view women and girls
as simply passive victims, but members of society with voices and competence. We
must deepen our efforts to systematically change perceptions about women and girls
and acknowledge their resilience, self-empowerment and the meaningful role they
can play as agents of change and transformation.
South Africa therefore recognizes that sexual violence is inextricably linked to
gender inequality. We must continue to strongly advocate for the equal participation
and full involvement of women in all processes in the maintenance and promotion
of peace and security.
The onus is on Member States to continually look at measures to strengthen
the full and effective implementation of all Security Council decisions, including
the recommendations of the 2015 global study pertaining to women, peace and
security, in line with resolution 2493 (2019), unanimously adopted in October at
an open debate on women and peace and security that emphasized the imperative
of implementing all Council decisions on women, peace and security. Our thematic
discussion today on converting commitments into compliance resonates with and
reaffirms that urgent call.
16/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

South Africa commends and reiterates its support for the efforts of the Office
of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict towards ending sexual
violence in armed conflict situations. The work of the Office has become more
important amid the myriad challenges brought about by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) global pandemic, particularly for women and children, internally
displaced people, refugees and migrants. It is also thanks to the Office that we
are able to monitor and express our concern about the reported rise of sexual and
gender-based violence during the COVID-19 pandemic. We therefore reiterate the
Secretary-General’s call that addressing gender-based violence is also integral to
COVID-19 responses.
While policies have been put in place to mitigate the scourge of sexual violence,
implementation is, unfortunately, lagging. There is still room for improvement in
strengthening rule-of-law institutions and capacities at the national level to hold
accountable perpetrators of that heinous crime.
Measures taken to ensure accountability from perpetrators of sexual violence,
such as prohibiting States listed for violations from participating in United Nations
peace operations and making sexual violence a designation criterion in sanctions
regimes, should continue to be implemented consistently across all country situations.
While we recognize the constraints of reporting only on situations of concern,
we would appreciate receiving reports on more than merely the 19 situations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487). Conflict situations in Palestine
and Western Sahara, for example, where human rights violations are prevalent and
women are affected by ongoing hostilities, should not escape our scrutiny. That will
ensure that there is no selectivity or bias in reporting and will maintain the objective
credibility of United Nations processes.
As Member States, we must do our part to mitigate some of the serious
negative impacts of sexual violence, such as stigmatization, discrimination, rejection
and social exclusion. Such efforts require sustainable and predictable funding.
There should therefore be consistent funding for programmes aimed at combating
sexual and gender-based violence in conflict situations, including for ensuring the
protection of sexual and reproductive health and rights, easy access to services for
victims and survivors of sexual violence — such as clinical treatment for rape and
medical, psychosocial and legal services — as well as reintegration support for
victims and survivors.
This is a significant year as we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the signing
of the Charter of the United Nations, among others. It is also the review year for the
Silencing the Guns initiative on the African continent.
Those commemorations will be hollow if we do not take steps to fulfil
their objectives and implement the ideals and commitments that we have made by
adopting those landmark outcomes. In that regard, South Africa underscores the
need for enhanced cooperation through better information sharing, coordination and
cooperation between the United Nations, regional and subregional organizations,
as well as with civil society and women’s organizations to advance the course of
women’s rights and empowerment.
This meeting is convened a day before Nelson Mandela International Day,
which will mark the one-hundred-and-second birthday of former President Nelson
Mandela, who once stated that freedom cannot be achieved unless women have been
emancipated from all forms of oppression. In that spirit, let us all do our part in
charting the path for justice for the women and children of today and of the future.
20-0987417/124

S/2020/727

Annex 8
Statement by the Minister for the Advancement of Women and
Child Protection of the Niger, Elback Zeinabou Tari Bako
[Original: English and French]
It is an honour for me to address the Council during this open debate on
conflict-related sexual violence. The theme of this meeting is more than relevant in
a global context characterized by an upsurge in gender-based violence, in general,
and conflict-related sexual violence, in particular.
As if wars were not devastating enough, thousands of people suffer inhuman
sexual violence in times of conflict, committed as a strategy of war, political
repression, torture and terror. The Secretary-General’s report on this issue
(S/2020/487) confirms that sad reality. It is an issue that concerns us all and must
be combated. That is why the Niger welcomes this important meeting and thanks
Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and the civil
society representatives for their insightful briefings.
Speaking on the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence
in Conflict, Nobel Peace Prize laureate Denis Mukwege reminded us that such
acts cause the disintegration of the social fabric and compromise any prospect of
lasting peace.
I would like to draw the attention of the Security Council and its member
States to the particular situation of increased vulnerability faced by people in the
Sahel region. For some years now, the tri-border area and the Lake Chad basin have
faced a situation of insecurity exacerbated by several factors, such as the presence
of armed terrorist groups, the proliferation of small arms, the lack of socioeconomic
opportunities, community tensions and the exclusion of young girls and boys from
decision-making spheres.
It has been noted that violence against women and girls is experiencing an
unprecedented upsurge, particularly in the regions of Diffa and Tillbéri, where
women and girls are suffering severe hardships. These acts constitute a violation of
their human rights.
In the Lake Chad basin region, terrorist groups such as Boko Haram are
abducting girls and women and forcibly integrating them into the ranks of combatants.
Forced marriages, sexual slavery and economic exploitation have become the daily
lot of these victims. We all remember the abduction of the Chibok and Dapchi girls
from the Government Girls’ Science and Technical College in Nigeria and the less
publicized but equally painful abduction of the women of N’galewa in the Niger.
During the first quarter of 2020, in the region of Diffa, 54 kidnapping incidents
were recorded, resulting in the abduction of 144 people, including 48 women and 29
children.
The Niger calls on all States Members of the United Nations to support the
reintegration of victims of sexual violence related to armed conflict in accordance
with the survivor-centred approach advocated in resolution 2467 (2019). That
approach is all the more important as it considers the context of each case. In most
of our communities, these acts of sexual violence are difficult to monitor because
they are rarely reported, either because the competent services do not exist or
because families, subjected to strong sociocultural burdens, are afraid of social
stigmatization. Victims suffer in silence.

18/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

That work of caring for victims of sexual violence cannot be done adequately
without contextual data. That is why my ministerial department conducted a study in
2015 on the extent and determinants of gender-based violence in the Niger.
Our research revealed that in the Niger, 53 per cent of the population is or
has been subjected to gender-based violence in the course of their lives. Children
constitute an important fringe of people affected by such violence, including child
marriage. The national prevalence rate of gender-based violence is 28.4 per cent,
while the prevalence rate of violence against women is 60 per cent. Women and girls
are therefore more likely to be victims of gender-based violence in the Niger.
Emergency situations and humanitarian crises linked to natural disasters and
the resulting population displacements increase the vulnerability of women and girls.
In the early stages of a disaster, those vulnerable groups may be exposed to specific
risks, such as separation from their families, which can make them vulnerable to
trafficking, abduction and sexual assault.
Cognizant of the fact that such violence is an obstacle to the achievement of
the objectives of peace, sustainable development and the promotion of human rights,
our country has taken legislative, legal, institutional and administrative measures to
address it.
Among other things, the Niger has made combating violence against women
and girls a national priority enshrined in the Constitution of 25 November 2010. In
2010, our country also adopted an ordinance on combating trafficking in persons,
particularly women and children. Undoubtedly, the adoption of the National Gender
Policy and the National Strategy for the Prevention of and Response to Gender-based
Violence in 2017 was a decisive step in the implementation of the national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000) and the women and peace and security agenda.
We attach great importance to the holistic care of survivors of sexual violence,
especially in the areas most affected by the security crisis. To that end, we have
established centres in the regions of Diffa and Tillbéri. People there in situations
of forced displacement are particularly vulnerable because displaced populations,
the majority of whom are women and children, often have fewer opportunities and
access to basic services, which can expose them to various forms of gender-based
violence, including sexual violence.
One of the most effective ways to address conflict-related sexual violence is
prevention, including access to quality education. In that regard, the Niger has set
up centres for the prevention, promotion and protection of children, which carry
out preventive activities in the areas of behaviour change, communication and the
handling of cases of victims of gender-based violence.
Furthermore, while our country has made significant progress in the area of
education, due to the conflict, attacks on education and schools are increasingly
becoming a cause for concern. We must protect access to education, especially for
girls. That is a sure way to address the root causes of sexual violence, including
gender discrimination, the lack of economic opportunities and toxic masculinities.
Access to education can contribute to sustainable poverty reduction, address gender
inequalities and, simply, promote dignity. The Niger has signed the Safe Schools
Declaration and we call on all Member States that have not yet signed it to do
the same.
In conclusion, the Niger would like to make some additional recommendations:
First, with regard to the adoption of a survivor-centred approach, it is important
that Member States establish or strengthen their legal and judicial assistance beyond

20-0987419/124

S/2020/727

the health, psychological, social and economic dimensions. The National Agency for
Legal and Judicial Assistance in the Niger is a perfect example.
Secondly, that approach must be contextual and include community outreach
activities that consider traditional care mechanisms. Civil society in the Niger is
doing remarkable work in that regard, in collaboration with local authorities and
women’s organizations.
Thirdly, implementation cannot take place without reliable and disaggregated
data on conflict-related sexual violence. This step is important to ensure more
effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, on which we
are reflecting deeply at this critical juncture for this agenda.
Finally, in conflict zones, it is essential that Member States ensure that acts of
sexual violence are investigated and perpetrators are held to account. Member States
should, therefore, intensify the training of national defence and security forces on
gender-based and conflict-related sexual violence.
Our country, as a troop contributor, calls for greater efforts to ensure that
these issues are taken into account in peace operations and processes, including
through the strengthening of early warning systems.
In a global context marked by the coronavirus disease pandemic, genderbased violence, including sexual violence, is unfortunately on the rise. The Niger
reiterates its commitment to combat gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence.

20/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 9
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
China commends the German presidency for hosting this morning’s open
debate. I thank Special Representative Pramila Patten and Special Envoy Angelina
Jolie for their briefings. I also thank civil society representatives for their presentations.
The year 2020 marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the World Conference on
Women, held in Beijing, and the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). It is
an important moment to reflect upon and renew our commitment to gender equality
and women’s empowerment, as well as to the women and peace and security agenda.
Throughout the years, many actions have been taken to advance the
development of women and girls across economic, social, political and peace and
security domains. Meanwhile, gaps remain between words and actions and between
ambition and reality. Women and girls are still bearing the brunt of wars, are suffering
the most from terrorism and displacement and are at particular risk of sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict situations. China strongly condemns sexual violence in
conflict, especially the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war and terror. Taking the
opportunity afforded me today, I would like to highlight three points.
First, all countries should work together to build a peaceful and prosperous
world free from conflict. As the Secretary-General pointed out in his recent report
(S/2020/487), the ultimate goal of the conflict-related sexual violence agenda is not
war without sexual violence, but a world without war. The best and most effective
way to protect women, girls and other vulnerable groups from sexual violence is to
prevent conflicts from happening and to resolve those conflicts by peaceful means.
The international community therefore needs to redouble its efforts aimed at
preserving peace for development, promoting development for peace and addressing
the root causes of armed conflicts. The Security Council should effectively
implement its primary responsibility of maintaining international peace and security
by promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes through dialogue, mediation and
negotiation and by ensuring the timely and complete implementation of the resolutions
it has adopted. In this context, we reiterate our strong support for Secretary-General
Guterres’ appeal for a global ceasefire and urge all parties to conflicts to heed this
appeal and realize a general and immediate cessation of hostilities.
Secondly, a holistic approach is needed to promote gender equality, advance
women’s empowerment and address sexual violence in conflict. The spirit of the
women and peace and security agenda is recognizing women not only as victims
of war but as contributors to peace with strength and expertise. Gender equality
and women’s empowerment are key to this transformation and for women to fulfil
their potential.
We need to intensify efforts on gender equality, remove structural disparities,
eliminate discrimination and stereotypes and ensure women’s equal access to
education, health care and decent work. We also need to move faster on the
empowerment of women, lift them out of poverty, increase their representation
and leadership in decision-making and strengthen their role in implementing the
Sustainable Development Goals.
As the Secretary-General observed in his report, sexual violence in conflict
does not occur in a vacuum; it is often linked with such factors as the resurgence
of hostilities, a collapse of the rule of law, mass displacement, the rise of terrorism
and violent extremism and so on. We need to adopt a holistic and comprehensive
approach in combating sexual violence in conflict, while making sure that the
20-0987421/124

S/2020/727

proposed solutions take all aspects — economic, political, counter-terrorism, security
and humanitarian — into consideration. Our response must tackle both immediate
threats and long-term consequences and should be carried out in a coordinated and
integrated manner.
Thirdly, we need to join hands to eliminate sexual violence in conflict while
respecting national sovereignty and ownership. Building on the existing normative
and institutional framework, we must support actions on preventing and deterring
sexual violence at national, regional and international levels. We must do our best
to protect and assist survivors, always prioritizing their needs and rights, and
hold the perpetrators accountable. To this end, the countries concerned bear the
primary responsibility. As almost all Governments whose national forces listed in
the Secretary-General’s report have assumed formal commitments in this regard, it
is time to fill the gap between commitments and implementation. The international
community should step up its assistance to relevant countries for national capacitybuilding. In the meantime, national sovereignty, jurisdictional and legal systems
and the principle of non-interference into other countries’ internal affairs must be
fully respected.
United Nations bodies — including the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and UN-Women — special representatives and
envoys of the Secretary-General and United Nations missions on the ground should
work within their respective mandates and intensify coordination to create synergy.
Any mechanism operating in the name of the Security Council should follow the
Council’s rules and practice. Regional and subregional organizations are well
informed of local context and can therefore play an important role and provide
customized suggestions.
As the host country of the Fourth World Conference on Women, China is
firmly committed to gender equality and the empowerment of women. We will
continue to work closely with the international community to advance the women
and peace and security agenda, eliminate sexual violence in conflict and build
a peaceful and prosperous world where all women and girls can reach their full
potential for development.

22/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 10
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
We thank all briefers for their presence and briefings.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his report, while noting with alarm,
again, his description of the
“global security environment in which sexual violence remains a cruel tactic
of war, torture, terror and political repression, and a brutally effective tool of
displacement and dehumanization.” (S/2020/487, para 3)
We note with particular concern the attacks against women human rights defenders
and political activists aimed aimed at silencing their voices in peace processes.
The Secretary-General’s reports and their annexes presented to the Security
Council over the years have in clear and grim detail laid out the information on
conflict-related sexual violence. We are alarmed that 70 per cent of the listed parties
are persistent perpetrators who have appeared in the list for years and with impunity.
We believe this information should feed into all Council discussions. Despite the
increased focus and documentation, there is accountability for sexual violence
in only a fraction of cases. This means that one of our most powerful tools for
preventing sexual violence is not used. All over the world, discriminatory social
norms and stigmatization prevent survivors from reporting cases of sexual violence
and accessing information or services. This needs to be changed.
In Iraq and Syria, in recent years, thousands of women and girls have been
abducted and forced into sexual slavery. In Iraq, there are still no indictments for
sexual violence committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. No perpetrators
have been prosecuted for sexual violence in Syria. In Myanmar, there has been no
accountability despite the recommendations of the Independent International Factfinding Mission, which found that sexual violence was a hallmark of the Tatmadaw’s
operations in 2016 and 2017.
We strongly support the Security Council mechanisms on sexual violence
in conflict, including field-based monitoring, reporting by the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative, and the work of the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security. We underline the importance of sufficient funding
for women protection advisers. We note with concern the challenges posed to this
monitoring and reporting by the coronavirus disease and call on the United Nations
peace operations to maintain its focus on sexual violence. We welcome the inclusion
of sexual violence as a designation criterion for the Council sanctions committees
and support its application in practice. We look forward to increased briefings to the
committees by the Special Representative.
Estonia continues to support the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict in its cooperation with national institutions to address
impunity and support victims. We underline the role of international accountability
mechanisms, including the International Criminal Court, which, in an important
step in 2019, found Bosco Ntaganda guilty for crimes against humanity, including
rape and sexual slavery.
We support the elements in resolution 2467 (2019) describing a survivor-centred
approach in responding to sexual violence. We believe it needs to be rights-based,
responsive to the survivors’ needs and differentiated accordingly. Psychosocial and
sexual and reproductive health services are an integral part of it.

20-0987423/124

S/2020/727

We cannot address sexual violence without ensuring gender equality. The
disempowerment of women and girls increases their risk of violence, but also leads
to negative coping measures and restricts their access to assistance and justice.
We note with dismay the difficulties the Council continues to have in
recognizing and addressing sexual violence in specific contexts, despite its clear
condemnation of sexual violence in conflict. Overlooking this, we fail the survivors
of violence, but we also fail in our principal task of maintaining peace and security.
Sexual violence is a widespread and, at times, systemic feature of conflicts, and it
can perpetuate the divisions and animosities driving conflict for years to come.

24/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank our briefers today and pay particular tribute to civil
society organizations for their action in the field. I also welcome the leadership of
Germany and the Dominican Republic, co-Chairs of the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security, on this subject.
We share the concerns expressed by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2020/487). Access to justice and basic health care for victims, including sexualand reproductive-health services, are major challenges, particularly in the context
of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We regret the politicization of these issues to
the detriment of women and girls. We strongly condemn the use of sexual violence
as a tactic of war and terror with the aim of permanently traumatizing populations,
thereby undermining all efforts to find a sustainable solution to crises.
The fight against impunity is the best deterrent. Those responsible for sexual
violence must be systematically prosecuted and sentenced. This must be a priority
at the national level. International justice also has a role to play in cases of mass
atrocities. We support the work of the International Criminal Court in this regard.
Preventing sexual violence requires tackling gender inequalities. Sexual
violence remains exacerbated by discrimination, prejudice and stereotypes. The rise
of overtly sexist, misogynist and homophobic political discourse reinforces sexual
and gender-based violence. The Security Council has clearly identified solutions to
combat this scourge: when the participation of women at all levels of the decisionmaking process is ensured and real attention is paid to their economic and social
emancipation, societies emerge reinforced from crises more just and equal.
Supporting survivors of sexual violence, including when court proceedings
are inaccessible or blocked, is essential. This is why France has decided to grant
€6.2 million to the Global Survivors Fund, spearheaded by the Nobel Laureates
Denis Mukwege and Nadia Murad. Such support must be comprehensive. To this
end, France provided €5 million in funding for a project that empowers women by
improving access to sexual- and reproductive-health services and tackles sexual
violence in the Wadi Fira region in Chad.
The Special Representative’s warning and documentation role is crucial. We
will continue to support the inclusion of conflict-related sexual violence in countryspecific resolutions and advocate for adequate resources for the teams on the ground.
We urgently need to transform commitments into compliance. France will do
its part, including in the context of the Generation Equality Forum, which we will
organize in partnership with Mexico, UN-Women and civil society.

20-0987425/124

S/2020/727

Annex 12
Statement by Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
Let me begin by thanking Germany for organizing today’s meeting, as well
as the Dominican Republic. I would also like to thank all the briefers for their
particularly important and eye-opening briefings.
Indonesia is resolute in recognizing that conflict-related sexual violence is a
crime against humanity. Despite a decade of concerted focus in the Security Council
to end this crime, we are confronted with increasingly complex challenges to protect
all survivors and their families, especially during the coronavirus disease pandemic.
As clearly reported, the level of compliance by all parties to conflict remains low.
Against that backdrop, I would like to focus my statement on three
fundamental points.
First, we must ensure accountability to fight against sexual violence.
Strengthening the reach and capacity of national authorities is vital to facilitate
access to justice and ensure that perpetrators are held accountable.
The stigma of being victims of such heinous crimes often prevents them from
coming forward and seeking justice. Therefore, by treating them as survivors —
rather than simply as victims — will help national authorities to address this
issue better.
We particularly commend some Governments’ efforts to put in place a more
protective legal and policy framework for women and children at risk. But much
still needs to be done. In that regard, capacity-building must be proportional and
responsive to survivors’ needs in their reintegration process and to address the root
causes of the culture of impunity.
Secondly, comprehensive resocialization and reintegration processes for
survivors must be developed. Aside from justice, this agenda has a strong connection
to access to health care and psychological support. Support for resocialization and
reintegration has been even more urgent and challenging during this pandemic.
We have no option but to empower survivors to live their lives with dignity.
We should provide assistance in terms of quality services, economic support, healthcare services as well as legal assistance, so survivors may be seamlessly reintegrated
into society. Promoting social reintegration and cohesion is important.
It is therefore critical to engage local communities, particularly religious
leaders and women-led organizations, to mitigate stigma and fully reintegrate victims
in society. Together, we can provide a reliable vehicle for enhancing communitylevel protection and response mechanisms.
Thirdly, meaningful women’s participation to combat these crimes is
necessary. Indonesia believes that the inclusion of women in peacekeeping missions
may encourage victims to feel more secure working with them, and thereby help to
eliminate sexual violence crimes.
Women peacekeepers are well positioned to win the hearts and minds
of affected communities. We therefore strongly encourage troop- and policecontributing countries to incentivize the percentage of women military and police in
deployment to peacekeeping operations.
Today there are 159 Indonesian women peacekeepers in various missions
who have been trained to combat sexual violence in conflict at the Indonesian
26/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Peacekeeping Operations Training Centre. We must do things concretely if we want
to see progress.
Combating these crimes also requires women’s participation as negotiators
and mediators. Earlier this month, as a pathway to establishing a network in
South-East Asia, Indonesia hosted a webinar on the role of women negotiators and
mediators in the maintenance of regional peace and security. Practitioners across
the region shared their views on enhancing the role and participation of women in
peace processes.
Today’s debate is about standing behind justice and equity. We stand behind
the brave survivors of sexual violence. We stand up for their rights. Indonesia
attaches great importance to efforts aimed at eliminating conflict-related sexual
violence, focusing on a survivor-centred approach and fostering compliance with
existing commitments. Keeping them in our hearts, we must put the survivors at the
heart of our work.

20-0987427/124

S/2020/727

Annex 13

Statement by Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
Let me thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
invited briefers.
The Russian Federation strongly condemns all forms of violence against
civilians in armed conflict, including sexual violence. We welcome the various
multi-country initiatives and individual efforts designed to properly address this
evil in any war. Russia therefore stands committed to international cooperation in
this area.
We acknowledge the valuable contribution made by Special Representative
Pramila Patten and her Office. We appreciate her assistance in strengthening
national capacities to counter sexual violence and her dedication to developing
dialogue, supporting victims and drawing public attention to the consequences of
those heinous crimes.
Last year, at the open debate on the same subject under the German presidency,
the Secretary-General said: “Despite all ... efforts, the reality on the ground has
not changed. Sexual violence continues to be a horrific feature of conflicts around
the world” (S/PV.8514, p. 3). That is true, but sexual violence is not a stand-alone
phenomenon; it is a dirty but inalienable part of an armed conflict. It might be
naïve for the international community to rely on sniping at one particular crime in a
situation of ongoing armed conflict. The eradication of war crimes goes along with
resolving armed conflict itself.
It is not possible to combat sexual violence without the active involvement
of national authorities in this process. It is well recognized that the primary
responsibility in protecting civilians in their territory is borne by Governments.
Fighting impunity and ensuring accountability are the key parameters of a sovereign
State. With increasing number of attacks by terrorist groups, including their use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war, we need to intensify our efforts to address the
threat of terrorism. Justice must prevail in the battlefield or be properly adjudicated,
primarily in courts, where such crimes have been committed.
We need to act jointly and vigorously. We must avoid politicization of the
topic. Any information submitted for the attention of the Security Council must
be verified.
Speaking of human rights, it is important not to confuse the perspectives
through which we address the issue of sexual violence in armed conflict. It is crucial
to clearly distinguish between sexual violence as a war crime and sexual violence as
criminal wrongdoing.
The Security Council has to remain within its mandate of maintaining peace
and security. We do not honour attempts to expand the interpretation of the relevant
scope pertaining to armed conflict and post-conflict situations that has been agreed
and laid down in resolutions of the Security Council.
Finally, the United Nations and its affiliates must exhibit the highest standard
of behaviour. The zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence has to be applicable to
all, including peacekeeping missions. That also applies, mutatis mutandis, to the
humanitarian actors and non-governmental organizations that are legally operating
in countries affected by armed conflict.
The efficiency of the Security Council is directly linked to its ability to bridge
different approaches by enhancing respectful dialogue and constructive cooperation.
We are committed to acting accordingly in the interests of peace and supporting the
victims of sexual violence and for the sake of building just societies.

28/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 14
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to extend our welcome and appreciation to all Ministers for
their statements.
We thank the German presidency and the Dominican Republic for co-hosting
this important open debate.
We would also like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
latest report (S/2020/487), his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
for her valuable briefing and other briefers for their insightful presentations.
As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women and the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations, it is saddening to see that the multiple
consequences of sexual violence continue to persist despite increasing commitments
and progress achieved.
Wars and conflicts affect everyone, but often women and children remain the
ones to suffer the most from lasting psychological and physical impacts. Lacking
access to education, livelihoods and economic opportunities, these victims are also
easily subjected to stigmatization, human trafficking and armed group and terrorist
recruitment, which further the cycle of violence and suffering.
Our response to conflict-related sexual violence requires a comprehensive
approach of preventive and recovery measures, in addition to tackling its root causes
arising from gender inequality. In this effort, we share the view expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report that a survivor-centred approach is imperative, and
remain concerned at existing gaps between commitments and the implementation of
commitments by parties to conflict.
With that in mind, I would like to make the following points.
First, victims of sexual violence must be provided with essential recovery
services, including health care, psychological support, vocational training,
employment opportunities, legal aid and socioeconomic reintegration. These
measures should be taken together with efforts to advance gender equality. We
would like to highlight the importance of economic empowerment in enhancing
women’s recovery and capacity. States have the primary responsibility in this regard,
but complementary assistance from the international community — particularly
the United Nations agencies, programmes and peacekeeping missions — is equally
crucial. This may include but is not limited to development assistance, capacitybuilding, technical support and training.
Secondly, women are not only victims but they are also the backbone of
communities. The equal representation and full involvement of women in decisionmaking processes is a prerequisite to conflict prevention and addressing sexual
violence in conflict. This would ensure that initiatives promoted could adequately
address the needs and interests of victims, raise greater awareness and overcome
stigmatization against those who suffer from sexual violence.
Thirdly, the international community should further strengthen cooperation
and experience-sharing among countries and regions to allow for the more consistent
and effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, as well
as the conflict-related sexual violence aspect. We also call for a united and collective
response to effectively implement existing normative frameworks to promote gender
20-0987429/124

S/2020/727

equality and women’s empowerment in the prevention of and response to sexual
violence in conflicts.
The path to prevention and response to conflict-related sexual violence
requires both immediate actions and a long-term approach. In this pursuit, let us
always be mindful of the perpetual suffering of victims, who are at increasing risk
of being left behind, and of the indispensable role of women in all stages of peace
processes. Moreover, in the face of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the protection
and empowerment of women should be paid even more attention.
Viet Nam is committed to working closely with Member States and the
relevant agencies of the United Nations in this endeavour.

30/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Argentina thanks Germany for organizing this open debate of the Security
Council, and the Secretary General; the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten; and the Executive
President of the Association of Central African Women Lawyers, Ms. Nadia Carine
Fornel-Poutou, for their briefings.
Argentina endorses the statement made by the delegation of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see annex 20).
We express our appreciation for the efforts made in recent years by Member
States, the United Nations, intergovernmental organizations and local and
international civil society organizations to prevent and respond to sexual violence.
We also continue to strongly support the efforts of the Secretary-General and the
Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and reiterate
our support for their work, firmly rooted in the women and peace and security
agenda, originated in resolution 1325 (2000).
In the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we appreciate
the report prepared by the Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on the implications of the pandemic for the prevention of and response to
conflict-related sexual violence. In particular, we share the concern regarding the
impact of COVID-19 on sexual violence survivors’ access to essential health and
support services, and we consider it essential that measures be taken to guarantee
access to justice and relevant protection.
Argentina categorically condemns acts of sexual violence in armed conflicts,
supports efforts to prevent them and advocates accountability and punishment
for perpetrators.
It is essential that the use or threat of sexual violence by various actors and
armed groups — State and non-State alike — be prevented and punished. Such actions
are among the most serious of crimes and must be fought in the framework of the law
and with the range of tools and mechanisms available, including Security Council
sanctions regimes, which should include sexual violence as a specific criterion
for the imposition of sanctions and referral to the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court.
Argentina endorses the Secretary-General’s recommendations seeking to
promote access to justice for victims, based on a holistic concept of justice focused
on such victims. Ensuring the implementation of a survivor-centred prevention and
response approach, in accordance with resolution 2467 (2019), is essential.
It is likewise crucial to forge greater cooperation and enhance the sharing of
good practices on access to justice and accountability for crimes of sexual violence
in order to end the climate of impunity that contributes to the proliferation of such
crimes. It is therefore essential to establish mechanisms to protect, support, assist
and reintegrate all survivors of such violations, in collaboration with women’s
organizations and other civil society organizations. Such assistance must meet the
needs and protect the dignity and human rights of victims through measures to help
eliminate the multiple forms of discrimination, marginalization and stigmatization
they often suffer during the process of socioeconomic and cultural reintegration into
their families. and communities of origin.
20-0987431/124

S/2020/727

These elements must be taken into account when setting the mandates for
peacekeeping operations and special political missions, as well as in the peacebuilding
efforts of the Security Council, in the context of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
follow-up resolutions.
As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we firmly believe that national action plans for the implementation of that
resolution should be seen as a tool for building peace and preventing sexual violence,
especially in conflict situations. It was that spirit that inspired our country join the
Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network and support the Elsie Initiative for
Women in Peace Initiatives, promoted by the Canadian Government, to ensure that
more women are deployed in peace operations.
Argentina would like to highlight the importance of equipping peace
operations with women protection advisers with a view to improving coordination
and information-gathering to monitor and prevent sexual violence in conflicts. The
role peace operations play on the ground is crucial, and we welcome the recent
development of the Handbook for United Nations Field Missions on Preventing and
Responding to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence.
In conclusion, sexual violence in conflict situations represents one of the
most atrocious and terrible violations of human dignity, with implications that may
hamper the building international peace and security. That is why we must step
up our commitment to preventing, eradicating and ensuring accountability for such
crimes, putting survivors at the centre of our actions and joining forces to address the
underlying structural conditions that put women in a state of greater vulnerability
and risk.

32/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations, Mitch Fifield
We thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for their strong leadership
on this agenda and for co-organizing this important debate on moving from
commitments to compliance on sexual violence in conflict. Australia welcomes
the Secretary-General’s renewed commitment to the eradication of conflict-related
sexual violence and the analysis and recommendations contained in his recent report
(S/2020/487). We align ourselves with the statement submitted by Canada on behalf
of a group of Member States (see annex 20).
The women and peace and security agenda is central to the eradication of
sexual violence in conflict. It recognizes that conflict has a disproportionate
impact on women, but also that women are powerful mediators, peacebuilders and
leaders. However, the rights of women and girls around the world continue to be
compromised and sexual violence in conflict prevents women from exercising their
rights to full, equal and meaningful participation in efforts to secure sustainable
peace. Furthermore, we are concerned that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
crisis is intensifying violence against women and girls, particularly in conflict and
humanitarian settings — an emerging shadow pandemic that risks setbacks to the
women and peace and security agenda and gender equality.
Australia is deeply concerned by the persistent and widespread occurrence
of sexual violence in armed conflict. A climate of impunity discourages reporting,
undermines assistance and abets further violations. Sexual violence in conflict is
part of a continuum of violence. It is used as a tactic of war, particularly against
women and girls, human rights defenders or individuals on the basis of perceived
political affiliation, sexual orientation or ethnicity.
Gender equality is key to the prevention of sexual violence in conflict.
Research clearly shows that gender inequality, including violence against women and
girls, harmful norms and inequality structures, is a direct cause of sexual violence in
conflict and the strongest indicator of a country’s risk of conflict.
We must promote and protect women’s and girls’ rights. Sexual and
reproductive health and rights are vital human rights and of central importance for
all people in conflict situations, particularly survivors of rape and sexual violence.
Access to the full range of quality reproductive and sexual-health care, services and
information is critical for the recovery of survivors and for the restoration of their
dignity and bodily autonomy. Respecting and upholding these rights, particularly
the right to services and information, can be the difference between life and death.
We need to identify solutions and approaches that are context specific,
inclusive and informed by experience, especially that of survivors. Our actions must
be survivor-centred and recognize diversity in experience and need. For example,
children born of rape and their mothers have particular needs, and we must not forget
that male survivors, including boys, have their own barriers to accessing services.
Gender advisers are critical in peace operations, the military and police, for
advancing prevention and protection, compliance and accountability, and justice
for survivors. In this regard, we welcome the recent launch of the Handbook for
United Nations Field Missions on Preventing and Responding to Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence. We remain committed to preventing sexual exploitation, abuse and
harassment; it is our collective responsibility to act in ethical and transparent ways,
building respectful working relationships that reject inappropriate behaviours.

20-0987433/124

S/2020/727

Australia commends the extraordinary work of survivor-advocates, civil
society organizations and human rights defenders. We call on Member States to
listen to their voices and support their work. Women from diverse backgrounds must
be involved in all aspects of our efforts to end sexual violence and in the design and
implementation of services for survivors of sexual violence in conflict.
At a time in which COVID-19 has the potential to deepen fragility and
conflict, Australia stands in solidarity with, and advocates on behalf of, victims,
survivors and those working on the front lines of conflict to advance gender equality
and the women and peace and security agenda, and end sexual violence in conflict.
We are pleased to continue to fund UN-Women’s Women, Peace and Security Global
Facility and the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund, alongside a large number
of other Member States, to leverage change.
In 2020, commemorations marking the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
agreement of the Beijing Platform for Action and the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) provide important opportunities to highlight the
intersections between these two important agendas. We call on the United Nations
system and all Member States to intensify efforts to eradicate sexual violence
in conflict.

34/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I thank you and the German presidency for organizing this virtual high-level
open debate. I also express my sincere appreciation to Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Nadia
Carine Therese Fornel-Poutou, Executive President, Association des Femmes Juristes
de Centrafrique, and the representative of civil society for their insightful remarks.
As evident in the most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487),
sexual violence in conflicts remains a growing concern. Conflict related sexual
violence continues unabated, and justice and redress remain elusive. Despite numerous
commitments, compliance remains unsatisfactory — in terms of prevention and
enforcement alike. Today’s debate, on turning commitments into compliance, taking
place on the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda,
could not be more relevant and timely.
Bangladesh itself went through the painful experience of conflict-related
sexual violence during its war of liberation in 1971. Over 200,000 women bore its
brunt. We took measures for their rehabilitation in 1972. The perpetrators were
brought to justice through a trial process, and the contribution of victims was
recognized officially. We are having a repeat of that traumatic experience hosting
over 1 million forcibly displaced Rohingyas in Cox’s Bazaar. More than half of them
are women, who suffered the worst forms of sexual violence in Myanmar.
To realize its commitment to combating conflict-related sexual violence
in the context of the women and peace and security agenda, Bangladesh recently
adopted a national action plan on women and peace and security. Taking into
account Bangladesh’s contributions to United Nations peace operations, the action
plan includes specific activities to increase the number of women peacekeepers and
strengthen knowledge of, and compliance with, obligations relating to conflictrelated sexual violence. The action plan includes specific activities to update and
localize modules and training materials on mandate aspects relating to conflictrelated sexual violence. We are conducting trainings for troops and police personnel
on those materials.
The women peacekeepers of Bangladesh provide life-saving services as well
as psychosocial support to the victims of conflict-related sexual violence in various
war-ravaged zones. To meet the growing demand for women peacekeepers, the action
plan also includes specific activities aimed at increasing the recruitment of women
into the armed forces and police.
The national action plan also addresses the need for capacity-building for
local humanitarian actors on gender-responsive and victim-centred humanitarian
actions. This has been given particular focus in the light of the Rohingya context. The
humanitarian assistance programmes for the Rohingya people led by the Government
of Bangladesh along with United Nations and other stakeholders take into account
the specific needs of women and girls, including the victims of sexual violence.
Rohingya women have also been made part of the response as agents against security
threats, including violent extremism and human trafficking.
The list attached to the 2020 report of the Secretary General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2020/487) names 54 parties who are credibly suspected to
committing or being responsible for matters of rape and other forms of sexual violence
in armed conflict. Unfortunately, many of those names belong to State machineries.

20-0987435/124

S/2020/727

It is appalling to know that over 70 per cent of listed State and non-State parties are
persistent perpetrators and have appeared on the list for more than five years.
As presented in the report of the Independent International Fact-finding
Mission on Myanmar, sexual violence against Rohingya women and girls was used
by Tatmadaw operations as a tactic of war in Rakhine during 2016 and 2017. Even
now, the increased fighting between the Myanmar armed forces and various armed
groups continues to put the remaining Rohingyas in Myanmar at constant risk of
conflict-related sexual violence.
The listing of Tatmadaw in the Secretary-General’s report is a step in the right
direction. However, unless and until perpetrators are held accountable, the risks
will only exacerbate. The international community, including the Council, needs to
persuade Myanmar to cooperate with the relevant United Nations entities, including
the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the Independent
International Fact-finding Mission on Myanmar and other international judicial
mechanisms, including the International Criminal Court and the International Court
of Justice.
In the past 20 years, we have made significant progress in developing
norms relating to conflict-related sexual violence and its intricate connection with
international peace and security. Decisive actions have to be taken to put those
norms into practice. To ensure the implementation of Security Council resolutions
on women and peace and security, we would like to suggest following actions.
The compliance framework suggested by Council resolutions, including
resolution 2467 (2019), needs to be fully utilized, especially by regular monitoring
at the field level and engagement by the Office of the Special Representative through
United Nations country teams to adopt prevention commitments. We see merit in the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to strengthen targeted measures against
those who do not implement existing obligations and commit, command or condone
sexual violence. Coherence between conflict-related sexual violence and targeted
measures would indeed send a clear signal underlining the gravity of these violations.
In addition, there is a need for greater synergies between mandated United
Nations entities and the Committee on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination
against Women towards ensuring compliance with the General recommendation
No. 30 of the Committee, on women in conflict prevention, conflict and post-conflict
situations, which obliges the 189 States parties to the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women to report on the resolutions related
to conflict-related sexual violence.
We believe the issue of sexual violence cannot be addressed sustainably
if the root causes of conflict are not addressed. Discrimination, persecution and
subjugation weaken vulnerable and marginalized communities and reduce their
ability to prevent incidents of sexual violence at the hands of the parties in conflict.
When sexual violence continuously goes unaccounted for, it becomes persistent
and often normalized. Such an environment of impunity obstructs peacebuilding
and recovery efforts. Hence, accountability and justice need to be prioritized in
addressing sexual violence by prioritizing the strengthening of justice mechanisms
in conflict and post-conflict contexts.
Stronger implementation mechanisms for the Security Council’s women and
peace and security agenda are needed at the national, regional and global levels.
Only 44 per cent of Member States — 84 — have to date developed national action
plans under resolution 1325 (2000). One practical method could be to pursue

36/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

universalizing national action plans more vigorously. National action plans could
serve as an important yardstick to measure progress.
Commitments relating to conflict-related sexual violence need to be
internalized by the entire United Nations system, including at the field level by
Resident Coordinators and other United Nations agencies in country teams. This would
address the capacity gaps in the security sector, justice system and overall political
processes for increasing women’s participation at all levels of peace processes.

20-0987437/124

S/2020/727

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, Ronaldo Costa Filho
First, allow me to congratulate the German presidency of the Security Council
for convening this important open debate on conflict-related sexual violence in the
context of the broader women and peace and security agenda.
The fight against conflict-related sexual violence is one that should unite the
international community, with the Security Council fulfilling its role as the principal
organ responsible for maintaining international peace and security on behalf of
Member States. For it is unacceptable that, in the twenty-first century, conflict be
used as a pretext for carrying out despicable acts of sexual exploitation and violence.
While the United Nations has set up a working architecture to deal with the fight
against conflict-related sexual violence, it is urgent that words and commitments be
translated into action on the ground.
In this regard, Brazil lends it support to the efforts of the Office of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, created in 2009 to raise awareness
and coordinate the response across the United Nations system and foster a victimcentred approach to sexual violence. Brazil also welcomes initiatives aimed at
advancing standard procedures in the fight against conflict-related sexual violence,
such as the recently launched “Murad code”.
We must consider that, among its various impacts on international peace
and security, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic creates an ever-more
challenging environment for survivors of sexual violence and abuse, providing
potential perpetrators with opportunities for their acts to go unpunished while
making it more difficult to deter such acts.
With this in mind, Brazil warmly welcomes the adoption of resolution 2532
(2020), calling for a global cessation of hostilities and establishing a humanitarian
pause to allow efforts to stop the spread of the disease to take place in conflictstricken areas.
Nevertheless, the international community should not lower its guard when
it comes to the fight against sexual exploitation and abuse in conflict and postconflict situations. Conversely, we need to remain all the more watchful. Blue
Helmets in particular have a key role to play in that regard, while trying to keep
themselves safe from the spread of the disease and dutifully fulfilling the mandates
of peacekeeping operations.
With regard specifically to sexual violence, exploitation and abuse, the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy, to which Brazil adheres entirely, provides
a starting point as well as a coherent conceptual framework to deal with this
lingering scourge in the context of peacekeeping. We are proud of the overall track
record of our peacekeepers in their performance over more than 70 years under the
United Nations flag, especially of their strict observance of conduct and discipline
protocols, including adherence to the zero-tolerance policy.
The twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which we
celebrate this year, should give us pause to reflect on the accomplishments made in
the two past decades and on the obstacles and shortcomings the women and peace
and security agenda as stumbled upon along the way.
Fighting sexual violence is one of the cornerstones of that historic, pioneering
resolution. Since its adoption, the Security Council has adopted nine other resolutions
on the matter, recognizing that one of the root causes of conflict-related sexual
38/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

violence is gender inequality, which pick up where resolution 1325 (2000) left off,
broadening the agenda of commitments and paving the way for a broad and coherent
response by the United Nations system and Member States.
The participation of women in every aspect of international peace and security
is one way to address the root causes of violence, but women peacekeepers and women
mediators are also valuable actors in peacemaking, peacekeeping and sustaining
peace. Studies have demonstrated that a peace agreement is about 35 per cent more
likely to last at least 15 years if women mediators are involved in the negotiation
process. Evidence shows that belligerents trust women to be honest brokers in peace
processes, hence lending more credibility to political and diplomatic efforts that will
eventually hold out longer.
Women peacekeepers are in general able to reach out to more segments of
the local population than their male counterparts. Their presence on the ground can
encourage the reporting of cases of sexual violence and forge stronger ties between
a mission and communities. It is therefore noteworthy that, for the first time in
history, roughly half of the Secretary-General’s special representatives and envoys
are women — a remarkable feat.
As we advocate for greater participation by women in peace and security,
we must highlight the importance of meeting the targets of the Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy 2018-2028 — an integral part of the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. Brazil’s national action plan on women and peace and
security commits to increasing the proportion of female military and police officers in
peacekeeping from their current levels — 16.5 per cent of female military observers,
14.6 per cent of staff officers, 4.5 per cent of troops, 11 per cent of formed police
units and 26.8 per cent of individual police officers — towards the Strategy’s targets.
Brazil is also proud of its two Blue Helmets — Commander Márcia Braga and
Commander Carla Araujo — distinguished with the United Nations Military Gender
Award, in 2018 and 2019, respectively, for the innovative work they carried out by
promoting mixed teams in patrols of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, which helped reduce sexual
violence in that country. Such recognition stands as a testament to the competence
these two military officers bring to the job, as well as to Brazil’s commitment to
ensuring the broader participation of women in peacekeeping.
The manifold links between the inclusion of women in peace and security
efforts and the fight against conflict-related sexual violence should not be overlooked,
most critically as the world struggles against the COVID-19 pandemic.
Brazil stands ready to advance the goals of the women and peace and security
agenda as we celebrate the first two decades of resolution 1325 (2000), and to help
eliminate the scourge that conflict-related sexual violence inflicts on international
peace and security as well as on human dignity.

20-0987439/124

S/2020/727

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations
[Original: English and French]
Canada is proud to have a feminist foreign policy, which places gender equality
at the core of our global engagement and decision-making. There is incontrovertible
evidence that gender equality is essential to achieve lasting peace and security,
sustainable development and inclusive economic growth. We all have the right to
equal participation, non-discrimination and protection from violence.
While many achievements have been made in the past two decades since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), this anniversary year calls upon all of our
countries to reflect on where improvements must be made and how further action
must be taken to deliver results on its implementation. Stopping the continued and
widespread occurrence of sexual and gender-based violence in conflict is one such
area. We all have a collective obligation to turn our commitments into actions.
Women and girls, members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer
and intersex (LGBTQI) community, and others belonging to marginalized groups
continue to be targeted with sexual and gender-based violence in fragile and conflictaffected situations, the effects of which have only been exacerbated during the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We are appalled by the conclusion of the
Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders that sexual and gender-based violence,
including in conflict-affected contexts, is often linked to the rise of misogynistic,
sexist and homophobic speech by political leaders. Understanding the root causes
of sexual and gender-based violence, and taking concrete action to address them, is
crucial to achieving a survivor-centred response that provides short- and long-term
support for individuals and communities.
The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the importance of recognizing
the gendered aspects of public health crises, such as increases in domestic violence
and the scapegoating of LGBTQI and other minority groups. The importance of
considering gender-based violence services as essential and life-saving and the
responsibility of all actors involved in COVID-19-response efforts has been brought
to the forefront. The pandemic has also highlighted the continued need for genderresponsive policies, and for initiatives that support victims and survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence, specifically women-led grassroots organizations,
which need adequate funding. Canada has committed an additional $3 million to
the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund in order to ensure gender perspectives
are at the forefront of peacebuilding and pandemic responses, and an additional
$2 million to the COVID-19 response of the United Nations Trust Fund to End
Violence against Women.
Health systems are straining to respond adequately to the pandemic, while the
need to protect comprehensive sexual and reproductive health and rights, including
access to safe abortion and contraception, must remain a priority. Canada will
continue to support the important work of our partners ensuring that quality sexual
and reproductive health services continue to be available and accessible, and will
work to protect advocacy efforts that promote rights for all, especially the most
marginalized. Canada has announced $8.9 million in new international aid to ensure
women and girls around the world have access to safe abortions and reproductive
health services, with an additional $1.2 million to provide technical support and
capacity-building in the humanitarian sector to support sexual and reproductive
health in fragile and conflict settings.

40/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

At home in Canada, we are also working to prevent and respond to the levels
of violence and discrimination faced by indigenous women, girls and two-spirit
people during the pandemic. This is a stark reminder of the intersecting ways in
which sexual and gender-based violence can occur, including in our own society.
Canada remains committed to promoting the rights and safety of indigenous peoples
in Canada and has announced new funding to meet the needs of indigenous women
and children experiencing or fleeing domestic violence, with additional funds to
meet the increased demands during the COVID-19 pandemic. Canada is also
expanding its national action plan on women and peace and security to address this
type of violence.
We must ensure that the diverse voices of survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence in conflict are fully reflected in our efforts to stop its all too widespread
occurrence. This requires context-sensitive and tailored responses that also address
the root causes of violence and conflict. Canada recognizes the significant normative
progress that has been made to address sexual violence in conflict. However, we
must take the necessary measures to address gaps in implementation and ensure
that progress is reflected by universal compliance, supported by the necessary
enforcement mechanisms, including Security Council sanctions regimes. Canada
welcomes the development of the Murad code, which will enable the international
community to increase accountability for conflict-related sexual violence and
support the needs, safety and rights of victims and survivors through a survivorcentred approach.
COVID-19 has taught us to adapt our efforts to new challenges. Canada
remains committed to preventing and responding to sexual and gender-based
violence and to advancing gender equality. In this twentieth anniversary year of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we cannot accept any setbacks.

20-0987441/124

S/2020/727

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations
on behalf of 62 Member States and the European Union
[Original: English and French]
I am pleased to submit this statement on behalf of the following 62 Member
States, representing all five regional groups at the United Nations, as well as the
European Union: Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Botswana, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana,
Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, the
Republic of Korea, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali,
Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Rwanda, Senegal, Singapore, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates,
the United Kingdom, Uruguay and Zambia.
We thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for co-organizing
this important debate on the theme “Conflict-related sexual violence: turning
commitments into compliance”. We welcome the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487).
The group expresses its serious concern at the multifaceted impacts of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on all victims and survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence, including by limiting their ability to report incidents and to
access assistance and essential services, including sexual and reproductive healthcare services. The group is also concerned that the COVID-19 pandemic has further
aggravated risks of sexual and gender-based violence, especially in conflict-affected
regions of the world, and is negatively impacting, and, in some areas, rolling back
and undermining, the progress that has been made on gender equality and women's
and girls’ enjoyment of human rights and their empowerment. The group underscores
the importance of human rights-based, people-centred, gender-responsive and
comprehensive responses to the pandemic to fully take into account the needs and
dignity of victims and survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.
We are outraged by the ongoing, persistent and widespread perpetration of
sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict. Sexual violence is being used
as a tactic of war and terrorism and a tool of political repression in fragile contexts,
during and after conflicts. It is a flagrant and unacceptable violation of international
law, including international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Women and girls — especially those who experience multiple and intersecting
forms of discrimination and from marginalized groups such as refugees and
migrants, internally displaced persons, indigenous women and persons living with
disabilities — are disproportionately affected by sexual and gender-based violence.
Victims and survivors are frequently an actual or perceived member of a persecuted
political, ethnic, religious minority or other group. We are notably appalled by the
conclusion of the Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders that sexual and
gender-based violence, including in conflict-affected contexts, is often linked to the
rise of misogynistic, sexist and various forms of hate speech by political leaders. In
this context, investing efforts in addressing the structural root causes of sexual and
gender-based violence, including gender inequalities, must be an absolute priority
to prevent violence and ensure that the human rights of all women and girls are
promoted and protected. To do this, we must view COVID-19 and the scourge of

42/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

sexual and gender-based violence not as unrelated challenges but as profoundly
interconnected ones.
Ensuring justice and accountability is one of the most effective means of
prevention. A climate of impunity, fear and stigma discourages reporting, undermines
survivor-centred relief and assistance and encourages further violations. This also
affects men and boys, who often face specific social, legal and cultural barriers
to reporting violence. Perpetrators of sexual violence in armed conflict must be
held to account; crimes must be effectively investigated and documented in a timely
manner; and legal assistance, effective protection and adequate legal frameworks
and institutions for the effective prosecution of crimes of sexual violence in conflict
must be maintained.
We also emphasize the need to ensure adequate training in human rights and
the prevention of violence for security forces who are tasked with protecting the
civilian population. We acknowledge the inclusion of sexual and gender-related
crimes among the most serious crimes of international concern in the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Ensuring equal, adequate and holistic access
to justice for victims and survivors also requires access to financial support, which
survivors in all conflict settings have identified as a priority for rebuilding their
lives, and for recovering from their traumas and social stigmatization. Furthermore,
we encourage the Security Council to use sanctions and other targeted measures in
order to enhance compliance. The group encourages the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict to pursue its efforts to strengthen the capacity
of national rule-of law-institutions. We also encourage the United Nations Action
Against Sexual Violence in Conflict network to continue strengthening advocacy,
improving coordination and accountability, and supporting country efforts to prevent
conflict-related sexual violence and respond to the needs of victims and survivors.
Accountability must be accompanied by effective and multisectoral support to
survivors and their communities, whose deep traumas and social stigma can persist
long after the conflict has ended. We therefore encourage all Member States to adopt
a survivor-centred and human rights-based approach in preventing and responding
to sexual and gender-based violence in conflict and post-conflict situations. Greater
efforts are needed at all levels to ensure that survivors have access to the full range
of mental health, psychosocial support, livelihood, legal and non-discriminatory
health services. We must stand in solidarity with survivors, not just in words but
also in actions, by being outspoken in defence of their rights and agency, especially
as survivors face overlapping crises. A comprehensive and holistic approach to
accountability that places victims and survivors at the centre of all interventions
includes principles of participation, transparency, non-discrimination, empowerment
and sustainability.
In addition, we cannot let the impact of COVID-19 erode our prevention and
response efforts and by extension endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security. Before the pandemic, less than 1 per cent of humanitarian assistance
was dedicated to sexual and gender-based violence services, and we are concerned
there will be increased pressure to further reduce critical resources to this sector. We
therefore call for increased funding for gender-responsive programming, including
tackling gender-based violence and providing access to sexual and reproductive health
and reproductive rights, as agreed in accordance with the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development and the Beijing Platform
for Action and the outcome documents of their respective review conferences, as
well as better integration of a gender-perspective into all programming in the areas
of peace and security and in humanitarian interventions.

20-0987443/124

S/2020/727

The group wishes to underscore the importance of the participation of
women and child-protection advisers in United Nations peace operations to better
coordinate and improve the quality of information available on trends and patterns of
conflict-related sexual violence in order to facilitate early warning and prevention.
Recognizing the important role played by United Nations field missions in preventing
sexual violence in conflict, the group welcomes the recent release of the Handbook
for United Nations Field Missions on Preventing and Responding to Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence.
In conclusion, as the Secretary-General has stated, the group underscores that
sexual violence in conflict does not happen in a vacuum and has broader implications
and links to the women and peace and security agenda. By successfully preventing
and combating sexual violence in conflict, we are ensuring that women and girls
can exercise their right to full, equal and meaningful participation and decisionmaking in all aspects of peace and security. We are therefore deeply concerned by
the increased reports of attacks against women human rights defenders and women
peacebuilders and by the withdrawal of many women from prominent leadership
roles in peace and transitional justice processes and civic space more generally.
In this historic year marking the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations, and with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, it is high time to act to end
sexual violence in conflict.

44/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations, Guillermo Roque Fernández De Soto Valderrama
[Original: Spanish]
The Government of Colombia categorically rejects sexual violence in all
settings, including armed conflict. Based on our belief that this problem needs to
be addressed with a gender-informed approach, Colombia has adopted measures to
safeguard the rights of women, girls and boys in conflict settings.
To that end, the State of Colombia has enacted national laws applied through
the development and implementation of public policies, plans, programmes and
projects to support victims and prevent crimes of sexual violence. Colombia’s
normative framework includes 15 provisions that comprehensively ensure the
protection of victims, access to justice, reparations and psychosocial support and
uphold their reproductive and sexual rights. Moreover, the Constitutional Court in
2008 recognized the commission of acts of sexual aggression in conflict as violations
of international norms, such as the Geneva Conventions and article 7 of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
In addition, the Victims’ Comprehensive Support and Reparation Unit —
the State entity tasked with attending to and meeting the needs of victims of the
armed conflict in Colombia — recently published a document containing guidelines
for psychosocial support to victims of sexual violence in armed conflict. This
was the result of joint work by the International Organization for Migration and
the United States Agency for International Development, organizations that share
Colombia’s interest in addressing this phenomenon in the most comprehensive and
precautionary way.
Likewise, the Office of the Attorney-General gives serious priority to
investigations involving gender-based violence, with a view to ensuring that
perpetrators are duly prosecuted and victims protected. Through the Transitional
Justice Steering Group and Victims’ Registry, the Attorney-General places emphasis
on problems affecting the rights of children and adolescents, gender-based violence
and crimes committed against protected categories, with a view to providing
appropriate support to victims.
For its part, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, a mechanism that administers
justice to strengthen the transition towards peace, is equipped with a standing body,
the Gender Commission, tasked with promoting the effective implementation of a
gender-informed approach in the justice component of the Comprehensive System of
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition.
The efforts of the Government have not been decimated during the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The Gender Technical Working Group of the National
Reincorporation Council has been working since the onset of the pandemic to develop
methods to address cases of sexual violence that occur during these conditions that
enable appropriate action and prevention.
However, despite ongoing efforts and the progress made in this area,
Colombia continues to face great challenges owing to the persistence of criminal
actions by residual groups of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia,
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional and other armed actors that continue to commit
violations, thereby undermining the rights of women and children in various parts of
the country. These armed groups and criminals are seeking intimidate and control
the community through sexual violence. The State, under the leadership of the
20-0987445/124

S/2020/727

Presidential Counsellor’s Office for Human Rights and through the Intersectoral
Commission for the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of and Sexual Violence
against Children and Adolescents, monitors and coordinates actions to counter these
types of crime in the territories.
It is important to highlight that, under the leadership of President Iván Duque
Márquez, the State’s public policy line for the prevention of the recruitment or use of
children and adolescents and for the prevention of sexual violence against them by
organized armed groups and organized criminal groups was updated and formulated.
With respect to criminal conduct involving uniformed members of the public forces,
it must be made clear that under no circumstances do such acts correspond to any
State policy. On the contrary, President Duque Márquez has emphatically stated that
the State will not tolerate any type of abuse of minors. The Government has publicly
and insistently requested that progress be made in criminal investigations both in the
course of ordinary justice and with respect to disciplinary investigations in the Office
of the Attorney General against the perpetrators of these crimes. Furthermore, the
Ministry of Defence and the military forces have shown no tolerance for such acts.
The Colombian State calls for strengthening the fight against the crime
of sexual violence in all its forms and dimensions, which necessarily requires
mechanisms for comprehensive reparation for the victims, as well as effective
sanctions and condemnations imposed by the international community against the
illegal armed groups, which are the main perpetrators of these practices.

46/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Cyprus to the United Nations
I wish to thank the German presidency of the Security Council, working
in collaboration with the Dominican Republic as joint Chairs of the Chairs of the
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, for convening today’s
important meeting. This statement complements that of the representative of the
European Union (EU) (see annex 25).
Nearly 20 years after the unanimous adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the
Security Council, protecting women from sexual violence in armed conflict remains
the most undervalued aspect of the protection of civilians in conflict situations. The
call stipulated in resolution 1325 (2000) on all belligerents to take special measures
to protect women and girls from gender-based violence has not curtailed rape and
other forms of sexual abuse as a weapon of war and humiliation. Not only do we have
a long way to go in order to ensure more safety for women in situations of armed
conflict, but we also have to expand the scope of protective measures from sexual
violence in armed conflict to include men and boys and to account for factors, such
as displacement, that might make certain civilians even more vulnerable.
The fact that sexual violence has taken place in every conflict since the dawn
of history is a testament to just how deeply rooted exploitation of vulnerability
is and how easily beastly instincts take the upper hand or are used as weapons.
Furthermore, the sheer scale of such violence in our times and a persisting attitude
of quasi-normalization of rape in armed conflict remain an insult to human
civilization. They expose a profound failure of national Governments and the
international community, given the prohibition of rape and other forms of sexual
violence by customary international law, in both international and non-international
armed conflicts, as well as the wide recognition of such acts as war crimes since the
first codification of the laws of war in early military manuals and as crimes against
humanity in current international legal practice.
As a State whose civilian population was subjected to rape and sexual violence
during the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in July and August 1974, with Turkey acting
with complete impunity and zero accountability, my country is painfully aware that
perpetrators often get away with crime and that victims have little chance of getting
justice, are alone in their agony, stigmatized, deprived of proper access to sexual
health care following abuse, and without adequate psychological support. We also
know that the readiness of a conflict State to respect international law may not
amount to much in the chaos that prevails during conflict. We therefore need to
be conscious that the adoption of declarations and legal texts should not blur the
focus on perpetrators, be they States or other actors that are taking advantage of the
gaps and lawlessness created by conflict, and the increased vulnerability of women
and girls.
Accordingly, in addition to the accession of States to all relevant instruments
of international law and transposing their rules into robust national legislation and
enforcing both, and, in addition, naturally, to sustained efforts around the world to
inculcate respect for the sanctity and inviolability of women and girls and of course
all non-combatants, as well as the rules of war in armed conflict, Cyprus considers
the following steps as indispensable to making progress.
Increased accountability of military commanders so as to ensure that the
combatants under their command are trained in and comply with international law,
including criminal liability for commanders themselves for lack of compliance, is
the most direct way of stemming sexual violence in armed conflict at the source.
20-0987447/124

S/2020/727

However, the elimination of impunity is perhaps the more powerful deterrent.
This entails criminal prosecution and not just accountability, for example, within the
framework of a truth commission, if the armed forces and/or the national criminal
justice system cannot prosecute, which is why the International Criminal Court,
with its complementary jurisdiction, was created.
Both civilian and military authorities should collect evidence and interview
victims and witnesses in the wake of fighting, focusing on war crimes, crimes
against humanity, and missing persons. Humanitarian actors should be able to assist
upon request.
Like other war crimes and crimes against humanity, sexual violence, sexual
slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, and enforced sterilization should
not be pardoned in any amnesty that may be granted as part of a peace agreement.
Furthermore, victims and their suffering must be acknowledged. Victims must
be treated as such and not as an inconvenient statistic shrouded in taboo. Victims
should be entitled to reparations and remedy, even where criminal prosecution is
absent, as well as the lifelong support and counselling they are likely to need. They
should also be helped with reintegration if they are marginalized by society.
Lastly, we should continue to enrich the body of collective commitments
we have, not only in creating additional directly relevant survivor-centred, human
rights-based obligations and in enhancing accountability in complying with these
obligations, but in situating such obligations within the broader framework of
achieving gender parity. We need to treat the disease, not just alleviate symptoms.
In this context, Cyprus’ third national action plan on gender equality, covering
the period from 2019 to 2023, incorporates a holistic approach to gender equality,
addressing seven priority areas — violence, gender stereotypes, decision-making,
social rights, legislative reform, employment and education — and draws on policy
recommendations by treaty bodies and United Nations norms, as well as EU policy
frameworks. Cyprus is also close to finalizing its first national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

48/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Denmark to the
United Nations, Martin Bille Hermann
I deliver this statement on behalf of Norway, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and
my own country, Denmark. I thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for
organizing today’s open debate. Furthermore, I express sincere gratitude to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten and her Office for their
important work.
We have seen several results on the normative side: of the 10 Security Council
resolutions adopted under the women and peace and security agenda, 7 specifically
describe sexual violence as a major impediment to international peace and security.
Other positive developments include the policy for United Nations field missions on
preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence, which was adopted in
January this year, and the first whole-of-mission Handbook for United Nations Field
Missions on Preventing and Responding to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence, which
was launched just over a month ago.
While much of the normative framework against sexual violence is in place,
sexual violence continues to be a horrific part of conflicts around the world. We
cannot turn a blind eye to this situation. It is high time to move from words to
action. We must step up efforts at all levels, including in relation to both advocacy
and funding for prevention and measures aimed at addressing conflict-related
sexual violence.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a violation of international human rights
and international humanitarian law. It can constitute a war crime, a crime against
humanity and an act of genocide. Sexual violence destroys lives, tears apart the
social fabric of communities, creates rifts between neighbours and preys on the
differences that enrich our societies. Those who are targeted are often discriminated
against owing to their religious, ethnic, sexual, political or other minority status.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has borne witness to a
“shadow pandemic” in the form of a sharp rise in incidents of sexual and gender-based
violence, including in conflict situations. To make matters worse, it is anticipated
that COVID-19 will severely hamper the possibility of survivors to report sexual
violence, further exacerbating the existing structural, institutional and sociocultural
barriers to reporting such crimes. Adding to this, sexual- and gender-based-violence
response programmes are in many cases not considered to be essential, life-saving
services and prioritized as such in the context of the overall COVID-19 response.
That needs to change. We need to ensure a prompt and comprehensive
response to survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. We need to work towards
the establishment of specific protocols for survivors to continue to be able to gain
access to timely services, including the full range of sexual and reproductive healthcare services, while mitigating the risks of COVID-19 transmission. And we need
to put an emphasis on the development of specific mitigation plans and measures
to ensure rule of law and accountability for sexual violence as part of the overall
COVID-19 response. In the end, justice and accountability are not only imperative
to end impunity; they are key in ensuring prevention.
The Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire during the COVID-19
pandemic is not only a key step for addressing the shadow pandemic of conflict-related
sexual violence. It should be the starting point for promoting a transformative and
feminist approach to peace and security. We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487) pointing to possible ways forward.
20-0987449/124

S/2020/727

We must monitor and document violations of international law and provide
training and funding where needed. Individual States have the primary responsibility
of preventing and responding to sexual violence, as well as of investigating and
prosecuting persons implicated in such crimes. However, we need to strengthen
State institutions and build capacity to combat conflict-related sexual violence.
Perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence must be held to account.
We call for the systematic use of gender expertise in United Nations operations
and would like to highlight the importance of women protection advisers. We
welcome the initiatives launched in the past year and echo the need for resolutions,
mandates and sanctions to address conflict-related sexual violence and further
translating words into action.
Eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons is a key part of
combating sexual and gender-based violence, and it should be included in all four
pillars of women and peace and security agenda: participation, protection, prevention,
and relief and recovery. We need to focus more on the gendered aspects of the spread
of small arms and light weapons and to include more women in disarmament efforts.
Root causes of gender-based violence, such as gender-based power inequalities,
gender stereotypes and gender-based discrimination must be addressed in policy and
practice. Responsive measures, such as providing adequate services to survivors
of gender-based violence, are crucial, as are measures to prevent the violence from
happening in the first place.
We support the Call to Action on Protection from Gender-Based Violence in
Emergencies, and we firmly believe that we can achieve better results by working
together. The Oslo conference on ending sexual and gender-based violence in
humanitarian crises, held in May 2019, helped to change the way we address this issue.
We must maintain momentum to make sexual and gender-based violence, prevention
and response a key humanitarian priority. We highly value the contributions of
survivors and witnesses, civil society and human rights defenders, which are crucial
to building a relevant and effective response without causing survivors further pain.
Reparation and justice must go hand in hand. A comprehensive approach is
a prerequisite to alleviating both the immediate and long-term impact of conflictrelated sexual violence. We must strengthen services for survivors of sexual
violence, including by ensuring comprehensive sexual and reproductive health
and rights, such as access to emergency contraception and the safe termination of
pregnancies. We must fight impunity, remove stigma, alleviate suffering, rectify
injustices and ultimately help people to rebuild their lives and communities to build
a sustainable peace.
Accountability also means funding. The Nordic countries recognize that we
as donors have a responsibility to promote flexible and core funding as well as build
equal partnerships with civil society organizations. We appeal to other countries
to step up and take on their responsibility to improve funding for conflict-related
sexual violence interventions. The Nordic countries will do our part, through our
embassies, multilateral cooperation and a wide range of partnerships, including the
Nordic Women Mediators Network and the Nordic Centre for Gender in Military
Operations, to equip peacekeepers. With the COVID-19 pandemic continuing to
spread by the minute, the time for action is now.

50/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
At the outset, we would like to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic
for organizing today’s high-level open debate on conflict-related sexual violence. We
would also extend our thanks to the briefers for their interesting briefings delivered
at the beginning of the meeting.
Egypt welcomes the efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, especially her cooperation with African
States. We also welcome the measures undertaken by the Secretariat with regard to
the increase in number of women protection advisers in United Nations peacekeeping
missions, as we believe that conflict resolution cannot be separated from efforts to
empower women and girls and the elimination and prevention of sexual violence in
armed conflict.
As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and
security agenda this year, it is worth mentioning that Egypt has always supported the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and its agenda in relation to the inclusion of women
at all levels of peace and security arrangements. In this regard and at the national
level, Egypt is developing its first national plan to monitor and implement resolution
1325 (2000). The Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping
and Peacebuilding organizes series of workshops for Egyptian forces and forces from
Arab and African countries participating in United Nations peacekeeping operations
to train them to deal with crimes related to sexual violence in armed conflicts.
Egypt reiterates its commitment to the Secretary-General’s initiatives
for zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse. We will continue working
with the Security Council and the Secretariat to eliminate all forms of violence
against women in the peacekeeping-operations context. We commend the efforts
of the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, especially the efforts related to capacity-building of States in conflict or
post-conflict situations.
Egypt calls for the mobilization of human and financial resources to assist in
the implementation of the mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We believe that the situation of women
under foreign occupation, especially that of Palestinian women, should not be left
out of our discussions on women and peace and security.
Respect for the societal and cultural contexts in each country when
implementing the women and peace and security agenda is paramount, especially
when combating sexual violence. We call upon the Secretary-General to focus his
reports only on sexual violence in armed conflicts zones. His reports should not
include controversial concepts and concepts that are not internationally agreed.
Egypt would like to highlight the important role of building the capacities
of religious and local leaders to raise awareness about ending stigma for victims of
sexual violence. While thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict for her work, we call on her to resume the dialogue
launched with the Al-Azhar Al-Sharif institution and the League of Arab States
with regard to the correction of religious discourse and the renunciation of violence
against women and girls, especially in armed conflicts.

20-0987451/124

S/2020/727

Annex 25
Statement by the Principal Advisor on Gender and on the
Implementation of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325
(2000) on Women and Peace and Security of the European External
Action Service of the European Union, Mara Marinaki
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
We thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for keeping this important
topic on the agenda of the Security Council. We owe this to all victims and survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence. They expect us to move resolutely from
commitments to compliance on sexual violence in conflict until the day when there
are no longer any cases of these crimes.
This anniversary year for resolution 1325 (2000), which marks the 20 years
since the Security Council recognized the relationship between the rights and safety
of women and international peace and security, has been disrupted by the current
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Yet this will not deter us. We will adapt
and continue to work resolutely for the comprehensive implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda and its interrelated pillars of women’s rights, agency
and safety.
It is alarming that, as the Secretary-General points out in his latest report
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, “the level of compliance by all parties to conflict
with the resolutions of the Security Council remains low after a decade of concerted
focus” (S/2020/487, para. 74). The EU and its member States are determined to show
political leadership and make all efforts to fill these gaps in compliance.
While the Secretary-General’s report was finalized before the COVID-19
outbreak, the pandemic has provided fresh evidence that such crises exacerbate and
amplify structural gender inequalities. Recent data have confirmed an increased
level of gender-based violence in general, including a rise in domestic violence under
quarantine. We must therefore put the safety of women and girls first in our response
to COVID-19.
As EU High Representative Josep Borrell and the United Nations Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict Pramila Patten stressed in their
joint statement on the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in
Conflict, we must now move from words to action in order to prevent that such
violence occurs. We need to protect victims, hold perpetrators to account and
guarantee access to justice, reparations and redress for survivors. In line with the
survivor-centred approach defined by resolution 2467 (2019) and previously adopted
resolutions, we will put the needs of victims and survivors at the front and centre of
our actions.
In this respect, we recognize the important work done by civil society actors,
human rights defenders and peacebuilders, who are often putting their lives at risk
to fight injustice. We express our gratitude to these champions, most often women,
whose work and advocacy have been an essential part of everything that has been
achieved to date.

52/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Gender matters in humanitarian settings because women, girls, boys and men
are affected by crises and conflicts in different ways. They have different needs,
suffer from different vulnerabilities and face particular risks, but do not necessarily
have access to the same resources and services. Furthermore, they develop diverse
coping or survival mechanisms and possess specific capacities to support their
families and communities during and after disasters and conflict. Responses
must take into account the root causes of gender-based violence and must follow
an intersectional approach, taking into account the specific challenges of those
suffering from multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination. This includes also
recognizing the agency of women and girls in shaping the response.
The past months have shown the importance of investing massively in the
health sector to ensure immediate support to victims and survivors. Comprehensive
health services, which include access to sexual- and reproductive-health, mentalhealth and psychological support for victims, are a fundamental part of a survivorcentred approach. The EU remains committed to the promotion, protection and
fulfilment of all human rights and to the full and effective implementation of Beijing
Platform for Action, the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development and the outcomes of their review conferences and, in
this context, remains committed to sexual and reproductive health and rights.
The EU has taken concrete actions to prevent and respond to conflict-related
sexual violence based on a holistic approach. Through the EU-United Nations
Spotlight Initiative, many projects have been launched to scale up existing hotlines,
provide shelters and reinforce the capacity of the health, justice and other sectors.
With funding of €500 million, Spotlight is the largest global investment in eliminating
violence against women and girls.
While humanitarian emergencies affect entire communities, the consequences
are most severely felt by women and girls. We are concerned that sexual and genderbased violence remains among the most underfunded humanitarian appeals. In
2019, the EU allocated approximately €26 million of its humanitarian aid budget to
preventing and responding to gender-based violence worldwide, and an additional
€20 million was allocated for reproductive health. We call on all States Members of
the United Nations to step up support for gender-responsive programming.
Awareness-raising is essential to transforming gender stereotypes and social
norms and to preventing sexual violence. An example of which we are proud of is
the European Union Training Mission in Mali, where Malian soldiers and officers
receive mandatory sexual and gender-based violence and international humanitarian
law training as part of their regular training curriculum. Incentives must be
accompanied by decisive measures to deter and prevent sexual violence.
The EU regrets that the level of compliance by conflicting parties with current
Security Council resolutions remains very limited. This is unacceptable. We call
on the Security Council to use sanctions and other targeted measures to enhance
compliance. Inclusion of sexual violence as stand-alone designation criterion
in existing sanctions regimes has proven an effective tool for both prevention
and accountability.
Today, 17 July, is the Day of International Criminal Justice. Justice for
victims and accountability for perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence and
crimes are still too often the exception. At a time when the rules-based international
order is facing increased pressure, it is more important than ever to strengthen
the international criminal justice system and bring an end to impunity for sexual
violence and the vicious cycle impunity engenders. The EU and its member States
reaffirm their full support for the International Criminal Court (ICC) and invite all
20-0987453/124

S/2020/727

States that have not yet done so to consider joining the ICC to end impunity for the
most serious crimes, including conflict-related sexual crimes.
In Colombia, Kosovo and the Philippines, the EU has supported programmes
prioritizing help for victims and increasing the effectiveness of transitional justice
processes aimed at building a more just and stable society. In Colombia, we are
supporting the work of Colombian human rights defenders.
Justice must be accompanied by reparations to allow survivors to rebuild their
lives and recover from their traumas. The EU was one of the first contributors to the
Global Survivors Fund launched by Nadia Murad and Denis Mukwege last year, with
an envelope of €2 million. We have also mobilized €15 million for direct and flexible
support to women’s and grassroots organizations in sub-Saharan Africa, through the
United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against Women, and in Haiti, Afghanistan
and Papua New Guinea, through the Women Peace and Humanitarian Fund.
Finally, the Secretary-General’s recent report makes it clear that there is
still a long way to go before sexual violence is effectively stamped out across the
world. Sadly, despite all our achievements, cases of sexual violence remain all too
numerous. Let us change that. Let us do more and better, together. With that in mind,
the EU is co-leading the Action Coalition focusing on ending gender-based violence
under the Generation Equality Forum, which offers a good opportunity to renew and
combine our efforts to end sexual violence in peace as well as in conflict.

54/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the
United Nations, Kaha Imnadze
I extend my heartfelt thanks to Germany and the Dominican Republic for
convening today’s open debate.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement of the European Union (see annex 25).
Let me make a few remarks in my national capacity.
Conflict-related sexual violence constitutes a grave human rights violation
and serious threat to international peace and security. The adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) 20 years ago was an important milestone in this regard.
Resolution 1820 (2008), which recognized conflict-related sexual violence as a threat
to international peace and security, and resolution 1888 (2009), which established the
mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence
in Conflict, served as major breakthroughs in the fight against this heinous crime.
In addition, by adopting resolution 2467 (2019) last year, spearheaded by Germany,
the international community took a significant step forward in strengthening justice
and embracing a survivor-centred approach.
Yet despite the significant advancements in the normative domain,
implementation is lagging. According to the findings of the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2020/487), sexual violence continues to be used as a cruel
tactic of war to dehumanize, instil fear, forcibly displace people and impede
prospects of sustaining peace and reconciliation. The coronavirus disease has further
compounded challenges faced by the survivors of the sexual violence.
Ensuring accountability for perpetrators and justice for survivors is key to
prevention and deterrence of future violence of this nature. Embracing a survivorcentred approach should become another pivotal aspect in our response to conflictrelated sexual violence, including through ensuring better access for victims to
justice, and medical services.
Finally, without addressing such structural root causes of sexual violence
as gender inequality, it is impossible to build a society where human rights are
universally respected. Committed to the full and effective implementation of the
Beijing Platform for Action, the Government of Georgia pays heightened attention
to the implementation of the Security Council resolutions on women and peace and
security. Through our national action plans, we have been promoting gender equality
in all aspects of public life, including by integrating gender perspectives in the
security sector and decision-making processes, increasing participation of women
in the Geneva International Discussions and in the mechanisms for preventing and
responding to incidents of sexual violence.
Another key aspect is promoting gender equality in the military. The Georgian
Ministry of Defence’s gender-equality strategy establishes the conditions required
to guarantee equal rights, freedoms and opportunities for men and women, prevent
and eradicate all forms of discrimination, counter any kind of gender violence
and eliminate the misconduct, sexual harassment and physical and psychological
mistreatment. The Ministry of Defence has further improved its legislative base to
ensure accountability for sexual harassment by military service personnel. In 2018,
for the first time, the notion of sexual harassment and sanctions for perpetrators
thereof have been introduced in the defence system. Since 2014, training on gender
perspectives has constituted an integral part of predeployment preparation of
peacekeepers, with 6,000 military service personnel, both men and women, having

20-0987455/124

S/2020/727

been trained up to now. Gender and domestic violence issues are also subject to posttraumatic-stress-disorder sessions at the post-deployment stage.
Fighting sexual violence requires placing the needs and priorities of victims
of sexual violence at the heart of our response strategy. Accordingly, the State Care
Agency, operating under the auspices of the Ministry of Health, provides protection,
assistance and rehabilitation of the victims of human rights violations, including
domestic violence, violence against women and sexual abuse.
At the international level, Georgia, together with Canada, Sweden, Uruguay
and Fiji, has been active in the United Nations Human Rights Council in leading
a new initiative: a resolution on accountability for ensuring women’s and girls’
full enjoyment of human rights in humanitarian settings, which is planned to be
presented to the Council in the near future.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned efforts, my Government continues to
be unable to extend protection to conflict-affected women residing in the occupied
regions of Georgia, namely, Abkhazia and Tskhinvali. The protracted illegal
occupation of these two regions by the Russian Federation continues to deprive
local residents of some of their basic human rights, with restrictions on freedom
of movement, deprivation of property rights and prohibition of education in their
native language.
Finally, let me reiterate our unwavering commitment to contributing to the
promotion of the women and peace and security agenda and to the global endeavour
to eradicate conflict-related sexual violence.

56/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Greece to the United Nations
Greece would like to congratulate the German presidency of the Security
Council as well as the Dominican Republic on organizing today’s open debate on
conflict-related sexual violence. Greece would also like to thank the distinguished
speakers for their comprehensive briefings.
While aligning itself with the statement submitted by the European Union
(annex 25), Greece would like to further highlight the devastating impact of conflictrelated sexual violence, which is very often used as a tactic of war and terrorism,
on international peace and security, as has been duly illustrated in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487). In this context, the prevailing culture
of perpetrator impunity, together with the false perception of conflict-related sexual
violence constituting a collateral damage of war, often negates the recognition of
those subjected thereto as war victims, condemning them to invisibility, silence and
further victimization.
Resolution 2467 (2019) introduces a survivor-centred approach to conflictrelated sexual violence, which serves as a very useful tool in assessing and addressing
the specific rights, individual needs and differentiated harms suffered by those
sexually violated in conflict and post-conflict settings, mostly women and girls,
on the basis of intersecting inequalities. This approach allows for people-centred,
holistic, gender and child-sensitive responses, thereby transforming the victims of
conflict-related sexual violence into empowered survivors.
Accordingly, the survivor-centred approach is fully compatible with the notion
of human security, which recognizes the right of every human being to live free from
fear generated by armed conflict and conflict-related sexual violence; from want
caused by hunger, malnutrition, diseases and underdevelopment; and in dignity, with
full respect of his or her human rights, within gender-equal and inclusive societies
based on the rule of law. The multidimensional character of the human security
approach is particularly relevant to the current global health crisis caused by the
coronavirus disease pandemic, which has exacerbated structural inequalities and
placed a disproportionate burden on the survivors of conflict-related sexual violence,
especially women and girls, and has therefore had a negative cumulative effect on
their personal, health, food, economic and political security.
The women and peace and security agenda, which incorporates a survivorcentred approach to conflict-related sexual violence, provides a comprehensive
policy framework and the impetus for empowering and giving voice to survivors,
first, by focusing on prevention and measures that address and tackle the root
causes of gender inequality, conflict and conflict-related sexual violence, as well
as on gender-responsive reforms, awareness-raising and peace education initiatives
guaranteeing non-recurrence in most cases; secondly, by prioritizing the protection
of the survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, their non-discriminatory access
to justice and redress, along with the accountability and punishment of perpetrators
so that peace may be restored; thirdly, by placing a particular emphasis on the
relief and recovery of survivors through their unhindered access to a wide range of
high-quality multisectoral services that include, inter alia, medical care, sexual and
reproductive health as well as psychological support; and finally, yet importantly, by
advocating meaningful gender-equal representation, participation and leadership in
decision-making at all levels, which is a prerequisite for gender-sensitive policies.
Turning those commitments into compliance requires multi-stakeholder
cooperation involving, inter alia, international organizations, States Members of the
United Nations, academia, civil society, human rights defenders and women’s and
20-0987457/124

S/2020/727

grass-roots organizations. It also requires effective, coherent, tailor-made and resultsoriented policies at all levels, which are based on thorough gender analysis, gender
mainstreaming, knowledge- and experience-sharing, as well as on sound division of
labour among stakeholders. However, it requires most of all a zero-tolerance attitude
towards conflict-related sexual violence along with a mind shift in understanding
that the ultimate goal is not a “war without rape” but rather “a world without war”,
as the most recent report of the Secretary-General points out (S/2020/487, para. 16).
Greece attaches great importance to eradicating conflict-related sexual
violence. Having ratified the fundamental conventional documents of international
humanitarian and human rights law, Greece is in the process of developing national
action plans on women and peace and security and on the rights of the child,
respectively, which set as a priority not only the protection of women and girls from
conflict-related violations and abuses, but also their empowerment. In the light of
this, Greece remains committed to joining forces with all international stakeholders
in a common effort to adequately promote and protect the rights and welfare of
conflict-affected women and girls.
In conclusion, the women and peace and security agenda suggests that when
women and girls feel secure and therefore free to develop their full potential as
powerful agents of change, peace is secured. Further, this can only be achieved by
giving voice, strength and resilience to survivors of conflict-related sexual violence
so that no one is left behind.

58/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Guatemala would like to express its appreciation to the German presidency
of the Security Council for convening today’s open high-level video-teleconference
of the Security Council on conflict-related sexual violence, and to the Dominican
Republic, which, with Germany, jointly chairs the Informal Experts Group on
Women, Peace and Security. We also appreciate the briefers’ briefings.
We are confident that today’s discussion is timely because of the added burden
caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic. We trust that it will help to identify
joint solutions that address effectively the challenges remaining in efforts to protect
women and girls and achieve gender equality and peace.
Guatemala attaches great importance to this topic. Sexual violence against
women during armed conflict has historically been used as an atrocious tactic of
war to establish terror. It is a flagrant violation of human rights. It is appalling and
unjustifiable that sexual violence is still used to generate income through trafficking
and sexual slavery, particularly as compensation for combatants in extremist groups.
We strongly condemn all these acts and call for the redoubling of efforts to achieve
the full eradication of conflict-related sexual violence.
We must highlight the important role that women play in peacebuilding.
There is a relevant link between the full and meaningful participation of women
in conflict prevention and the efforts aimed at adequate reconciliation, reinsertion
and reconstruction in ensuring effectiveness and long-term sustainability. Women
must participate on an equal footing in all activities to maintain and promote human
rights, development and peace and security. We must increase the representation of
women in all local, national, regional and international decision-making processes
for conflict prevention and resolution. Gender-related issues need to be considered in
all deliberations of the Security Council to achieve sustainable peace.
Cognizant of the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) and mindful of the need
to ensure a gender perspective in field missions, Guatemala proudly contributes
through the deployment of female staff in areas of armed conflict. In this regard,
we stress that the zero-tolerance policy is of high importance for the prevention of
violations related to sexual abuse and exploitation.
We join the international community in commemorating the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Furthermore, Guatemala
also commemorates the third anniversary of the adoption of its national action plan,
which has helped to strengthen its framework on gender issues through a national
mechanism whereby 14 Governmental institutions oversee the adequate protection
of the rights of women and girls and discuss the challenges that the country continues
to face for the protection and promotion of gender equality. We appreciate the
assistance provided by UN-Women and the contributions of civil society to fulfil
our national action plan.
To date, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court constitutes the
most progressive international legal framework on gender crimes. As a State party to
the Rome Statute, we highlight that the Statute’s provisions should be incorporated
into the national context through a comprehensive framework for the international
investigation of crimes of sexual and gender-based violence, specific procedures to
support victims and witnesses, programmes aimed at raising women’s awareness of
laws that concern them, allocation of adequate resources to monitor the application
of laws that take into account the gender perspective and provisions to compensate
20-0987459/124

S/2020/727

victims. Each of these components has great importance for women’s access to
justice, and it is the responsibility of each State to implement them.
In closing, Guatemala firmly believes that women are agents of change and
have an important role to play as facilitators of dialogue and reconciliation in their
societies. Through the continued and holistic discussion of this agenda item in the
Security Council, we can further contribute to the interdependence of the pillars of
peace and security, development and human rights.

60/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Hungary to the
United Nations, Katalin Annamária Bogyay
I wish to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening today’s
important meeting and for making it as open and inclusive as possible under the
current circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his thoughtful remarks and for his reports on
women and peace and security, including his most recent report on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2020/487), as well as the briefers for sharing their perspectives
and bringing the voices of women to us from across the globe.
Hungary aligns itself with the statement submitted by the representative of the
European Union (annex 25) and with the message conveyed on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 20). We wish to add some remarks
in our national capacity.
This year, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
resolution 1325 (2000), Hungary reaffirms its commitment to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. We strongly believe that sexual
violence in conflict is an impediment to international peace and security, a serious
violation of human rights and an attack on women’s empowerment. In the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic, we have an even greater responsibility than ever to take
all measures to prevent these crimes, support survivors, ensure accountability for
perpetrators and put an end to the shame and stigma related to sexual violence.
We are appalled by the ongoing systematic and widespread conflict-related
sexual and gender-based violence that is often used as a tactic of war and terrorism
and can constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity and even genocide.
Accountability and justice have been painfully lagging behind and must be provided
accordingly, irrespective of the affiliation of the perpetrator. We also call for the
international community to better uphold the rights and address the needs of women
and girls belonging to religious and ethnic minorities persecuted and displaced by
conflict or terrorism.
Tragically, the pandemic has not swept away existing challenges, conflicts
and inequalities; on the contrary, it has amplified and exacerbated them. Now more
than ever, we need to invest in, involve and ignite action for girls and women in order
to accelerate progress on the women and peace and security agenda. Survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence require not only immediate medical care, but also
shelter, comprehensive psychosocial support, legal services and long-term assistance,
including legal and socioeconomic support to survivors and their children. All
actions should be human rights-based and gender-responsive.
In order to successfully implement the women and peace and security agenda,
action needs to be taken already in peacetime, on the one hand, by addressing the
root causes of conflicts and preventing militarization and arms proliferation, and,
on the other hand, protecting and promoting the human rights of all women and girls
and eliminating all forms of violence and harmful practices against them. A longterm victory over this scourge is not possible without ensuring gender equality and
women’s empowerment, including through equal recognition before the law, access
to economic and financial resources and full participation of women in all aspects
of life.
More than ever, we see the power of girls and women shining through the
insecurity caused by the COVID-19 pandemic worldwide. More than ever, all around
the globe, we see women stepping up, using creative means and new technologies to
20-0987461/124

S/2020/727

gather and disseminate information, inspire and guide action and create a narrative of
common responsibility. More than ever, women are leading on interconnectedness,
flexibility and readiness to take action.
We need to involve women in decision-making processes and give them a
leadership role, including in institutionalized mechanisms. Participation is all the
more important when a nation is fighting for its future and for peace. Revolutions
and ceasefires can be washed away; only inclusive peace can be sustainable. Women
need to participate meaningfully and inclusively in mediation, peace processes
and wider decision-making structures and in implementing ceasefires and peace
agreements. Through its resolutions, the Security Council should give a clear
mandate to ensuring the inclusion of women.
Women do have a voice; we just need to give them the space and attention they
need to raise it. We must support women-led and women-focused organizations by
building capacity and agency and by ensuring safe and ample civic space, including
for women peacebuilders and human rights defenders, who are often at the forefront
of peace efforts.
What this health crisis teaches us is that it is not always possible to predict
breakdowns, or even prevent them. Success therefore lies in building robustness and
resilience against them. More than ever, it is time to join together and take action
to protect women and put an end to conflict-related sexual violence, achieve gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls, and foster their participation
in all aspects of life. Overall, there is a pressing need for change in the culture of
impunity and mentality and for a strong political will to achieve it. The world is
looking to the Security Council to lead on these matters.

62/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations
We thank Germany for convening this open debate. We also thank all the
briefers for sharing their experiences and insights today. Once again, they have
reminded us of the poignant human tragedy that lies at the heart of this agenda and
of the solemn duty of the international community to end impunity and assist the
survivors and their communities to heal from trauma, in order to ensure peace.
Sexual violence in armed conflicts, perpetrated by State and non-State actors,
poses grave security challenges. It divides communities and weakens governance.
It imperils the opportunities for post-conflict reconciliation and stability. The
Security Council’s actions in response to sexual violence in conflicts and postconflict situations must therefore be fully informed of the dynamic complexities of
the conflicts and the facts on the ground.
We wish to highlight the following points on the theme of today’s discussion.
First, we wish to mention that the issue of violence against women, including
sexual violence, has been discussed by other United Nations bodies, including the
Human Rights Council. Deliberations at the Security Council should therefore
remain focused on those atrocities perpetrated in situations of armed conflicts that
threaten intentional peace and security.
Secondly, in order to take action to address the implementation gaps, the
Council needs to be better informed of the drivers and motivations of a range of
State and non-State actors. Justice systems and rule-of-law mechanisms at all levels
must be strengthened in order to hold accountable the perpetrators of sexual violence
and those who order or condone such violence. Otherwise, we will be treating the
symptoms without ever curing the ailment.
Thirdly, the Council’s sanctions and targeted measures need to be strengthened
in order to maximally advance women’s protection from sexual violence in situations
of armed conflict. Their effective implementation by all actors must be ensured
and there should be credible and effective deterrence for those who violate their
obligations under sanctions regimes.
Fourthly, evidence and insights on the patterns and prevalence of sexual
violence in conflict areas must inform the development of specific programmes and
policies to prevent such violence and assist the survivors. Expanded programmes in
strengthening rule-of-law mechanisms and security sectors in affected countries,
more women in security forces and capacity-building for the protection of civilians
are important. Equally important is promoting access to justice for the survivors.
National ownership and meaningful community participation are key to successful
prevention and response efforts.
Fifthly, it is critical to challenge the underlying social norms that prescribe
behaviours leading to the normalization of sexual violence and perpetuate the
stigmatization of victims. Normative, institutional and operational frameworks
outside the Security Council have an important role to play in addressing such
structural issues. The Council’s actions need not duplicate those efforts, but must be
situated within those broader frameworks.
Sixthly, the meaningful participation of women in conflict resolution,
post-conflict reconciliation processes and relevant rule-of-law mechanisms
needs to be promoted. India is committed to the effective implementation of the
Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy as a road map to increase the number of women
peacekeepers. We believe that all women units need to be incentivized to ensure
20-0987463/124

S/2020/727

greater participation of women in United Nations peacekeeping. We also remain
committed to fostering cooperation with regard to providing adequate training to
United Nations peacekeepers on gender issues in order to enable them to fulfil
their mandates.
India’s sensitivities on the issue of sexual violence in armed conflict is guided
by the appalling atrocities perpetrated against women with impunity by the armed
forces of Pakistan against its own people in India’s immediate neighbourhood in
1971. It is ironic that those who perpetrated those crimes, including sexual violence,
are now masquerading as champions of justice and levelling false allegations against
India. The double standards in Pakistan’s actions are self-evident.
It is common knowledge that Pakistan is breeding a cesspool of terrorists
and other non-State actors, including traffickers and drug and arms peddlers, to
destabilize countries in its neighbourhood and beyond. Pakistan is using abduction,
forced marriages and forced religious conversions of vulnerable women and girls as
weapons of persecution against religious and ethnic minority communities in their
own country. The international community can no longer afford to merely sit and
watch those atrocities without taking action to stop Pakistan on that reckless path.
If the Council resolutions under the agenda of sexual violence in conflict are
to be translated into results, we must do much more to hold to account not just those
who commit such acts but also those who command, bankroll and condone them. We
need greater political will and public awareness among the affected communities
and, above all, greater ownership from a range of actors to counter and prevent
sexual violence from exacerbating armed conflict and hindering peace.
United Nations entities have made significant progress in monitoring,
reporting and listing the persistent offenders. We need to close the compliance gaps
through a range of context-specific and inclusive actions to strengthen protection and
prevention. India is committed to working with all members of the Council during its
forthcoming non-permanent membership to address normative and implementation
challenges on this agenda.

64/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
Allow me to congratulate the presidency of the Republic of Germany
on convening this meeting. I am confident in the wisdom and able leadership of
Germany to lead the Security Council. I would also like to thank the briefers for
their valuable insights.
This year we mark the twentieth anniversary of the Council’s adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, which mobilized global
efforts to eliminate the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence, a horrific weapon
of war that is a threat to international peace and security.
Iraq is developing its second national plan with the assistance of the United
Nations and civil society organizations. That plan focuses on new and old challenges
that were not fully addressed due to various circumstances. Iraqi women have shown
great resilience in their fields of work and are playing an active role in mediation
efforts and in the country’s response to the coronavirus disease.
Although Iraq is still committed to further implementing the joint communiqué
by the Republic of Iraq and the United Nations on the prevention of and response
to conflict-related sexual violence, in partnership with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the United Nations
system, we regret that the Office of the Special Representative did not achieve its
targets, as stipulated in the joint communiqué, because the implementation process
has been obstructed for over a year.
Iraq seeks further engagement from the Office of the Special Representative
in order to build the capacity of the respective authorities so as to ensure the
provision of services, support livelihoods and secure reparations for survivors,
thus helping survivors and guaranteeing them psychosocial support and access to
rehabilitation programmes.
The Iraqi presidency submitted a draft bill on Yazidi female survivors in April
2019. That draft was later expanded to include all survivors of acts of sexual violence
perpetrated by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terrorists. The draft bill
calls for holding the perpetrators of such acts accountable in accordance with the
applicable national law. The text proposes various reparation measures for survivors
of captivity, acknowledges the issue of children born of sexual violence and calls for
it to be addressed.
Those survivors are considered victims, which is reflected in the title of the
draft law. Community and religious leaders are raising awareness of survivors’ plight
and are promoting tolerance and inclusion so that the victims are not blamed and are
not considered or treated in any way as being affiliated with ISIL.
Lastly, in March, when sufficient evidence was provided, Iraq held accountable
an ISIL terrorist who committed sexual violence against a Yazidi female survivor
who was only 14 years old at the time. The perpetrator was found guilty before the
court of participating in the rape and abduction of a Yazidi girl. Iraq believes that
such a move will encourage other women and girls raped or abducted by ISIL to
come forward and seek justice, as the reluctance of victims to testify in public had
previously prevented the judicial system from bringing this kind of case. It will
also empower women and girls who are survivors of sexual violence and protect
their rights.

20-0987465/124

S/2020/727

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ireland to the United Nations
I would like to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for organizing
this debate, and Minister Maas for presiding over today’s discussion.
Ireland aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European
Union (see annex 25) and the Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security
(see annex 20).
We are grateful to all briefers for their powerful interventions. I welcome in
particular the interventions of Ms. Ohmar, from NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, and Ms. Fornel-Poutou, from Association des Femmes Juristes
de Centrafrique. Ireland believes that the inclusion of civil society in the Security
Council’s discussions is critical. Hearing directly from organizations representing
those affected by sexual violence in conflict enhances our understanding and our
ability to make meaningful change. We must do everything we can to increase our
support to local organizations, civil society and women human rights defenders,
who are at the forefront of these struggles. The coronavirus disease pandemic has
increased the challenge and the importance of their work. Yet as their role has become
more critical, we have seen an increased targeting of women human rights defenders.
Ireland is committed to building peace that is inclusive of civil society, youth
and women — from the beginning and throughout. Preventing gender-based harm is
critically linked to preventing armed violence. Put simply, more equal and inclusive
societies enable more peaceful societies. Strengthening gender equality and women’s
rights is both a human rights obligation and key to cultivating peace.
Structural gender inequalities and discrimination are at the heart of the
differential impact conflict has on women, men, boys and girls and members of sexual
and gender minorities. To prevent and eliminate the scourge of sexual and genderbased violence in conflict, our most fundamental task is to achieve gender equality
at every level. That includes ensuring women’s full and effective participation in
political, economic and social life. It also includes ensuring accessible and responsive
political, justice and security institutions. Societies where discrimination is tolerated
and where economic and social inequalities persist are an enabling environment for
conflict-related sexual violence.
Promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls is central
to Ireland’s foreign policy. Our commitment is embedded in our development policy,
our women and peace and security national action plan and throughout our activities
at the United Nations, including our time as Chair of the United Nations Commission
on the Status of Women. We are concerned that humanitarian services for survivors
remain chronically underfunded. We strongly support and are committed to a
holistic and survivor-centred approach to prevent and address conflict-related sexual
violence. That must include access to comprehensive health services, including
sexual and reproductive health services.
In 2019, we increased our funding to partners supporting prevention and
response interventions for sexual and gender-based violence in conflict-affected
and fragile contexts. Our support includes funding for the Special Appeal on the
Response to Sexual Violence of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
a multi-year partnership with the International Rescue Committee to support the
provision of gender-based violence prevention and response services in conflictaffected and fragile contexts in sub-Saharan Africa.
Poverty, forced displacement and vulnerability increase the risk of sexual
violence, especially for those in flight. As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
66/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

latest report (S/2020/487), marginalized communities, such as refugees and migrants,
indigenous women, members of sexual and gender minorities, members of persecuted
political, ethnic or religious minorities and persons living with disabilities, are all at
particular risk. We must ensure that those groups are included in all our actions to
eliminate conflict-related sexual violence and to provide redress when it does occur.
Ireland commends the critical advances made by the Office of the Special
Representative towards our collective goal of ending conflict-related sexual
violence and impunity for those crimes. Shining a light on those acts is vital but,
as the Secretary-General’s report implores, we must ensure that, once uncovered,
those crimes are stopped and survivors are supported throughout their recovery.
Accountability is key to protection and prevention, and the onus is on us all to do
more by supporting existing international institutions and strengthening national
mechanisms. Last year, Ireland was proud to provide initial support to survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence as part of the ongoing truth, reconciliation and
reparations process in the Gambia, thus enabling survivors to participate fully in
the process and strengthen national systems to respond to victims. Ireland continues
to provide support to mechanisms such as Justice Rapid Response, which provide
gender expertise to investigations of serious human rights violations in conflict
zones, including conflict-related sexual violence.
We welcome recent progress linking conflict-related sexual violence with the
work of specific sanctions committees. We strongly support efforts to bolster the
use of conflict-related sexual violence as a criterion for imposing sanctions and for
greater alignment across thematic and country-specific United Nations sanctions
regimes. However, for such criteria to be effective in ensuring compliance and
accountability, they must be clearly articulated, consistent and credible. It is not
enough to simply establish a relevant mandate or introduce new designation criteria;
such criteria must result in actual listings.
More can be done to ensure greater gender and humanitarian expertise on
panels of experts and to encourage such panels to report consistently on instances
of conflict-related sexual violence. Regular reporting from field missions
would also be welcome, particularly from those missions that already have
sanctions-monitoring mandates.
There can be no impunity for perpetrators, irrespective of the community
or organization they come from. Ireland, as part of the Circle of Leadership on the
prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and abuse, and as a signatory to the
voluntary compact on ending sexual exploitation and abuse, is committed to supporting
the Secretary-General’s efforts to end the abusive practices of peacekeepers.
In conclusion, we must recognize the need to tackle gender inequality as the
root cause and a driver of sexual violence in times of war and peace. Ireland views
tackling conflict-related sexual violence as an essential element of the wider women
and peace and security agenda, which is marking its twentieth anniversary this year.
Progress cannot be attained in one area without focusing on the other. During our
tenure as an elected member of the Council from 2021 to 2022, we will champion
implementation and progress. The survivors of these heinous crimes deserve
nothing less.

20-0987467/124

S/2020/727

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (see
annex 25) and would like to add the following remarks in its national capacity.
We thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for organizing this open
debate, which keeps the topic of sexual violence in conflict high on the Security
Council’s agenda 11 years after the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
One year ago, upon the initiative of the German presidency, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2467 (2019), putting a strong focus on the victims and
survivors of sexual violence and calling upon Member States to address their needs
as a priority action. That is all the more urgent as the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2020/487) once again depicts a gloomy situation, with sexual crimes still being
used as part of a global war strategy by State and non-State actors, thus showing the
importance of our collective engagement.
The issue under discussion today represents a top priority for Italy. In 2017, it
was at the core of our mandate in the Security Council and of our presidency of the
Group of Seven. It continues to be high on our agenda as we celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action. We recommit to those principles.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak and the measures taken to
combat the pandemic are exacerbating existing vulnerabilities and leading to a rise
in sexual and gender-based violence. The restrictions imposed due to the pandemic
are also limiting access to education, legal protection services and health services,
including for sexual and reproductive health. Those negative effects are especially
felt by women and girls living in conflict-affected areas, which face multiple risks
and barriers. This is why the protection and promotion of the rights of women and
girls must be placed at the heart of all our efforts to combat the virus and of all
recovery measures.
In that spirit, together with 145 States Members of the United Nations, Italy
supported the Secretary-General’s appeal to end gender violence during the pandemic.
Tackling the root causes of violence is key, as the prevention of systematic
sexual violence begins in times of peace, when national laws should be sufficiently
robust to prevent abusive behaviours in times of war. We need a paradigm shift
through the dismantlement of patriarchal rules that are at the basis of violence. We
must also affirm a culture of full gender equality and women’s empowerment by
ensuring the complete and effective participation of women and girls in decisionmaking processes.
Our action should seek to ban all forms of gender-based violence, including
harmful practices that tend to be more widespread in times of war, in particular child,
early and forced marriage. Training remains an essential component of our efforts
and should include a wide range of actors — youth, leaders, military and police units
and civilian personnel. Establishing a stronger women’s presence in United Nations
missions should also be a priority so as to facilitate dialogue with local populations
and encourage victims to speak out, thus enhancing missions’ ability to deliver on
their mandates, particularly with regard to the protection of civilians.
At the same time, it is fundamental to assist countries in situations of
conflict in reforming their judicial systems and strengthening their rule-of-law and
accountability mechanisms. Sexual violence in conflict constitutes a grave breach
68/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

of international humanitarian law and human rights. Fighting against impunity and
holding the perpetrators accountable should be a matter of primary concern in order
to deter further violations and to allow survivors’ access to justice. A survivorcentred approach also means providing them with all the necessary services they
need to cope with the consequences of conflict-related sexual violence, including
medical services, legal assistance and psychological support.
To that end, Italy financially supports the United Nations Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which is committed to fighting
impunity for sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict contexts. The Team’s role
in providing technical assistance to Governments by strengthening their capacity
to address accountability for sexual violence has proved to be critical, as it has led
to more criminal investigations and prosecutions. It has also led to strengthening
legal frameworks in affected countries, carrying out notable work in the Central
African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, GuineaConakry and South Sudan, as recognized in the Secretary-General’s most recent
report (S/2020/487). We therefore call on all Member States to use and support this
important tool.
In order to enhance the commitment of State actors to ending the hateful
practice of conflict-related sexual violence, we deem it important to include it as an
automatic and independent designation criterion in all relevant sanction regimes.
We also consider that the work of the Security Council would benefit from
more systematic involvement by the International Criminal Court (ICC), in which
the Office of the ICC Prosecutor could receive the necessary resources to conduct
swift investigations. In our effort to combat all forms of violence against women,
including domestic violence, we also continue to promote the widest possible
implementation of the Council of Europe’s Convention on Preventing and Combating
Violence Against Women, known as the Istanbul Convention.
The United Nations should lead by example in the fight against sexual violence
and set a standard of good behaviour in that regard. For that reason, Italy welcomed
the invitation to be part of the Circle of Leadership launched by the SecretaryGeneral in 2017, and is the main contributor to the Trust Fund in Support of Victims
of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
We are also a proud partner of the Call to Action on Protection from Genderbased Violence in Emergencies, aimed at including gender-based violence prevention
services from the earliest stages of intervention in humanitarian emergencies.
Finally, we commend civil society, especially women human rights defenders,
for their role in raising awareness on sexual violence in conflict, often putting their
lives at risk to fight injustice. Their work and advocacy are essential.
We are aware that the problem is far from being solved, and that more efforts
are required of us all in order to move from commitments to compliance through a
whole-of-Government and whole-of-society approach and to advance the agenda.
Italy is ready to engage by supporting the work of the Secretary-General and that of
his Special Representative in order to pursue better and increasingly concrete results.

20-0987469/124

S/2020/727

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to begin by thanking Germany and the Dominican Republic for
convening this important high-level open debate on conflict-related sexual violence.
I also wish to extend my appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on this
issue (S/2020/487).
We will not tolerate any sexual violence in conflict. With that firm belief, Japan
has been working closely with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and in partnership with other relevant organizations.
First, since 2014, Japan has been providing financial assistance to the work
of the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic,
Somalia and Iraq, which is mandated to support the investigation, prosecution,
legislative reform and capacity-building of judicial and security authorities, in close
cooperation with respective Governments, as well as United Nations missions and
country teams. Their work in the Central African Republic, for example, resulted in
the bringing of 22 cases of conflict-related sexual violence to the criminal court in
Bangui in December. Japan will continue to support the Team of Experts to ensure
accountability for perpetrators and to bring justice to survivors, both of which are
key to preventing and deterring future crimes.
Secondly, Japan is committed to addressing the needs of survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence and empowering them, which is indispensable to ensuring
a people-centred response. In that regard, Japan has provided assistance to United
Nations action projects, such as one in Iraq to help children born of rape and their
mothers, and another in Somalia that provides mental health and psychosocial
services to women victims.
Thirdly, Japan contributed €2 million this year to the Global Fund for Survivors
of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence. As a Fund board member, Japan will continue
to be actively engaged in its effective management.
Lastly, Japan contributed $4.5 million to UN-Women to support its coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic response through four regional projects, which
include activities to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based violence.
In the midst of this unprecedented human security crisis caused by COVID-19,
we must work together to minimize its impact and build back a more resilient and
inclusive society where all individuals, in particular the most vulnerable people and
those most affected by conflict, are able to live in dignity and are duly protected
and empowered. In this landmark year for women’s agendas, Japan reaffirms its
unwavering commitment to redouble its efforts to end sexual violence in conflict.
We look forward to working closely with the United Nations in that joint endeavour.

70/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on a successful presidency of the Security
Council, and to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening this
meeting today during these challenging times. I would also like to thank the briefers
for their insight and views.
Jordan also aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women and Peace and Security (see annex 20), chaired by Canada.
This year marks the milestone seventy-fifth anniversary of the establishment
of the United Nations, which we celebrate in unusual circumstances, with a pandemic
that has disrupted our daily lives, halted the growth of our economies and further
intensified the suffering of many — mainly women and girls in conflict zones.
Despite efforts to end sexual violence in conflict, including by implementing
resolution 2106 (2013), it continues to be a common feature of armed conflicts
around the globe. Sexual violence can constitute war crimes or crimes against
humanity. Such atrocities demand accountability under international law, and we
must effectively utilize every tool available to prevent these grave violations and
protect the victims, regardless of gender, in times of peace and war. In that regard,
Jordan welcomes the Secretary-General most recent report on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2020/487) and strongly supports his numerous initiatives to end sexual
violence, the most recent of which was his call for an immediate global ceasefire.
Jordan is not a country in conflict, it is a country that provides a great deal of
humanitarian support as a host country for refugees fleeing conflict in the region.
It has provided safe shelter and humanitarian assistance to those in need, and is
actively participating in international efforts to combat terrorism, violent extremism
and dark ideologies that perpetrators and extremist groups like Da’esh use as a
pretext to commit heinous crimes against humanity, including sexual violence.
My country ranks among the police-contributing countries to peacekeeping
missions. It has incorporated the participation of more women into the police force,
the enhancement of internal and external accountability mechanisms and human
rights as a key to successful peacekeeping operations — into its national action plan
for 2018 to 2021.
It is through gender equality, women’s participation and a gender-sensitive
approach to humanitarian responses, as well as a focus on women’s agency in the
prevention of violent extremism and radicalization, that we can arrive at stable and
peaceful communities.
A survivor-centred approach, tending to the needs of survivors of such
atrocities and holding perpetrators accountable before the law are vital to delivering
justice to those victims. It also helps deter future crimes, thus protecting societies,
promoting a culture of peace and sustaining security.
It is not enough to listen to the victims; it is not enough to shoulder their
suffering and voice their pain; we need to collectively make every effort to ensure
that we do not re-victimize them and must protect them by reinforcing the rule of law
and the pillars of equality and peace.

20-0987471/124

S/2020/727

Annex 36
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of
Kenya to the United Nations, Susan Mwangi
Kenya extends its compliments to the Federal Republic of Germany for
remaining seized on the women and peace and security agenda. Addressing conflictrelated sexual violence is a human security issue. Furthermore, no one should ever
suffer the scourge and indignity of being sexually violated — in conflict situations
or otherwise. We therefore thank both Germany and the Dominican Republic for
their continued work as the current co-Chairs of the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of landmark resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, championed by Namibia in 2000, the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and the review year of Silencing
the Guns in Africa. As we look back and ahead on our commitments to the mandates
regarding conflict-related sexual violence, my delegation welcomes the call by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, and the other civil society speakers, from the Central African
Republic and Myanmar, who reminded us of the need to move from resolutions to
results, the centrality of accountability and the need to maintain a survivor-centred
approach, in line with resolution 2467 (2019).
Gender inequality, the discriminatory perception of gender role and human
trafficking and exploitation are among the factors that touch directly on women and
contribute to the disproportionate impact on women and girls in both conflict and
non-conflict situations. Additionally, the lack of women in leadership roles and the
lack of preventive, inclusive and accessible judicial and social protection systems
play a key role in propagating sexual violence in conflict. Unaccountability and
impunity thrive in such environments.
My delegation also recognizes that addressing sexual violence in conflict is a
collective endeavour, and not just a women’s affair. Creating awareness, training and
ownership of the process must involve the whole of society for sustainable results.
We therefore believe that it is critical, despite our diverse cultural and social norms,
to take a whole-of-society approach, where young boys and men can also see their
role in championing and implementing the women and peace and security agenda.
In 2016, Kenya inaugurated its national action plan, with strategies for
strengthening its judicial mechanisms and ensuring a survivor-centred approach in
the fight against sexual violence in conflict, within the framework of resolution 1325
(2000) and the women and peace and security agenda. The operationalization of
those strategies has ensured a conflict- and gender-sensitive approach in addressing
matters pertaining to gender-based violence. Our national action plan is aptly
known as “Kuhusisha Wanawake ni Kudumisha Amani”, or “to Involve Women is to
Sustain Peace” — and has been translated into local languages in partnership with
civil society.
In April, Kenya rolled out phase II of our national action plan for 2020 to
2024, having completed the benchmarks of phase I, which ended in 2018. The
2019 review and assessment process of the implementation of phase I highlighted
increased women participation at all decision-making levels in all institutions and
mechanisms for conflict prevention, management and resolution. It also revealed
enhanced prevention and reporting of sexual and gender-based violence and
increased protection of women and girls against violence. Additionally, enhanced
accountability and timely and effective access to justice for survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence were observed.
72/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Some of the priorities of phase II include addressing climate-related issues
that exacerbate the risk of sexual violence and the increased vulnerability of women
and girls in conflicts arising from natural disasters and intercommunal and pastoral
violence over natural resources. In the semi-arid lands of Kenya, the distances
women and girls walk in search for water, for example, increases their vulnerability
to conflict and puts them at risk of sexual violence.
Kenya’s Government has undertaken critical initiatives and has reached key
milestones in translating our commitments into compliance.
For example, Kenya has adopted a survivor-centred approach through legal
frameworks in place to address sexual and gender-based violence, including Kenya’s
Constitution, which contains provisions on gender equality and guarantees a wide
range of rights for both men and women. Kenya has also made considerable strides
in addressing sexual-based violence, including through the Sexual Offences Act,
whose primary purpose is to ensure justice for survivors.
Our national guidelines on the management of sexual violence and our training
of military and police personnel on sexual and gender-based violence include
essential procedures and services for survivors of sexual violence. The review of
standard operating procedures for the prevention and response to sexual and genderbased violence includes gender-sensitive desks in police stations, where the first
point of contact is a woman officer, as well as the timely referral of survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence to seek medical attention. Those efforts have
resulted in increased dignity for survivors, reduced silence and greater reporting of
sexual and gender-based violence, as well as less stigma towards survivors.
We also invest in relief for, and the recovery of, survivors. There are various
initiatives in place aimed at enhancing income generation by women at the grassroots level, including those recovering from violent conflicts. Some examples of that
include the Women Enterprise Fund, the Youth Enterprise Development Fund and
the Uwezo Fund.
With regard to women’s leadership and participation in key peace positions,
our Government has appointed women as leaders in key positions on the peaceconflict continuum. For the first time, the Kenya Defence Forces has a female major
general, who is in charge of personnel and logistics. The President also appointed
Kenya’s first woman Cabinet Secretary for Defence. Women have also been involved
in the design and implementation of the national conflict early-warning and earlyresponse mechanisms, where women chair at least one third of the 233 sub-county
peace committees across the country. Women are also being trained as mediators
across fragile and conflict-affected counties.
Moreover, the deployment of Kenyan women in peace support operations
stands at 19 per cent, surpassing the United Nations-recommended 15 per cent.
These are key leadership dockets that are central to the prevention and management
of armed conflict. These initiatives also enhance accountability by ensuring
that women are not only survivors, but also key leaders in making decisions and
formulating strategies pertaining to sexual violence in conflict.
We have also established a whole-of-government reporting mechanism. In all
Government ministries, focal officers have been appointed to champion, monitor
and report on the implementation of the women and peace and security national
action plan within their sectors.
In addition, we have set up a task force on women, peace and security within
the Gender Sector Working Group as a platform to bring together public and private
actors to advance our national gender priorities. Partnership between the police
20-0987473/124

S/2020/727

and civil society in raising awareness about sexual and gender-based violence has
reduced barriers to accessing police stations to report cases of sexual and genderbased violence.
Community-based programmes to end cultural and structural violence against
women have also been critical. For the victim, the stigma and shame attached to
sexual violence often prevents disclosure. The Nyumba Kumi initiative acts as
both a preventive and a protective measure, whereby vulnerable groups, including
survivors of sexual and gender-based violence, can find safe homes and safe
reporting platforms.
On our commitment to regional and international instruments, Kenya
participates and supports African Union (AU) initiatives that address inequalities
and sexual violence in conflict, including the African Union Solemn Declaration
on Gender Equality in Africa and the 2018 African Union policy on prevention
and response to sexual exploitation and abuse for peace support operations. The
AU Commission has also adopted a zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence in
times of conflict and peace. The AU Continental Results Framework is geared
towards monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda in Africa. We are pleased to be among the Member States that
validated the Framework in March 2019. Since then, recent efforts have focused
on ensuring that Kenya’s national action plan aligns its monitoring and evaluation
tools with the Framework. The Council needs to integrate these continental and
subregional instruments into their work and decisions.
Kenya has also ratified a number of key international instruments focused
on addressing sexual and gender-based violence, such as the Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Women and the Convention on the Elimination of
all Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
Although we have made progress towards the implementation of the various
initiatives, we note that we still face challenges. We must expand the scope of
prevention to ensure it is the preserve of not just security agencies but the whole
of society, including local, grass-roots actors and religious leaders. We must also
address the persistent lack of reliable baseline records and inadequate documentation
of good practices at the local levels. In addition, the enactment of the Sexual Offences
Act has not been matched with adequate legal training of officers and agents. As a
result, there are still inconsistencies when it comes to judicial action.
The Security Council and its secretariat have an important role to play when it
comes to monitoring compliance with its own resolutions and acting upon breaches of
same, including listing credibly suspected perpetrators and enacting sanctions. That
has to be done in partnership with Member States in order to enhance accountability.
However, there are concerns in the manner in which the secretariat has been reporting
on suspected cases. In many occasions, the relevant offices in the secretariat have
presented cases of suspected sexual and other violations against women and children
as facts without proper investigations. Many such allegations have been proved to be
untrue. A recent example is the 2020 report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2020/525), which contained inaccuracies on this issue and others,
including glaring inconsistencies, contradictions and outright impossibilities.
When unverified accusations find their way into the Security Council, it is
not only unhelpful for the would-be victims of sexual violations, but it puts in doubt
the credibility of such reports. To retain the usefulness of reports adopted by the
Security Council, it needs to ensure that the reports adopted are factual and meet the
evidential threshold. Offices in the secretariat that publish misleading reports should
be held accountable.
74/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

In conclusion, we reiterate Kenya’s continued engagement and commitment
in all matters pertaining to the implementation of recommendations contained in
resolution 1325 (2000), including subsequent related resolutions and those regarding
conflict-related sexual violence.

20-0987475/124

S/2020/727

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein to the
United Nations, Christian Wenaweser
This year is a pivotal one for the women and peace and security agenda. In
addition to marking the twentieth anniversary of foundational resolution 1325 (2000)
and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the visionary Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, it also marks 75 years since the advent of the United Nations itself,
with its founding promise of gender equality. While some progress has been made
since then, gender inequality and discrimination remain major challenges. Had we
more effectively addressed such inequalities and discrimination in past decades, we
would find ourselves in a better place today to respond to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
Discussions on conflict-related sexual violence have been dominated by
an approach that looks at women and girls primarily as victims and survivors.
As important as the protection pillar remains, the participation dimension is also
essential, as it emphasizes women’s agency to address and prevent such violence.
As a contribution to further strengthening the participation pillar of the women
and peace and security agenda, Liechtenstein has commissioned a research project
from the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security on the impact of
female peacekeepers and members of armed forces on respect for international
humanitarian law.
Harmful gender stereotypes and abusive power dynamics are the root cause of
sexual and gender-based violence. Women and girls are disproportionately affected
by sexual violence, but men and boys are also targeted. The annual report of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the work of the Liechtenstein-based human rights organization All Survivors Project
document rape, sexual slavery and other forms of sexual violence of comparable
gravity perpetrated against women, men, girls or boys in a large number of conflict
situations, many of which are on the Council’s agenda.
Resolution 2467 (2019) and its survivor-centred approach are an important
step forward in the women and peace and security agenda. Monitoring, analysis
and reporting focus more consistently on the gender-specific nature of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations against all affected populations in
all situations of concern, including men and boys. That is of the utmost relevance,
as sexual violence against men and boys in particular continues to be underreported
owing to a lack of legal frameworks, cultural taboos and fear of stigmatization. In
a time of quarantines, lockdowns and other restrictions on movement caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, it is particularly important to ensure that survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence have access to reporting mechanisms and necessary services.
In addition to ensuring the implementation of resolution 2467 (2019), we call on
the Council to include conflict-related sexual violence as a designation criterion in
targeted sanctions regimes.
Accountability is an essential part of the fight against conflict-related sexual
violence. The international criminal justice system has done groundbreaking work
in that regard. Last year, the International Criminal Court (ICC) found warlord
Bosco Ntaganda guilty of 18 counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity. It
is a milestone verdict, as sexual violence crimes committed against men were held
to the same standard as those committed against women. The ongoing proceedings
at the International Court of Justice against Myanmar’s military and security forces
in the context of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of

76/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Genocide is another promising development to strengthen accountability for sexual
violence crimes.
In too many instances, perpetrators of sexual violence continue to enjoy
impunity, and victims and survivors are left without assistance. We call upon
the Security Council to refer situations such as in the Syrian Arab Republic and
Myanmar to the ICC. We will continue our strong support for the accountability
mechanisms created by the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council. We
remain committed to strengthening criminal justice and accountability for sexual
and gender-based violence in conflict, including by supporting the important work
by UN-Women and Justice Rapid Response.

20-0987477/124

S/2020/727

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Lithuania to the
United Nations
We commend Germany, as President of the Security Council for the month of
July, on convening this important annual debate.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European
Union (see annex 25) and the Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security
(see annex 20).
Lithuania remains a strong advocate of the highest standards of conduct and
continues to call for strong measures to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse. Once
again, we express our principled position in support of the zero-tolerance policy, and
call for full accountability for all civilian, military and police personnel, both in the
United Nations and in other international peace operations.
We strongly support the Secretary-General’s leadership in dealing with this
difficult challenge, which calls for a system-wide response based on the pillars
of prevention, enforcement, victim support and accountability. We commend the
Secretary General’s commitment to ensuring that tackling sexual exploitation and
abuse remains at the top of the Organization’s agenda, including through the work of
the Circle of Leadership to combat sexual exploitation and violence in conflict. We
also welcome the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, her Office and all others across the
Secretariat working on this issue.
To address today’s topic, we would like to focus on three major issues:
first, addressing root causes of sexual violence in conflict-related settings;
secondly, fighting impunity; and, thirdly, identifying the responsibilities of United
Nations peacekeepers.
First, addressing the root causes of sexual violence in conflict-related settings
is vital. Sexual violence in armed conflict, to a major extent and in essence, remains
an issue that plagues and exacerbates many contemporary conflicts. Women, girls,
men, boys and members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex
community can all be victims of sexual violence in conflict-affected settings. Many
studies have shown how unequal gender relations and patriarchal norms exacerbate
crises. While women and girls remain the largest group of victims affected by
conflict-related sexual violence, there is a growing number of incidents of sexual
violence reported by boys and men, as well as violence on the basis of sexual
orientation and gender identity.
Lithuania stresses that it is of the utmost importance to address the root causes
of sexual violence in conflict-related settings. Sexual violence in conflicts cannot be
perceived solely as a standalone social problem arising wholly because of conflict and
one which will naturally die down when peace is restored. Sexual violence is closely
connected and interlinked with pre-existing power relations, social orientation
and other forms of gender-based violence preceding the descent into conflict.
Those fundamental issues must be addressed in order to eradicate conflict-related
sexual violence and to shift the paradigm. In that context, it is crucially important
to uphold human rights standards and improve respect for human rights. The full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and
of all relevant subsequent Council resolutions, especially those focused on conflictrelated sexual violence remains of the utmost importance. We must redouble our
efforts and consolidate all political will to maintain a course towards eradicating
unjustifiable acts of sexual violence, which has many faces, including as a tactic of
78/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

war and terrorism and in post-conflict settings. Holistic approaches are critical if we
are to address the root causes of sexual violence in conflict.
Secondly, we must fight impunity. Combating impunity for sexual violence
is a central aspect of deterring and preventing such crimes. It is essential that all
reported allegations be promptly and fully investigated in order to ensure justice
for victims and accountability for perpetrators. Unfortunately, the conditions and
the situation are only getting harder. Already a chronically underreported crime,
conflict-related sexual violence has been further obscured by the COVID-19
pandemic. Research shows that COVID-19 has a significant and detrimental impact
on increased violence against women in a domestic setting, including sexual
violence. Unfortunately, conflict settings create even more vulnerable environments
with fewer possibilities for support due to physical-contact restrictions. COVID-19
has affected various aspects of the rule-of-law response, including accountability
for conflict-related sexual violence. All additional virus-related challenges should
be fully evaluated and taken into account in the context of fighting against impunity.
Furthermore, every effort must be made to give victims all the assistance
and support they need to report allegations and ensure that there will be no
repercussions for those speaking out against their abusers. More women in police
forces and prosecutorial bodies could make women and girls feel safer in reporting
sexual violence, rape and other abuse without fear of exposing themselves to further
violence. Accountability cannot be achieved if civilians are afraid to report or do
not know their rights and whom to complain to. Building trust and ensuring timely
assistance and access to information on national judicial processes is crucial.
At the same time, it is important to use every opportunity to disseminate
information about the United Nations and national processes put forward in order
to respond to sexual exploitation and abuse. To that end, there is a need to ensure
close cooperation with local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) working with
victims in order to improve the protection of whistle-blowers and ease the reporting
and investigation of allegations. Lithuania continues to be a trusted partner of, and
donor to, the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund, which supports local NGOs,
including those working on the issue of sexual violence in conflict.
In his most recent annual report on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2020/487), the Secretary-General stresses that strengthening national rule of law
institutions is critical in order to fight impunity as well as to prevent sexual crimes
related to conflict in the future. Good examples on the ground prove that there is
a possibility to turn words and statements into positive action on the ground. For
example, the criminal code of Colombia includes extensive references to sexual
violence in the context of armed conflict. In this case, a legal base brings needed
attention to sexual crimes in conflict and establishes the procedure for how to bring
perpetrators to justice.
The third issue is the responsibilities of United Nations peacekeepers. Lithuania
attaches great importance to peacekeeping — a core task of the Organization and
its flagship activity in extremely challenging environments around the world. The
protection of civilians is at the centre of peacekeeping, and any act perpetrated
against the most vulnerable is intolerable. It is devastating that in certain instances
the most vulnerable suffer sexual abuse by those who are there to protect them.
The sexual misconduct of peacekeepers undermines the fundamental goals of
peacekeeping operations. A number of studies have shown how sexual exploitation
affects the perceived impartiality of peace operations and contributes to the mistrust
of host societies. Therefore, the deployment of women protection advisers, the
provision of human rights and gender-awareness training for staff to be deployed in

20-0987479/124

S/2020/727

peacekeeping missions and the inclusion of sexual violence issues in peacekeeping
mandates should be further expanded.
It is important to note that the actual responsibility for investigating and
punishing misconduct by uniformed personnel falls to Member States. We call on
all troop- and police-contributing countries to proactively address, within national
jurisdictions, all sexual misconduct by peacekeepers and to ensure justice for
the victims.
To conclude, we must galvanize our efforts to address the root causes of
sexual violence in conflicts, to work towards full gender equality in law and in
practice and to continue the implementation of existing commitments. There must
be no backsliding on what has been agreed. We owe it to the victims and our own
contingents to set high standards and to stick to them. We must stand by the objective
to enhance the credibility and the effectiveness of the United Nations to deliver.

80/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 39

Statement by the Permanent Mission of Luxembourg to the
United Nations
[Original: French]

Luxembourg aligns itself with the statement of the European Union and
with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security. Despite the significant progress made at the political level and on
the ground, sexual violence in conflict persists. We cannot condone that. As the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/487) underlines, we must act very specifically on
behalf of survivors to prevent sexual violence and make their needs the focus of our
commitment. We must also tackle the structural root causes that perpetuate and fuel
such violence. In that context, combating impunity and strengthening the access of
survivors to justice and reparations are priorities.
To give a voice to the victims, in March 2019 Her Royal Highness Grand
Duchess Maria Teresa of Luxembourg invited some 40 survivors of sexual violence
to Luxembourg to testify at the international conference Stand Speak Rise Up to End
Sexual Violence in Fragile Environments. It was the first international event of its
kind to focus on the plight of survivors.
Luxembourg will continue its commitment both politically and in the context
of its development cooperation and humanitarian action. In 2019, we allocated more
than €13.2 million to the fight against sexual and gender-based violence. Luxembourg
supported Dr. Mukwege’s Panzi Hospital in the Democratic Republic of Congo. We
also financed the construction of a regional centre for the medical and psychosocial
care of women victims of violence, particularly sexual violence, in Senegal’s
Casamance region. We are a long-standing partner of Justice Rapid Response, and
we have supported the work of the International Center for Transitional Justice in
Colombia and Tunisia for several years. In 2020, Luxembourg continues to support the
activities of the International Committee of the Red Cross to combat sexual violence,
particularly by funding a research project on the prevention of sexual violence. As
part of the implementation of the women and peace and security national action plan
2018-2023, Luxembourg is also co-financing a capacity-building project that focuses
on gender, which is being implemented by NATO in Jordan.
Luxembourg is convinced that the fight against sexual violence cannot
succeed in a vacuum. It must be part of an integrated policy to combat gender
inequalities and gender-based discrimination. In the context of its feminist foreign
policy, Luxembourg applies a multidimensional approach to combating sexual and
gender-based violence, based on the promotion of gender equality, the empowerment
of women and the defence of human rights. In that context, we attach particular
importance to the protection and promotion of sexual and reproductive health and
rights, which are also an essential component of the survivor-centred approach.
In its foreign policy, Luxembourg will continue to be committed to universal
access to health and well-being in accordance with Sustainable Development Goal 3,
including access to quality and comprehensive health services, information and
widespread and affordable sexual and reproductive health education. We deeply
regret the challenges to sexual and reproductive health and rights in multilateral
forums. We must make every effort to overcome the restrictions on access to sexual
and reproductive health care in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Both those issues risk having devastating consequences for women and girls and
causing an unprecedented setback for women’s rights in our time. In such situations
of crisis and fragility, women and girls are even more vulnerable to the impact of
sexual violence, necessitating prevention and awareness-raising efforts.

20-0987481/124

S/2020/727

Members can count on our commitment, and we count on the commitment of
the Security Council to heeding the call of survivors and preventing sexual violence.

82/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening
this debate.
Twenty-five years ago, by adopting the Beijing Platform for Action, States
committed themselves to increasing women’s participation in conflict resolution
and decision-making, as well as to protecting women living in situations of armed
conflict, which was also mandated by this organ in its resolution 1325 (2000).
Unfortunately, despite numerous calls to end sexual violence, it continues to
be used as a tactic of war, causing deep trauma that fractures the social fabric and
communities. It is perpetrated by both State forces and illegal armed groups. In
some cases, it has become systematic and the incidence of impunity is alarming
despite being a violation of international humanitarian law and international human
rights law.
However, the opening this week of the first trial on gender grounds before
the International Criminal Court (ICC) against Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag
Mohamed Ag Mahmoud, accused of crimes against humanity and war crimes as
a result of forced marriages, rape and sexual slavery, represents a milestone in the
fight against impunity and the reparation of victims. Mexico will closely follow the
development of that case and will reiterate its full support for the ICC. Strengthening
the relationship between the Council and the ICC may be instrumental in closing the
accountability gap for those egregious crimes.
We also acknowledge the leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Conflict-Related Sexual Violence, Ms. Pramila Patten, and
the work of the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
accession in 2019 of the Office for Disarmament Affairs to that initiative is a
positive development.
Unfortunately, the pandemic has created challenges for conflict prevention
and peacekeeping. Community violence has escalated in some regions, leading to
an increase in conflict-related sexual violence. Some mitigation measures for the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) have exacerbated inequalities, exposing women
and girls to higher levels of domestic violence in their homes. Prevention policies
must put women and girls at the centre of their response, particularly in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We commend the publication of the guidelines Implications
of COVID-19 for the Prevention of and Response to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence.
While women and girls are the primary victims of such violations of their
rights, men and boys also experience them. It is unacceptable for people to be
persecuted based on their sexual orientation, gender identity, ethnicity or disability
status. It is therefore crucial to ensure a survivor-centred approach to preventing and
responding to that scourge in safe and secure conditions, recognizing that survivors
are not a homogeneous group.
The social stigmatization to which victims are exposed in their communities
can put their physical integrity at risk and lead to psychological trauma, which, if not
properly treated, can continue for decades. Victims must therefore be empowered
to become key and resilient actors for recovery, reconciliation, development and
sustainable peace.

20-0987483/124

S/2020/727

The resurgence of hostilities, militarization, the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons, mass displacement of the population and the increasing violent
extremism leading to terrorism can result in conflict. However, discrimination,
structural marginalization, exclusion, the struggle for natural resources and
inequalities of all kinds also trigger violence.
The full, effective and meaningful participation of women in decision-making
processes cannot be achieved without addressing the root causes of sexual and
gender-based violence. The social norms, stereotypes and unequal power relations
engrained in patriarchal societies consign women and girls to a secondary role and
prevent them from reaching their full potential. States must therefore ensure the
conditions for achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls.
More than 10 years since the adoption of resolution 1888 (2009), compliance
by parties with the normative framework for prevention and sexual violence in armed
conflict is very limited, particularly in terms of accountability and the delivery
of justice. We must not allow those atrocities to be mainstreamed in post-conflict
societies. It is unacceptable that to date, 42 of the 54 parties listed in the annex to
the Secretary-General’s report have not entered into any commitments and that 30 of
them — 71 per cent — have been on the list for more than five years.
Women and girls face additional barriers to access to justice linked to cultural,
social and economic issues. Special protection must be given to women human rights
defenders and peacebuilders, who work in increasingly difficult conditions due to
threats and intimidation.
In line with its commitment to gender equality, Mexico has supported the
inclusion of the women and peace and security agenda as a fundamental part of the
Generation Equality Forum, to be held in 2021. Mexico calls on the Security Council
to do the following.
First, it should systematically strengthen mandates for the protection of
civilians in peace operations with women and child protection units and advisers.
Second, it should promote the collection of disaggregated data and specific
early warning indicators on possible patterns of sexual violence.
Third, it should encourage more meaningful participation of women at different
stages of conflict, in all activities of peace operations and special political missions
and in the negotiation and implementation of peace and ceasefire agreements and
ensure the inclusion of provisions on sexual violence in such agreements.
Fourth, it should consider, where relevant, the adoption of sanctions targeting
the perpetrators listed in the annex to the Secretary-General’s report.
Fifth, the Council should strengthen cooperation with the ICC to close the
impunity gap, including, where appropriate, by referring to the Court situations where
war crimes and crimes against humanity involving sexual abuse and exploitation
are committed.
Sixth, it should strengthen the capacities of the justice and security sectors
with a gender-sensitive perspective and provide integrated care, including medical
and psychological support and access to health services and sexual and reproductive
rights for women and girls.
Seventh, it should ensure that survivors have full access, on an equal footing,
to compensation and reparation programmes for crimes of conflict-related sexual
violence as part of transitional justice, including innovative strategies to achieve
sustainable funding.

84/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Eighth, it should support mechanisms and mandates for the prevention of
and response to conflict-related sexual violence and achieve better coordination
among them.
Finally, Mexico reiterates the need to further implement the commitments
made by the signatories to the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, especially those
aimed at strengthening the United Nations zero-tolerance policy and ensuring
that personnel to be deployed in peace operations comply with the Organization’s
standards, since acts of intimidation and sexual violence are unacceptable.

20-0987485/124

S/2020/727

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the United Nations
My delegation would like to thank Germany, President of the Security Council
for the month of July, and the Dominican Republic, co-Chair of the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security, for jointly organizing this open debate
on a very important issue — conflict-related sexual violence: turning commitments
into compliance — as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
the milestone resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the visionary
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the 75 years since the foundation
of the United Nations, with its promise of gender equality enshrined in its Charter.
United Nations reports reveal that 1.3 billion people worldwide, which is 35 per
cent of the world population, are sexual violence survivors. This is alarming and
despicable and calls for urgent and immediate actions to not only eradicate sexual
violence in all circumstances — be it in times of armed conflict, in humanitarian
crises or difficult contexts, such as the current one with the coronavirus disease —
but also to implement a holistic approach founded on cooperation and prevention and
sharing best practices. In this regard, I would like to highlight the following points.
Violence is always condemnable. However, sexual violence during armed
conflict and global crises is even more reprehensible. Only a few years ago, the world
was brought to tears by the appalling and poignant testimonies of Ms. Nadia Murad
and other victims reporting their tragic ordeals. Unfortunately, history repeated itself
with shocking cases of other victims of rape, torture and unimaginable savagery and
brutality, depicting a disturbing trend of using sexual violence.
The Kingdom of Morocco strongly condemns these practices of another age,
which unfortunately continue today. Sexual violence affects victims and plagues
communities and societies in their entirety, whether it is used as a tactic of war,
a weapon of terrorism or an act of coercion, intimidation, retaliation or reprisal
against the family or the larger community. It aims to terrorize, harm the body, maim
dignity, destroy social fabric and destroy all reconstruction efforts at their root.
The Kingdom of Morocco, as a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, chaired by Canada, and of the Group of Friends for Gender
Parity, led by Colombia, fully subscribes to its international commitments to combat
all forms of sexual violence, including in times of conflict, and considers them
barbaric, brutal and inhuman methods and practices with serious consequences for
the establishment of lasting peace and reconciliation.
Because of the systematic and premeditated nature of acts of sexual violence,
the Kingdom of Morocco believes that innovation in the approach to dealing with
this scourge is urgent. In this regard, there is a need to adopt and implement a
comprehensive and inclusive approach that takes into account the complexity of
the root causes of sexual violence; restores the dignity of victims; addresses the
stigma surrounding victims, including children born of this violence; presents firm
accountability measures against the perpetrators who act against international
humanitarian law, human rights and the Geneva Conventions of 1949; and invests in
rebuilding and sustaining peace.
Prevention is key to eradicating sexual violence, namely, through the promotion
of gender equality and women’s empowerment; guaranteeing victims’ access to
legal, medical and psychosocial services; using sanctions as a tool to dissuade sexual
violence and to coerce and constrain the individuals involved; ensuring protection
for victims and witnesses in order to enable men to speak out without fear or shame;
strengthening existing services for women and girls and establishing complementary
mechanisms for men and boys; and engaging both those advocating the elimination
86/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

of sexual violence against women and girls and those addressing sexual violence
against men and boys and making them work together to achieve their goals.
Religious leaders have a powerful and persuasive role to play in combating the
use of religion to justify sexual violence. They should be encouraged to speak out
firmly against this scourge. Cooperation with local actors and community leaders is
also crucial, as they can identify early warning signs of acts of sexual violence and
propose appropriate prevention strategies.
There is a need for more research on the range of sexual violence, its
perpetrators and its victims in order to build the evidence base from both quantitative
and qualitative perspectives. Whereas neither women and girls nor men and boys are
spared from being victims of sexual violence, there is widespread ignorance about
the shocking details of sexual violence against men and boys in conflicts. Some of
the barriers that prevent the majority of male victims from reporting sexual violence
to the authorities are the sense of dignity, stigmatization and a fear of being singled
out and mocked. In addition, the lack of comprehensive data on the issue remains
one of the biggest obstacles to address it. While a big majority of reports focus on
sexual violence affecting women and girls, reports on sexual violence affecting men
and boys are rare.
To conclude, Morocco commends United Nations efforts to eliminate sexual
violence in conflicts, namely, through the United Nations campaign against sexual
violence in conflicts and the work done by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten. Secondly,
Morocco also welcomes the efforts of Member States to implement relevant Security
Council resolutions at the national level and welcomes the growing number of signed
and negotiated action plans for the protection of victims of sexual violence.
Last but not least, Morocco welcomes the initiatives taken in the context of
peacekeeping operations aimed at combating violence and sexual violence, as well
as the appointment of advisers to combat sexual violence and the adoption of codes
of conduct, military action plans and zero-tolerance policies in the armed forces.

20-0987487/124

S/2020/727

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Myanmar to the
United Nations, Hau Do Suan
Myanmar welcomes the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security. There is no question about the importance of the
women and peace and security agenda of the Council in the fight against conflictrelated sexual violence. At the same time, it is pertinent to review the achievements
of the Council on the implementation of the agenda in the past 20 years, apart from
the adoption of nine more resolutions following resolution 1325 (2000).
Only durable peace and sustained stability can bring an end to conflict-related
violence. Having experienced over seven decades of protracted ethnic insurgencies,
Myanmar is striving to end decades-long conflicts and to achieve sustainable peace
and national reconciliation. As women and children bear the brunt of armed conflict,
we are trying to tackle the root causes of the conflict to mitigate the suffering of the
most vulnerable.
Myanmar upholds the policy of zero tolerance of any form of sexual violence,
including conflict-related ones. To demonstrate its strong commitment to addressing
conflict-related sexual violence, in December 2018 the Government of Myanmar
signed a joint communiqué with the United Nations on the prevention of and response
to conflict-related sexual violence.
Subsequently, in March 2019, the National Committee on the Prevention of
and Response to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence was established to implement the
joint communiqué. A national work plan has been drafted with technical assistance
from the United Nations and is currently under review.
As domestic legal reform is essential for the effective implementation of the
protection of the rights of women and girls, a bill on the prevention of and response
to violence against women has been drafted and is currently under review by the Bill
Committee of the Parliament. The new bill reinforces the protection of women from
all forms of violence, including domestic and sexual violence.
The One-Stop Women Support Centres and 24-hour help lines have been set
up to provide women and girls with physical, legal, psychological and social support.
The One-Stop Women Support Centres and help lines are operating 24 hours, 7 days a
week, even during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, to provide crucial
services, as women and girls are more vulnerable during lockdowns. Victims of
sexual violence are also provided with one-time financial support for rehabilitation.
To assist with case management for gender-based violence, a new set of standard
operating procedures has been developed since 2019 using a survivor-centred
approach. Clinical guidelines are also being developed for responding to rape.
The new child rights law, which was adopted in July 2019, criminalizes
sexual violence, requiring the Government, the Tatmadaw and armed groups to take
necessary measures to protect children from sexual violence.
The Government is working closely with UN-Women on formulating
and implementing the National Strategic Plan for the Advancement of Women
(2013-2022) for gender equality and women’s empowerment. Moreover, reports on
the protection of the rights of women and the prevention of sexual violence against
women and girls have been regularly submitted to the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women and included in the Universal Periodic Review
process of the Human Rights Council.

88/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

With the aim of ending ethnic armed conflict and ushering in a democratic
federal union, the Government has been convening the Union Peace Conference —
the 21st Century Panglong. Even in the midst of formidable challenges caused by
the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government is making relentless efforts to advance
the peace process. The fourth session of the Peace Conference is slated to be held
in August 2020. The Government is also promoting the meaningful participation of
women in the peace process, with more women delegates now involved in different
committees on the basic principles of the Union Peace Accord.
In response to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire during
the pandemic, the Tatmadaw announced a three-month nation-wide ceasefire, from
10 May to 31 August, to help fight the COVID-19 pandemic. The unilateral ceasefire
applies to all conflict areas except where terrorist groups have taken positions.
In terms of accountability, the Independent Commission of Enquiry submitted
its final report to the President in January. The Criminal Investigation and
Prosecution Body, led by the Union Attorney-General, is undertaking investigations
in prioritized places and cases out of 13 locations included in the report.
The court-martial to prosecute the Gutarpyin incident was completed in April
this year. Three military personnel, including one senior military officer, were found
guilty in the incident, and actions have been taken against them. Also, in July this
year, another court-martial was formed to conduct an investigation into the incidents
of Maung Nu village and Chut Pyin village.
It is regrettable that this year’s annual report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487) did not properly reflect the situation
on the ground, especially the challenges faced by the Government of Myanmar. It is
disappointing that the atrocities committed by terrorists against women and children
were not reflected in the report.
My delegation believes that accountability is an important component of
preventing sexual violence in conflicts. However, it is not the only solution to prevent
or stop sexual violence. The countries concerned have the primary responsibility to
protect and prevent such crimes against innocent people in conflict situations. A
holistic approach led by the country concerned is the best way to bring about a
definitive end to conflict-related sexual violence.
In tackling the issue of sexual violence in conflict, the international community
should be guided by universally accepted norms of impartiality, non-selectivity and
non-politicization of the issue. Only a constructive approach undertaken through
dialogue and by providing assistance to the country concerned would bring about
positive results in efforts to resolve the problem.
With the constructive cooperation and engagement of the international
community, we are confident that we will be able to reduce, and ultimately end, the
suffering of the victims of sexual violence. We look forward to continuing to work
closely with the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict in order to advance in addressing conflict-related sexual
violence in Myanmar.
My delegation rejects the statement of the briefer Khin Ohmar, which is based
on unfounded, biased and politically motivated narratives and does not in any way
contribute value to the debate. Her views are mainly based on narratives from the
Independent International Fact-finding Mission on Myanmar and other mechanisms
with which my Government has refused to cooperate owing to their lack of objectivity
and independence.

20-0987489/124

S/2020/727

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Netherlands to the
United Nations
We would like to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for organizing
today’s debate.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement
submitted by the delegation of Canada on behalf of 62 member States of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see annex 20) and with the statement
submitted by the delegation of the European Union (see annex 25).
As the world is facing a global health crisis with an unprecedented impact on
all aspects of human security and with a disproportionate effect on women and girls
in all their diversity, the Kingdom of the Netherlands remains ever more committed
to supporting the United Nations efforts to prevent and address sexual violence
in conflict.
On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the present
open debate on sexual violence in conflict provides an excellent opportunity to
reiterate and strengthen our collective commitment to preventing and addressing
sexual violence in conflict.
The Secretary-General provides us with a clear message in his present report
(S/2020/487): we must not forget the profound human suffering that is at the heart
of the sexual violence in conflict agenda. We are here today for the victims and
survivors of sexual violence in conflict. We are speaking about a crime that is widely
invisible and underreported — hence the importance of letting disregarded voices be
heard in the Security Council.
In that regard, let me express my gratitude to Nadia Carine Therese FornelPoutou, from the Association of Central African Women Lawyers, and Khin Omar,
speaking on behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, for
taking the time to share their experiences with the Council. Their concerns must be
at the centre of our common effort to move from commitment to compliance. Let me
also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence
in Conflict for briefing the Council.
Allow me to highlight three areas of action for strengthening efforts to prevent
and respond to sexual violence in conflict.
First, with regard to sexual and reproductive health and rights, any response
to sexual violence must prioritize the rights, needs and wishes of survivors. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) puts the implementation of a survivor-centred
approach to addressing sexual violence in conflict under further pressure. It is
becoming increasingly challenging for survivors to access essential life-saving
services, including comprehensive sexual and reproductive health services.
Sexual and reproductive health and rights is a fundamental part of a survivorcentred approach to sexual violence in conflict and must be put at the forefront of the
response. Those organizations working in conflict situations where sexual violence
in conflict occurs must provide adequate and comprehensive services to survivors in
all their diversity, including sexual and reproductive health care, mental health care
and psychosocial support, protection, legal services, access to justice and support
for livelihoods. Concrete and sustained actions must be taken to ensure diverse
survivors can claim their right to such services. Preventing and addressing sexual
and gender-based violence, including sexual violence in conflict, is a prerequisite
for the realization of women’s rights and their ability to meaningfully participate in
90/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

peace, political and security processes. Also, the inclusion of disrupted communities,
of which survivors of sexual violence in conflict are part, in the response must
ensure collective healing, as well as the reintegration of survivors. In that journey of
healing, the importance of accountability and justice cannot be understated — which
brings me to my second point.
In terms of accountability for sexual violence, States have the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute violations and uphold international human
rights standards. The lack of criminal accountability for sexual violence in conflict
in countries affected by conflict is concerning. The international community must
therefore play a role in supporting the delivery of justice at the local level.
For justice to be truly survivor-centred, it must be holistic and comprehensive
and occur at multiple levels. Next to international accountability mechanisms, a greater
focus on survivor-centred national and local justice mechanisms for the prosecution
of sexual violence in conflict must be ensured. National and local prosecution should
be close and accessible to survivors, as this is where most perpetrators and survivors
and their communities remain. We would like to emphasize the importance of the
reconstruction of the rule of law as a central part of peace processes, with special
attention to the local and national laws in which gender and the rights of women are
fully anchored.
When States are unable or unwilling to prosecute, the International Criminal
Court (ICC) can play an important role in holding perpetrators to account. The Rome
Statute of the ICC was the first international instrument to include various forms of
sexual violence as underlying acts of both crimes against humanity and war crimes.
We remind the Security Council of its power to refer situations to the ICC, and call
upon all States to become a party to the Rome Statute and to adopt the most serious
crimes into their national legislation.
With regard to dedicated sanctions for sexual violence, beyond criminal
accountability we must make use of other tools at our disposal to fight impunity.
Targeted sanctions against perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict are one of them.
The gap assessment presented in the latest report of the Secretary-General,
pursuant to resolution 2467 (2019), makes painfully clear the impunity in which
crimes of sexual violence in conflict remain steeped. It is telling and confronting
that, of the 65 parties that have been listed since 2010, only one has been delisted.
By contrast, 42 listed parties have not assumed any commitments, while they have
been listed for over five years.
As a world and as an international community, we are not doing enough to
change this. A true survivor-centred approach takes root in prevention, as well as
the assurance that those who have torn lives apart will not be allowed to continue
doing so. Impunity is precisely one of the main drivers of sexual violence in conflict,
further fuelling a cycle of violence. In 2018, when the Netherlands was an elected
member of the Council, we pushed for the systematic inclusion of sexual violence as
a stand-alone designation criterion for all existing sanctions regimes.
We would like to reiterate the opportunity that we have to strengthen our
joint prevention and response by systematically and explicitly incorporating and
applying sexual violence as a stand-alone designation criterion in sanctions regimes.
Recognizing the meaningful steps that have been taken in that regard, with specific
designation criteria on sexual violence having been included in seven out of the
current 14 sanctions regimes, we call upon the Council to extend this practice to all
remaining relevant sanctions regimes and to ensure adequate follow-up. The Council
should not hesitate to list individuals or entities solely for sexual violence. This

20-0987491/124

S/2020/727

sends a clear message to perpetrators that sexual violence in itself warrants United
Nations sanctions.
To conclude, we call upon the Council and all Member States to ensure that
women and peace and security, in particular preventing and addressing sexual
violence in conflict, is an integral part of country-specific discussions and mandates.
We must not allow our common efforts to prevent and address sexual violence
in conflict to be dwindled down to an annual discussion in the Council. We need
instructive mandates on sexual violence in conflict in order to translate our common
priorities into action.

92/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 44
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of Nigeria to the United Nations,
Samson S. Itegboje
I thank the Foreign Minister, His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, and the
delegation of Germany for organizing this important debate. Our appreciation also
goes to all the briefers for sharing their perspectives on this very important subject.
The term “conflict-related sexual violence”, as reflected in the Secretary
General’s report for 2019 (S/2020/487), refers to rape, sexual slavery, forced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion, enforced sterilization, forced
marriage and any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity perpetrated
against women, men, girls or boys that is directly or indirectly linked to a conflict.
That link may be evident in the profile of the perpetrator, who is often
affiliated with a State or a non-State armed group, which includes terrorist entities;
the profile of the victim, who is frequently an actual or perceived member of a
political, ethnic or religious minority group or targeted on the basis of actual or
perceived sexual orientation or gender identity; and the climate of impunity, which
is generally associated with State collapse, cross-border consequences, such as
displacement or trafficking, and/or violations of a ceasefire agreement. The term also
encompasses trafficking in persons for the purpose of sexual violence or exploitation
when committed in situations of conflict.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a pervasive human rights violation that
prevents women and girls from reaching their full potential. It is an obstacle to
women’s ability to live dignified lives, free from fear. During times of conflict
and instability, it can also pose significant security challenges, as violence is
normalized, while sexual violence is often used to punish and terrorize populations,
fuel displacement and destroy the fabric of communities. The impact of such acts, if
unchecked, further fuels extremism, instability and collapse of the rule of law.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has further compounded the problem, as the
imposition of quarantines, curfews, lockdowns and other restrictions on movement
have hampered the possibility for survivors of sexual-related violence to report new
cases. This further heightens the existing structural, institutional and sociocultural
barriers to seeking redress for such crimes.
The pandemic has also had a negative impact on the availability of immediate
life-saving assistance and accessibility to other multisectoral aid for survivors of
sexual violence in many settings. The majority of the shelters for gender-based
violence survivors have been closed and mobile clinics and counselling services
cancelled, as the already scarce resources are diverted to other areas impacted by
the pandemic.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights areas of strength and weakness
in the implementation of the conflict-related sexual violence mandate. His
recommendations, if embraced, can enhance coordination and effectiveness. One
gap identified was the significant lack of compliance with prevailing commitments.
The problem of fragmentation and overlap in the United Nations system demands a
framework for implementation and accountability, which, he argues, would increase
the perceived or actual cost for perpetrators and serve as a deterrent.
Nigeria has had its fair share of conflict-related sexual violence, especially in
the north-east, largely perpetrated by Boko Haram terrorists. As has been the case
since 2014, the Secretary-General’s annual report on conflict-related sexual violence
contains an annex that rightly lists Boko Haram terrorists among the
20-0987493/124

S/2020/727

“parties credibly suspected of committing or being responsible for patterns
of rape or other forms of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict in
countries on the agenda of the Security Council” (S/2020/487, para. 74).
In its efforts to stem the tide and to prevent other potential human rights
violations, the Nigerian Government has put in place a number of measures to address
the situation in north-eastern Nigeria in a holistic manner. These measures centre
on the issues of accountability for the crime of conflict-related sexual violence, the
well-being of the survivor and prevention. The measures also emphasize respect
for human rights and the rule of law, humanitarian assistance and the protection of
civilians, crisis prevention and stabilization, and resilience-building for sustainable
development, as well as regional cross-border cooperation. Some of the specific
steps taken in that regard include, but are not limited to, the following: the diligent
prosecution of those found to have perpetrated the crime of conflict-related sexual
violence; the provision of psychosocial support where survivors are provided with
protection, reparations and holistic health and psychosocial services; the use of
leaders at the national and local levels, including community, religious and traditional
leaders, to play a more active role in advocating within communities against sexual
violence in conflict; the creation of a human rights desk, working in a synergistic
fashion between the National Human Rights Commission and the Ministry of
Defence to investigate and prosecute, where applicable, human rights abuses by the
Nigerian military; and the establishment of a civil-military relations department in
the Nigerian Defence Headquarters to enhance the civil-military relationship and
information-sharing. Among other things, this is a trust-building mechanism so as
to win the hearts and minds of civilians in the fight against Boko Haram.
The specific steps also include the provision of social and medical outreach for
civilians by the military; the provision of ongoing workshops and training sessions for
military personnel by the Office of the National Security Adviser on various human
rights topics, including civilian protection, children in conflict, tracking civilian
harm, sexual exploitation and abuse; the revision of the rules of engagement and the
code of conduct of the Nigerian military to reflect international humanitarian and
human rights standards; and comprehensive security sector reform. As part of this,
the Nigerian Government, through its Institute of Peace and Conflict Resolution,
helped to facilitate the adoption and operationalization of the handover protocol
on children and armed conflict, including the handing over of children in armed
conflict encountered during operations to civilian child protection actors.
It should be pointed out that Nigeria does not see children in armed conflict
as being in conflict with the law but as victims who must be protected. Also, with
regard to the high number of unaccompanied, separated and orphaned children,
the Government, through the National Emergency Management Agency and other
humanitarian actors, is working towards the rehabilitation, reintegration and family
reunification of children affected by Boko Haram.
Nigeria also established of the Protection Sector Working Group (PSWG),
which is made up of all the protection response agencies, such as the National Human
Rights Commission, the Institute for Peace and Conflict Resolution, the National
Emergency Management Agency and the Federal Ministry of Women and Youth
Development. Through the PSWG, Nigeria drafted a standard operating procedure
(SOP) for the protection of vulnerable groups in emergency settings. The SOP serves
as a tool for case management and referrals of survivors of human right abuses in the
internally displaced person (IDP) camps.
Another specific measure is the launch and the ongoing implementation of the
road map on preventing gender-based violence in the Lake Chad region. This road
map was unveiled domestically in Nigeria in July 2018 and launched internationally
94/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

in Berlin in September 2018. The road map is proactive in nature, aiming, first
and foremost, to prevent possible cases of gender-based violence, especially in
emergencies and humanitarian situations.
A further measure is the launch and the ongoing implementation of the
Buhari Plan. This is a presidential initiative of the current Administration that
seeks to provide immediate relief to the people of the north-east, offer psychosocial
support to survivors of conflict-related sexual violence and rehabilitate and resettle
IDPs. It also seeks to support the restoration of livelihoods, generate jobs, secure
communities, drive infrastructure development, facilitate peacebuilding, revamp
agriculture, which is the lifeblood of the north-eastern region, and resuscitate
health-care services. Indeed, the Buhari Plan is the blueprint for the comprehensive
humanitarian relief and socioeconomic stabilization of the north-east, as well as the
return and resettlement of displaced persons. It is designed to achieve the peace,
stability, socioeconomic rehabilitation, reconstruction and long-term sustainable
economic development of the region.
Let me conclude by noting that sexual violence, whenever and wherever it
occurs, is a crime and cannot be justified. Sexual violence in armed conflicts must
be subject to absolute prohibition, as impunity for the crime has no place in the
twenty-first century.

20-0987495/124

S/2020/727

Annex 45
Statement by the Special Representative for Women, Peace and
Security of the Secretary-General of NATO, Clare Hutchinson
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to make a statement at this
open debate on sexual violence in conflict.
The adoption of the women and peace and security resolutions, beginning with
resolution 1325 (2000) 20 years ago, established a new path in protecting women
and girls against sexual violence. The continued work of the Council, through the
adoption of additional resolutions focused on protection from sexual violence in
conflict, has made clear that preventing such violence and protecting women and
girls, as well as men and boys, must be a priority.
There is now global recognition that conflict-related sexual violence threatens
international peace and security. The awareness that sexual violence perpetuates
conflict and instability is now entrenched in our collective thinking, as is the
understanding of the long-term destructive nature of sexual violence as a deliberate
tactic of war and the devastating effect that this has not only on women and girls, but
on entire communities.
NATO understands that protection is at the core of the women and peace and
security mandate. It has become central to our efforts to protect civilians in all our
missions and operations. We recognize that understanding and responding to the
grievous, systematic sexual abuse of women and girls in and around conflict are
mission critical and essential to our operational effectiveness.
NATO has military guidelines, as well as a supplementary directive, to guide
the Alliance’s response to conflict-related sexual violence. These also affirm to
commanders their leadership responsibility in preventing and responding to sexual
violence. To ensure that we are prepared to carry out our responsibility, we continue
to integrate the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence into
our contingency planning, exercises, education and training.
Developing standards for ourselves is important, and how we encourage high
standards in other militaries around the world is also essential. In many of our partner
countries, we have strengthened our training on human rights and the protection of
civilians, including against conflict-related sexual violence.
Earlier this year, NATO’s Joint Forces Command Naples conducted a workshop
focused on the Alliance’s commitment to the prevention of and response to conflictrelated sexual violence. We reaffirmed our international obligations to protecting
women, girls, men and boys from sexual violence and highlighted the need to further
develop clear political and operational guidance on how to respond to this heinous
crime, including in relation to reporting.
While we have seen an increase in the recognition and understanding of
conflict-related sexual violence and the risks it poses to peace and security, the
scourge of sexual violence in and around conflict remains a pressing global protection
challenge. Despite the definitions, resolutions, commitments, endorsements and
financing dedicated to eradicating sexual violence, this intolerable crime continues
in numerous conflicts around the globe today, where the bodies of so many women,
men, girls and boys are co-opted as part of the battlefield. It demoralizes, destabilizes
and destroys individuals, communities and societies across the world.
Where a culture of impunity exists, the many survivors of sexual violence in
conflict may never see justice for what they have endured. Where such injustices go
unpunished, they become part of the cycle of violence that perpetuates conflict. As
96/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

the NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg highlighted in his opening remarks at
the NATO Digital Dialogue on Conflict-Related Sexual Violence last month,
“We need legal instruments to reveal the atrocities, hold the perpetrators
accountable and bring justice to the victims. Impunity is not an option. And
we also need military means, to defeat [those] that have sexual violence as an
integral part of their strategy.”
Preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence is not just
a moral duty, it is critical to achieving durable peace and security. Actions that
NATO has taken have made a real difference, but we all have a responsibility to do
even more.
That is why Secretary General Stoltenberg has highlighted the importance
of reinforcing our policy framework to strengthen the political foundation for our
continued commitment to eliminating sexual violence in conflict. This is an urgent
task to create the conditions for security that will allow women and girls to live free
from abuse and violence. And as with so many threats to peace and security, we can
tackle this best by working together.
Ultimately, in tackling sexual violence against women and girls, we do more
than help individual victims; we set the tone for the respect for fundamental dignities
and human rights that is the foundation for freedom and essential for peace. By doing
this we can lay a foundation for lasting stability — a foundation that we can all play
a part in building.

20-0987497/124

S/2020/727

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We would like to thank Germany, in its capacity as President of the Security
Council this month, and the Dominican Republic for convening this open debate
on the issue of conflict-related sexual violence, under the women and peace and
security agenda, to which Peru attaches great importance. We especially welcome
the participation of His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany. We would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for her
important briefing, as well as the representatives of civil society for their briefings.
We welcome and celebrate, in particular, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which was an essential
milestone in the defence and advancement of the role of women in our societies,
developing an agenda for women’s empowerment and gender equality while
envisioning a world in which women can exercise their freedoms and choices and
realize their rights. We also celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), an important event for the women and peace and security
agenda, which recognizes women as key players in building international peace
and security.
For Peru, the gender equality and women’s empowerment agenda is crucial.
That is why, in recent years, we have made great efforts to improve the enjoyment
and exercise of the rights of all women, adolescents and girls. Within this framework,
Peru is committed to the women and peace and security agenda, which includes the
key element of combating sexual violence in armed conflict. This commitment was
expressed in the work we carried out during our recent participation in the Security
Council within the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, which
Peru had the honour of co-chairing with Germany.
We also wish to stress our support for multilateralism and the rule of law as
essential elements of the international community. On this basis, we condemn in the
strongest terms sexual assaults, including those committed during armed conflicts,
whose systematic use, whether as a tactic of war, to spread terror or attack collective
identities, must be understood and confronted as a threat to international peace
and security.
We are concerned about the magnitude and seriousness of the problem. The
most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487) confirms the link between
sexual violence, trafficking in persons and terrorism. It also reports alarming trends,
such as sexual violence perpetrated against girls and boys, which cannot be justified
under any circumstances and must be categorically rejected by the international
community as a whole. In this regard, we wish to emphasize that the prohibition and
condemnation of this type of violation during an armed conflict is established in
international humanitarian law, international criminal law and international human
rights law.
Actions aimed at combating these crimes must include not only the protection
of victims and their rehabilitation, but also bringing those responsible to justice and
addressing the root causes that make their perpetration possible, in order to prevent
further repetition of these atrocities. We are convinced that the United Nations, and
in particular the Security Council, have a very important role to play in this task, and
therefore urgent action must be taken.

98/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Despite increased attention of the international community to the need to
end impunity for crimes of sexual violence, and commitments to that end, we are
concerned that accountability for such crimes remains elusive. In this regard, we
consider it important to recall, in line with resolution 1820 (2008), that sexual crimes
cannot be subject to amnesty in the context of conflict resolution processes.
It also is essential to recognize and combat gender inequality as a fundamental
cause and driver of sexual violence in conflict. We therefore believe that equality
and empowerment have a direct impact on the maintenance of peace and security.
The important role played by women in all areas of our societies is crucial.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has demonstrated this, showing that 70 per cent
of all health-care and social workers on the front line of the pandemic are women.
However, inequalities and gaps are still evident. In that sense, the inclusion of
women in the decision-making process is very important, as it gives visibility to
their needs and perspectives and thereby also helps to eliminate stereotypes about
women’s roles. Evidence shows that greater participation of women in decisionmaking processes reduces the likelihood of conflict.
We cannot ignore the stigma and fear of victims or their intimidation by their
attackers. Most cases of sexual violence go unreported. This is reflected in the low
confidence and trust in national institutions. Therefore, strengthening the capacity
of these institutions is essential to ensure accountability for the crimes committed
and their prevention in the future.
The proper care for and rehabilitation of victims are essential to any
sustainable peacebuilding process, including an understanding that their trauma
is also psychological and that if it is not addressed through a multidimensional
approach, it has the potential to destroy the social fabric of a community.
The Security Council must also continue to encourage, support and monitor
specific commitments and plans to prevent sexual violence in the conflicts on its
agenda, working with local non-governmental organizations and United Nations
entities on the ground.
In conclusion, we wish to express our appreciation and support for the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and to underscore the priority that the Secretary-General attaches to this issue, in
line with the need to build sustainable peace.

20-0987499/124

S/2020/727

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
We commend Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening this
important debate and for their commitment in pursuing the important topic of sexual
violence in conflict. We also thank the briefers for their remarks and would like to
align ourselves with the statement by the European Union (see annex 25).
We are outraged by the persistent and widespread sexual violence in armed
conflict committed by State and non-State actors, as documented in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487). Sexual violence is increasingly used
as a tactic of warfare and is a flagrant and unacceptable violation of international
humanitarian and human rights law. One of the biggest challenges its victims
are facing is the lack of accountability of the perpetrators for the crimes they
have committed.
To address that, Poland will continue to fight and counteract gender-based
violence, including as a response to the coronavirus pandemic. We will also
continue to support a survivor-centred, rights-based response aimed at creating a
safe and participatory environment, including through various solutions that build
resilience and address the diverse experiences of all survivors. This approach is
critical to ensuring that no one is left behind or excluded from the dividends of peace
and development.
We recall that victims continue to be stigmatized and rejected by their families
and communities too often. Wanting to escape stigma and discrimination, the
majority of victims do not report rape and other forms of sexual violence. The great
reluctance of many men and boys to report sexual violence makes it very difficult
to accurately assess its scope, the limited statistics that exist almost certainly vastly
underestimate the number of male victims. It not only contributes to the culture of
impunity, but also prevents survivors of sexual violence from accessing medical care
and legal support. Also, women with children born of sexual violence are the most
marginalized and their lives are accompanied by stigma and isolation. Against this
background, we commend the work done by civil society, human rights defenders
and peacebuilders, who have been working to change this situation, notwithstanding
the risks, and we promise to support them further.
We would also like to recall that sexual and gender-based violence remains an
important part of humanitarian appeals and requires a joint international response
and solidarity. Poverty and social exclusion remain risk factors associated with
gender-based violence. As we have stated before, we believe that there is a need for a
broader discussion in the Security Council on the importance of women’s economic
empowerment in post-conflict settings in more general terms.
We cannot spare any effort in combating sexual violence. Only by shedding
light on the atrocities and by bringing perpetrators to justice can we lift the lasting
shadow of sexual violence in conflict for all the survivors and prevent it from
happening in the future.

100/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Portugal to the
United Nations, Francisco Duarte Lopes
My delegation aligns itself with the statements presented by the European
Union (see annex 25) and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see
annex 20) and would like to complement them with the following points.
As we all know, conflict-related sexual violence disproportionally affects
women and children and is, unfortunately, used as a tactic of war, torture and
terrorism in order to fulfil military, economic and ideological objectives.
In this sense, we would like to recall that conflict-related sexual violence is
not a mere consequence of war. Victims of conflict-related sexual violence can be
subject to discrimination, sexual assault, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, human
trafficking and forced marriages. These crimes represent serious violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of humanitarian international law. Therefore,
we must ensure accountability and fight against impunity, maintaining a zerotolerance approach towards aggressors, whoever they might be.
In this regard, Portugal would like to commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten, for her
work and efforts in strengthening the United Nations mechanisms to tackle conflictrelated sexual violence as a peace and security issue.
Resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, recognized the
impact of armed conflicts on women, highlighting the importance of promoting the
active participation of women peacekeepers and of including women in negotiations,
decisions and policymaking, as well as ceasefire processes. The women and peace
and security agenda has since become an important component of peace processes.
This year we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), an
opportunity to increase our efforts to address structural gender inequalities, the role
of women in peace processes and the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence.
It is urgent to implement specific strategies against acts of violence, namely,
through cooperation with civil society, youth and women’s organizations, access to
information and the use of new technologies. This commitment also includes the
protection and promotion of sexual and reproductive health and rights and providing
victims with access to mental health care and to legal services.
Portugal has a holistic approach to the women and peace and security
agenda, based on the promotion of gender equality, the inclusion of women in
conflict prevention, the training of armed forces and the fight against gender and
sexual violence.
My country has adopted its third national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2019-2020. This national action plan complies with
the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against
Women and Domestic Violence. In addition, Portugal is committed to greater legal
and judicial cooperation on this matter, but also to expanding the presence and
participation of women in military and security forces contingents. Every branch of
the Portuguese Armed Forces has gender advisers.
To conclude, Portugal looks forward to the outcomes of this open debate,
which represents an opportunity to strengthen our commitment to fight against the
impunity enjoyed by perpetrators.

20-09874101/124

S/2020/727

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
My delegation commends you, Mr. President, for convening this high-level
open debate on conflict-related sexual violence for two consecutive years. The
Republic of Korea offers its deep appreciation to the briefers for their valuable
interventions today, and we take this opportunity to reiterate our full support for
Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and her Office.
This year holds a special meaning for the women and peace and security
agenda as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). However,
we are still witnessing a significant gap between commitments and implementation.
Furthermore, the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis on the
socioeconomic and security environment may pose even greater challenges to
addressing sexual violence in armed conflict. As such, we must once again renew
our commitments and pay heightened attention to this critical agenda. Against that
troubling backdrop, while aligning myself with the statement submitted by the
representative of Canada on behalf of 62 Member States (see annex 20), I would like
to highlight the following five points on this important topic.
First, COVID-19 could aggravate the suffering of those who are exposed
to sexual violence in armed conflict, and we must do our utmost to minimize its
negative impacts. In that connection, we welcome the recent adoption of resolution
2532 (2020), and call for its full implementation, particularly the general and
immediate cessation of hostilities and the durable humanitarian pause. Any military
threat or attempt to incite violence must stop and political solutions must be pursued.
Additionally, sexual violence must never be used as a tactic of war, terrorism or
political repression, particularly in situations where people are suffering from the
current health security crisis.
Secondly, we emphasize the importance of a survivor-centred approach. The
landmark resolution 2467 (2019), which recognizes a survivor-centred approach in
preventing and responding to sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations,
must be fully implemented. We should ensure survivors’ non-discriminatory access
to all the services that they need, such as sexual and reproductive health-care
services and psychosocial care, so as to prioritize the rights and needs of victims
of sexual and gender-based violence. Furthermore, we must increase our efforts to
prevent stigmatization, discrimination, hate speech and any form of revictimization
to protect all survivors.
To that end, the Republic of Korea actively participates in the Global Fund
for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence as one of its board members,
and is also providing $8 million in tailored assistance to survivors through the
United Nations Population Fund, UNICEF and the International Organization for
Migration in 2019 and 2020. Addressing sexual violence in armed conflict carries a
very special meaning for Korea. The Korean Government has been endeavouring to
restore the honour and dignity of the so-called comfort women victims during the
Second World War. We believe that it is crucial to ensure that lessons are learned
from these victims’ painful experiences.
Thirdly, we reiterate the pressing need for prevention. In that regard, my
delegation would like to highlight the expanded role that United Nations peace
operations can play. We encourage the increased participation of women in peace
operations, more gender-sensitive mandates and enhanced training on gendersensitivity for all United Nations peacekeeping and civilian personnel with a view
102/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

to preventing sexual violence and exploitation. We emphasize the importance of
incorporating the latest technologies to support such efforts. In that regard, the
Republic of Korea hopes that the 2021 United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial
meeting, to be held in Seoul next April, will serve as a timely platform to promote
relevant discussions. For our part, the Korean Government continues to increase
women’s participation among our peacekeepers.
Fourthly, women must play a meaningful role in peacebuilding and decisionmaking processes. We should also endeavour to increase engagement with a wider
range of actors and stakeholders, including civil society. Inclusivity is key to
sustaining peace. Women’s full, equal and meaningful participation must be ensured
in the full continuum of peace processes, including peace negotiation, mediation and
post-conflict reconstruction. Women’s electoral rights must be upheld as well.
Last but not least, holding perpetrators of sexual violence to account is vital to
delivering justice to victims and deterring future crimes. We must end impunity and
safeguard judicial justice. To that end, we call for improving national, regional and
international legal mechanisms for reporting and prosecuting sexual violence cases,
putting perpetrators on trial and fully respecting international law, particularly
international human rights law. We should not forget that sexual violence can
constitute a war crime, a crime against humanity or a constitutive act with respect to
genocide, as stipulated in resolution 1820 (2008).
The Republic of Korea reaffirms its driving commitment and strong support
for the women and peace and security agenda and looks forward to hosting the
second International Conference on Action with Women and Peace this year. As we
now begin the third decade of the agenda, we will continue to stand with all victims
and survivors and to work together in solidarity with the United Nations, as well as
all Member States, to address the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence and
ensure a survivor-centred approach.

20-09874103/124

S/2020/727

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Serbia to the
United Nations, Milan Milanović
I would like to thank Germany as President of the Security Council for
organizing this high-level open debate, and I thank the Secretary-General for his
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487).
Serbia aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European
Union (see annex 25), and I would like to make the following remarks in our
national capacity.
Serbia strongly supports the activities aimed at preventing all forms of
violence, including sexual violence in armed conflicts. Regular consideration of this
issue within the United Nations with the full cooperation of all relevant actors, such
as States, international organizations and civil society, is a prerequisite for wider and
more efficient and effective action.
The first steps in that direction were made with the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). It was followed by a number of other resolutions and Security Council
presidential statements, including resolution 2106 (2013), on the basis of which the
Secretary-General’s reports on this issue are submitted every year. Serbia supports
the efforts of the Security Council, the Secretary-General and other United Nations
mechanisms, as evidenced by co-sponsoring, inter alia, General Assembly resolution
69/293 in 2015, by which 19 June was proclaimed the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Serbia also supported the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019), once again
joining the global efforts aimed at eliminating this grievous type of violence and at
punishing those responsible for the crime. We commend the victim-focused approach
and deem that the response to sexual violence in conflict should prioritize the rights
and needs of victims.
However, achieving the common goal at the global level must be supported by
appropriate measures at the national level. The measures should be twofold, focused
on the establishment of an efficient system of prevention and on the punishment
of perpetrators.
Serbia is a State party to the Rome Statute and supports the efforts of the
International Criminal Court to prosecute crimes of sexual violence in conflict.
It also fully cooperated with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in prosecuting crimes of sexual violence committed during conflicts in
the territory of former Yugoslavia. The Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor and
the Special Division of the Higher Court for War Crimes are the competent bodies
addressing this issue at the national level.
Yet prevention measures are not always sufficient. It is therefore necessary to
establish a system that ensures that perpetrators of sexual violence are brought to
justice. However, victims are often not prepared to report incidents of sexual violence
due primarily to stigmatization. The number of victims is therefore established
subsequently by way of differing methodologies. Developing a uniform methodology
to ascertain and document the number of victims of sexual violence, to be used
by Governments, international governmental and non-governmental organizations,
expert circles and individuals, would help to create a uniform approach to assessing
the number of victims of sexual violence in conflict.
Encouraging victims of sexual violence to report the crime is the first step
in detecting and punishing perpetrators and, consequently, in preventing the crime.
104/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Serbia is advocating for the establishment of a system of prevention through the
inclusion of the gender dimension in national security forces and international
peacekeeping missions.
The protection of witnesses, in general, and the protection of aggrieved
parties, in particular, are of paramount importance to the process of establishing
responsibility and punishing the perpetrators. It should be borne in mind that, in
the absence of written documents, the main source of evidence in proceedings
such as these is eyewitness testimony. Serbia’s experience in that regard indicates
that, following the establishment of witness protection measures, victims of sexual
violence in armed conflicts in the former Yugoslavia have been encouraged to
testify. All along, the Victim and Witness Assistance and Support Service has been
instrumental in encouraging and assisting the aggrieved parties.
The manipulation of numbers, however, does not contribute to the pursuit
of justice, often leads to politicization, has a negative impact on the reconciliation
process in post-conflict societies and, more often than not, brings no justice to,
and does not indemnify, individual victims. Particularly problematic are attempts to
establish a hierarchy of victims on an ethnic, religious, gender or some other basis.
The number of victims of sexual violence in conflict diminishes neither the terrible
effect of this type of violence on each individual victim nor the responsibility of
States to punish the perpetrators and make it possible for victims to access justice.
Serbia’s criminal justice protects victims of sexual violence by way of
prosecuting two criminal offences: crimes against the civilian population and the
organization of a group and incitement to the perpetration of genocide and war crimes.
The Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor was also established, and it has processed
multiple cases related to sexual violence in armed conflicts. Serbia has therefore
ensured, institutionally and in practical terms, the highest level of processing of
these crimes and the protection of victims of sexual violence. It is exceptionally
important that this be done by all parties currently participating, or that previously
participated, in armed conflicts, because it is never too late to bring perpetrators to
justice and ensure proper punishment. This is exactly what is needed for the process
of genuine reconciliation among one-time belligerents.
I would like to reaffirm Serbia’s strong commitment and continued support to
tackling the issue of sexual violence in conflicts.

20-09874105/124

S/2020/727

Annex 51
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Slovakia to the
United Nations, Michal Mlynár
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on organizing this important
open debate and on bringing this topic back to the forefront of the discussions of the
Security Council.
Under international humanitarian law, women and men, civilians and
combatants alike, have equal protection. Nearly 20 years ago, resolution 1325 (2000)
identified protection from gender-based violence as a key pillar for peace. Through
the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), conflict-related sexual violence was declared
a war crime and a crime against humanity.
Despite the ever-increasing international recognition of the serious impact
that conflict and post-conflict sexual violence poses to international security and
the maintenance of peace, concrete initiatives to prevent or mitigate these incidents
are still not yielding the desired outcome. Similarly, steps to end impunity and
dismantle the enabling environment allowing such violent acts to take place are
falling short. It is concerning that, even with the adoption of resolutions, rulings in
international criminal courts and existing international frameworks, there is still no
robust approach to the elimination of sexual violence. It continues to be used as a
tactic of war to terrorize populations, destroy the social fabric of communities and
even amount to a business practice through trafficking and sex slavery.
Slovakia would like to emphasize the important role of the full and meaningful
participation of women in conflict prevention, resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction activities. Their leadership and representation in decision-making
processes at the national, regional and international levels are required in order to
recognize and address gender-specific aspects of conflicts and mitigate their adverse
impacts on the communities.
Furthermore, we stress that women are key pillars in peacebuilding for the
effective and long-term sustainability of activities within communities, as well as
in all activities for the maintenance and promotion of peace and security. Greater
participation of women in peacekeeping missions is an area where we need to
double our ongoing efforts. In order to achieve consistent and substantial results, it
is necessary to also engage dedicated gender specialists in peacekeeping missions,
including gender advisers and women protection advisers.
With the support of the Slovak chairmanship of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2019, the OSCE Mediation Support Team
and Gender Section launched a new toolkit focused on boosting the meaningful
inclusion of women in peace processes. The toolkit assesses the state of women’s
participation in political and settlement processes throughout the OSCE space and
makes recommendations to the OSCE Chair, secretariat and participating States. In
addition, a photography exhibition dedicated to the women and peace agenda was
displayed in Vienna in 2019 to increase awareness.
Last but not least, we must turn our attention to identifying the remedies not
only for the symptoms but, more importantly, for the root causes of this issue. To
understand the full effect of sexual violence in conflict situations, we must first
understand the societal norms and practices that exist outside war. Research shows
that inequalities between men and women increase the likelihood of rape in war.

106/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 52
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Slovenia to the United Nations
We wish to thank the German presidency for organizing this debate and the
invited speakers for their briefings and testimony. Slovenia aligns itself with the
statements submitted on behalf of the European Union (see annex 25) and of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see annex 20). We would like to
make some additional remarks in our national capacity.
Slovenia welcomes the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/487) and
strongly condemns the persistent and widespread occurrence of sexual violence in
conflict. In the past decades, we have achieved a critical paradigm shift whereby
conflict-related sexual violence is no longer considered a side effect of conflict but
is understood as a threat to international peace and security.
Sexual violence in conflict is a tactic of war and a means of repression,
terror and control, used to humiliate and injure survivors, their families and
entire communities. Survivors, not just women and girls but also men and boys,
are traumatized and stigmatized for life. These hideous acts remain in the vivid
recollection of whole communities for generations. A survivor-centred approach
to sexual and gender-based violence is therefore central. Comprehensive support
should be provided to the victims, including access to sexual and reproductive health
and rights, as well as psychosocial and socioeconomic assistance.
Impunity for conflict-related sexual violence has to end. We need to hold
perpetrators accountable in order to provide justice to victims and to prevent these
horrific crimes from happening in the future. It is the responsibility of States to
investigate, prosecute and punish those who commit these crimes. However, ensuring
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence committed by both non-State and
State actors remains a major challenge.
International mechanisms for the investigation and prosecution of such crimes,
including the International Criminal Court, play an important role in that regard. As
a member of the international Justice Impact Group in The Hague, Slovenia supports
the Hague Principles on Sexual Violence in order to enhance the understanding
of what constitutes an act of sexual violence in conflict from the perspective of
its survivors.
Impunity is not an option and should be exempt from amnesty provisions in
the context of conflict resolution and transitional justice processes, as highlighted
by resolutions 1820 (2008) and 2106 (2013). Slovenia joins the call on the Security
Council to fully integrate the issue of conflict-related sexual violence into the work
of its sanctions committees by expanding the designated criteria to sexual violence
in the context of armed conflict.
Slovenia continues to support the response of the International Committee of
the Red Cross to sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo, for which
we pledged €100,000 in 2019 for a period of three years. Furthermore, for the
period of 2020-2022, we have earmarked €400,000 to support the implementation
of two humanitarian projects, selected at the public tender for non-governmental
organization proposals focusing on gender-based violence and raising awareness of
child marriages in Lebanon.
This year, while we mark important milestones for gender equality and
women’s empowerment, we also face the biggest global crisis of the modern
world. By revealing the structural inequalities, the coronavirus disease pandemic
has demonstrated the devastating effects of undelivered promises and unachieved
goals. However, at the same time it has demonstrated the central role and the power
20-09874107/124

S/2020/727

of women’s leadership. We have now been given an opportunity to rebuild more
carefully, and it is our responsibility to seize it. Ending sexual and gender-based
violence and impunity, as well as promoting equality and inclusion, must be building
blocks in our efforts to build a better and more peaceful future for all.

108/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 53
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Sri Lanka to the
United Nations
Sri Lanka warmly congratulates Germany on its assumption of the presidency
for the month of July 2020 and is confident that it will be a successful tenure.
The year 2020 is pivotal for the women and peace and security agenda,
particularly with the commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on this subject, and the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. As such, we
believe that the convening of this important debate is timely.
Women play an important role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and in peacebuilding. Their equal participation and involvement in all efforts for
the maintenance and promotion of peace and security are also essential. Therefore,
Sri Lanka calls for an increase in the role of women in decision-making, not only in
processes related to conflict prevention and resolution, but in all aspects related to
governance at all points.
While recognizing that vital steps have been taken by the global community
towards achieving gender equality and empowering women and girls, it remains
ominous that this segment of society is disproportionately and adversely affected by
armed conflict and remains increasingly targeted. This situation has unfortunately
been exacerbated by the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Having experienced an armed conflict borne out of a decades-long fight
against terrorism, the Government of Sri Lanka fully recognizes the devastating,
multilayered impact of conflict on women and girl children. They were and remain
a vulnerable group of the population during the armed conflict and in the postconflict context. The Government is fully committed to prioritizing the addressing
their grievances, ensuring their protection and mitigating the continued harmful
effects of the prolonged conflict, compounded by periodic natural disasters, through
inclusive processes and proactive measures.
As we are deeply cognizant of their unique and differentiated needs and
vulnerabilities, as well as the invaluable contribution of women to the social and
economic development of the country, measures have been put in place for their
empowerment by integrating gender-related priorities into Government plans and
legal frameworks and gender-sensitive budgeting.
Universal adult franchise was introduced in Sri Lanka in 1931; free education
for both boys and girls and free health care were introduced very early after the
country’s independence in 1948. These positive policies implemented over the years
have resulted in achieving gender parity in education, with 68.5 per cent of university
undergraduates being women. Furthermore, Sri Lanka adopted a Women’s Charter
two years before the Beijing Platform for Action and a national plan of action on
women is in place.
We are of the firm resolve that preventing and addressing sexual violence is
an integral part of achieving Sustainable Development Goal 5 on gender equality and
empowering all women and girls. Sri Lanka maintains a zero-tolerance policy on
sexual abuse and exploitation and has adopted a number of best practices.
As a manifestation of this commitment, Sri Lanka also endorsed the Group
of Eight Declaration on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict in January 2016,
signed the Secretary-General’s voluntary compact on preventing and addressing
sexual exploitation and abuse, contributed $10,000 in August 2017 to the Trust Fund
20-09874109/124

S/2020/727

in Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and joined the SecretaryGeneral’s Circle of Leadership.
Sri Lanka works with UN-Women on several projects related to the
empowerment of women in Sri Lanka. With the support of the Government of Japan
and UN-Women, in September 2019 the Government commenced the second phase of
an ongoing programme for the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, carried out by the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs and focusing on
women’s participation and empowerment in efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts
and in the drafting of the National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security in
accordance with resolution 1325 (2000).
A policy Framework and National Plan of Action to Address Sexual and
Gender-based Violence has been adopted and is being implemented. This plan of
action seeks to address the issue of sexual and gender-based violence against women
through a three-pronged approach of prevention, intervention and policy advocacy.
Nationally, human rights, including provisions of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, have been included into
the training programmes of the security forces and the police, and a Directorate of
Human Rights and Humanitarian Laws has been established for the security forces.
Sri Lanka recognizes that the inclusion of women in peacekeeping missions in
civil, military and police functions allows women and children in the host country to
feel more secure, particularly with reporting any abuse. With regard to peacekeeping
missions, the country deployed its first woman peacekeeper in June 2017. Currently,
there are 10 nursing and technical female officers with the level-2 hospital in South
Sudan, and we stand ready to contribute more with the aim of helping to build a
security sector that is accessible and responsive to all, especially women.
In addition, a vetting procedure has also been put in place in the selection
of members of our armed forces and police to serve as peacekeeping troops.
Predeployment training includes sensitizing both officers and troops on sexual
harassment and abuse; the training manual of the Army and Air Force includes
sensitizing and creating awareness of sexual exploitation and abuse and directives
by the Integrated Training Services of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs have been incorporated into training schedules.
Safeguards that enable victims to make complaints and seek redress are key
components in addressing sexual violence in Sri Lanka. As such, a hotline has been
established for this purpose and legal aid centres throughout the island provide
support to women victims. Six shelters have been established in the country by the
Government to provide them with safety and protection. This is supplemented by
shelters maintained by recognized women’s organizations operating in Sri Lanka.
Counselling is also extended through officers attached to each divisional secretariat.
In addition, the female officers assigned to children and women’s desks at every
police station are given special training on counselling.
As the world endeavours to meet the multifaceted challenges of COVID-19 and
grapples to get back on track to meet the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Sri Lanka reiterates its firm commitment to promoting and supporting the role of
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding, and their
equal and active participation and involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security. Sri Lanka strongly believes that the meaningful,
enhanced participation of women in the international peace and security agenda will
bring effective change and can play an important role in its long-term success.

110/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 54
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
[Original: English and French]
Switzerland would like to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for
organizing this debate, as well as all the briefers for their contributions.
The current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has far-reaching negative
implications for the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence.
Switzerland therefore urges the Security Council and the international community
to immediately implement resolution 2532 (2020). We support the call of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict on all parties
to conflict to cease all forms of sexual and gender-based violence. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s recent report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487)
and reiterate the primary responsibility of Member States to protect all women and
girls, as well as men and boys, against acts of sexual violence.
Let me highlight three issues.
First, conflict-related sexual violence is deeply rooted in gender inequality and
gender-based discrimination. Hence, it constitutes both an early warning sign and
consequence of conflict. It is therefore crucial to empower women and girls, as well
as to engage men and boys, in order to achieve gender equality. While the majority
of survivors of sexual violence are women and girls, men and boys also suffer from
such horrible acts of violence. The stigmatization and exclusion of victims can lead
to an even higher number of such acts going unreported. The contribution of civil
society, including women human rights defenders, in creating mutual trust and
respect remains key to preventing and resolving conflicts.
Secondly, Switzerland advocates for a community-based approach in treating
survivors of sexual violence, including children born of rape. The rights and needs
of survivors, including their sexual and reproductive health and rights, must be at
the centre of every response. Survivors must be treated with dignity and respect.
We emphasize the importance of reintegrating survivors into their communities and
related social structures. That is why Switzerland supports projects that strengthen
solidarity networks and collective healing as conflict-related sexual violence affects
a community as a whole.
Thirdly, Switzerland is concerned about the persisting gaps related to
accountability and justice for conflict-related sexual violence at national and
international levels. While supporting the crucial efforts of the International
Criminal Court and its Prosecutor to hold perpetrators accountable for sexual and
gender-based crimes, Switzerland also engages with national actors to facilitate
access to justice for survivors. Such partnerships empower survivors to become key
stakeholders and agents of change in efforts to prevent and respond to conflictrelated sexual violence. In line with resolution 2467 (2019), Switzerland reiterates
the need for a holistic approach, including legal and non-legal measures, and calls on
the Council to continue to fight impunity and uphold accountability with all means
at its disposal.
This year, we commemorate important milestones, such as the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations. Decisive progress in eliminating the root causes of sexual and genderbased violence is long overdue. The Security Council has a crucial role to play, in
20-09874111/124

S/2020/727

particular with regard to strengthening and monitoring the full implementation of
commitments by all parties to conflict to prevent and address all forms of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations. We therefore urge the Council to
continue its efforts in this sense.

112/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 55
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations, Bashar Ja’afari
[Original: English and Arabic]
My delegation takes note of the concept note addressed to the Permanent
Missions to the United Nations on this topic.
The Syrian Arab Republic affirms its support for all efforts aimed at
combating the phenomenon of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict and
the importance of holding the instigators and perpetrators accountable, and calls
for extreme caution and objectivity in dealing with this serious humanitarian issue
without the politicization that extends the suffering of the victims and hinders its
elimination through international efforts.
Allow me to refer to the efforts made by the Syrian Government to strengthen
the national framework, including the legal framework, to protect women and ensure
their rights and empowerment. For example, Syrian national legislation criminalizes
many acts, such as so-called honour crimes, some types of cybercrime and other acts
of violence against women. There are also competent courts that are responsible for
holding perpetrators of sexual violence accountable in accordance with procedural
rules that ensure proper enforcement, and there are national plans and programmes
to deal with women victims of violence and provide them with the support they need.
With regard to women with disabilities, the national legislative framework
and plans include providing protection for them, promoting their advancement,
ensuring the full enjoyment of their rights and achieving their full integration into
society in a manner commensurate with the obligations of the Syrian Arab Republic
under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. We would also like
to mention that Syrian legislation imposes severe criminal penalties for perpetrators
of sexual assault crimes, in accordance with the Syrian Penal Code promulgated by
Legislative Decree No. 148 of 1949 and its subsequent amendments.
Moreover, we note that it is an obligation of the Syrian Arab Republic to
advance, protect and promote the status and rights of women, together with their
empowerment. In this context, several amendments to Syrian laws were made, the
most recent of which are the amendments to the provisions of the Personal Status
Law (Law 4 of 2019), which establishes the minimum age for marriage; and Law
No. 2 of 2020, which cancels article 548 of the Penal Code, therefore, cancelling the
pardonable or mitigating excuse relevant to honour crimes. Furthermore, a national
interpretation of resolution 1325 (2000) is being prepared in the form of a draft
programmatic plan on the content of the resolution. A study is also under way with
a view to identifying discriminatory laws in Syria to ensure their compatibility with
the Constitution of the Syrian Arab Republic, which guarantees that women enjoy
full citizenship rights, equality and no discrimination in any fields.
The reports of the Secretary-General continue to refuse to acknowledge that
terrorism is the root cause of the long-suffering of Syrian women. They also refuse
to indicate the huge challenges that prolong and deepen such suffering. The policies
of aggression and occupation targeting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic, the unilateral coercive measures imposed on it by several
international parties and the politicization that has stigmatized the humanitarian
aspect in the Syrian Arab Republic are all challenges that have changed the lifestyle
of many Syrian women and led them to experience displacement to escape terrorist
armed groups or exposure to the nascent practices of these groups and their extremist
beliefs, depriving them of fundamental rights.
20-09874113/124

S/2020/727

Furthermore, the Syrian Arab Republic categorically rejects the use by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict of the
phrase “parties to the conflict” in her reports, thereby putting the legal and legitimate
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic — which is upholding its constitutional
duty to protect its people and ensure the safety and territorial integrity of its lands
from the danger of terrorism, in accordance with the provisions of international
law — on an equal footing with terrorist armed groups created, financed, armed and
supported by countries that have employed terrorism as a tool for their war on Syria.
In addition, the Syrian Arab Republic regrets the biased approach of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict towards the situation in my country.
Accordingly, we consider the analysis of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to be flawed on the factual and legal levels and that it does not
reflect her intended mandate, which requires an objective approach to the reality of
the issue.
The Office of the Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence
in Conflict continues to ignore the hundreds of identical letters of the Syrian
Government addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council, which document the crimes and massacres committed by terrorist armed
groups and the so-called Global Coalition to Counter Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant, which has had a profound impact on women and compelled them to live in
harsh conditions, physical and psychological, including exposure to various forms
of violence. On the contrary, the Office of the Special Representative continues to
adopt the contents of the reports of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic and to promote the content of these reports.
In this regard, we reiterate our rejection of the special and periodic reports
and recommendations of the so-called International Commission of Inquiry, owing
to the fact that the Commission has repeatedly proved to be a politicized tool that
lacks the minimum objective and professional criteria. Since its establishment,
the Commission has been a prisoner of the political inclinations of countries that
have engaged in hostile acts against my country, either directly or indirectly, thus
becoming an example of how United Nations mechanisms are used to twist facts and
manipulate legal concepts.
Moreover, this deliberate disregard only covers up the practices of terrorist
organizations and the individuals and entities associated with them, whose crimes
and grave violations have affected tens of thousands of women and children in Syria
and Iraq. In this context, my delegation emphasizes the credibility and relevance
of what we have repeatedly conveyed in many letters and statements on various
occasions, meetings and platforms, by stressing the need to uncover the practices
of terrorist organizations, and for the United Nations to play an effective role in
coordinating international efforts to support the Syrian Government and its allies in
the fight against terrorism.

114/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Annex 56
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations
We would like to thank the German presidency of the Security Council for
convening this important debate and express our appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2020/487). We commend the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Patten, and the work of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on the impact and role of women
in conflict prevention and resolution, and of resolution 1820 (2008), which classified
the use of conflict-related sexual violence as an impediment to the restoration of
international peace and security, we have witnessed important achievements in the
fight against conflict-related sexual violence.
Over the past decade, there have been examples of successful prosecutions of
perpetrators by national and international tribunals, legislative reforms to enhance
protection and ensure access to justice for survivors, and codes of conduct for security
forces on conflict-related sexual violence. Most importantly, a global mindset
that firmly renounces this crime and supports efforts aimed at its elimination has
been formed.
Despite important progress on policy and implementation, however, the
Secretary-General’s most recent report to the Council reveals that we face an
increasingly complex global security environment in which sexual violence remains
a cruel tactic of war, torture, terror and political repression and a brutal tool of
displacement and dehumanization. An integrated and comprehensive approach,
comprising an emphasis on prevention, holding perpetrators accountable and
supporting survivors, is needed in order to effectively address sexual violence
in conflict.
First, we need to tackle the structural root causes that drive and perpetuate this
violence, including gender inequality, which is exacerbated by conflict. Achieving
gender equality, the empowerment of women and girls and the full recognition of
their human rights are the essential steps for prevention and addressing impunity.
This will also help further our agenda on women and peace and security.
Ending violence against women is a part of this effort. The Council of Europe
Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic
Violence, known as the Istanbul Convention, stands out as a landmark document in
this regard. Turkey is committed to fostering the objectives of the Convention and
stands ready to share its experiences in its implementation.
Secondly, we need to make sure that perpetrators of such heinous crimes are
held accountable. Impunity must be put to an end both for perpetrators and those in
the chain of command. Accountability is essential in terms of both a response and
prevention. Ending impunity is a key deterrent to future violence of this nature, and
it is a vital step in helping survivors to repair and rebuild their lives.
This brings us to the third point, which is to provide survivors with both
protection and legal action. Life-saving services, including medical care,
psychological support and legal aid, should be made more available and accessible.
To that end, the primary role of States should be strengthened and complemented
by assistance from relevant United Nations entities, specialized agencies and
peacekeeping missions.
As the conflict in Syria enters its tenth year, millions of Syrians, particularly
women and girls, continue to live under the threat of sexual violence. The horrific
20-09874115/124

S/2020/727

acts of sexual violence perpetrated by the Syrian regime, especially during
arrest and detention and at checkpoints, have been documented in various United
Nations reports.
As a neighbouring country, which has opened its doors to Syrians fleeing war
and violence in their own country, Turkey now hosts close to 4 million Syrians, of
whom approximately 1.7 million are women. Turkey makes every effort to provide
security and safety to Syrian women and girls who have fled the conflict in Syria.
We attach utmost importance to their empowerment and self-reliance without any
threat of sexual and gender-based violence.
Since 2014, psychological and social support has been provided to a large
number of refugees to ensure their adaptation to our country and access to services.
In addition to benefiting from the same health-care services provided to Turkish
citizens, necessary legal steps are taken in order to protect refugee women who
are victims of violence. All women seeking asylum in Turkey who are identified
as victims of violence have the right to stay in women’s shelters. They also receive
assistance from violence prevention and monitoring centres.
People of Iraq from different ethnic and religious backgrounds — including
Shias, Sunnis, Yazidis, Turkmen, Kurds, Arabs and Christians — faced the most
evil practices of conflict-related sexual violence during the invasion by the Da’esh
terrorist organization. It is also worth noting that a significant number of Yazidis
who fled to northern Iraq because of Da’esh atrocities still cannot return to their
homeland in Sinjar owing to the oppressive policies and practices of the terrorist
organization Kurdistan Workers Party.
Given the fact that accountability is one of the key factors in preventing
conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s call on Iraqi authorities to prosecute the Da’esh affiliates for crimes related
to sexual violence. We are ready to assist the Iraqi Government in addressing the
needs of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.
We note the efforts and the difficulties in monitoring and reporting cases of
conflict-related sexual violence in Libya. We are also compelled to underline that, in
its current form, the Libya section of the report is far from complete without reflecting
the conflict-related sexual violence by Haftar’s militia. The flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law by Haftar’s militia have once again become evident
by the mass graves discovered in Tarhunah, as well as the improvised explosive
devices and mines trapped to kill innocent civilians in Tripoli and other areas. The
conflict-related sexual violence by Haftar’s militia also deserves further attention.
Furthermore, we would like to recall that the military offensive on Tripoli
mentioned in the report was launched against the United Nations-recognized
Government of National Accord, Libya’s sole internationally recognized, legitimate
Government, by rebels, insurgents and mercenaries affiliated with warlord Haftar.
The findings of the Secretary-General’s report on the situation of the
Rohingya in Myanmar are once again distressing. The report not only reminds us of
the widespread and systematic brutal attacks, including sexual violence perpetrated
against the Rohingya community, especially in 2017, but also indicates the ongoing
vulnerability of displaced Rohingya women and girls who are exposed to high
risks of trafficking-related sexual violence, as well as detention and forced labour
in camps.
We expect the joint communiqué to prevent and address conflict-related sexual
violence, signed in 2018 by the Government of Myanmar and the United Nations, to
be fully implemented. It is also of great importance that the Government of Myanmar
116/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

address the root causes of the problem in Rakhine state and create the necessary
conditions for peaceful coexistence and a safe return of refugees. We welcome the
provisional measures announced on 23 January 2020 by the International Court of
Justice and expect full compliance with them.
Turkey will continue to support Myanmar as it makes further progress to end
human rights violations, including sexual violence.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Turkey’s strong commitment and continued
support to international, regional and national efforts to prevent and respond to the
consequences of sexual violence in conflict.

20-09874117/124

S/2020/727

Annex 57

Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations, Sergiy Kyslytsya
Let me express my appreciation to the German presidency for holding this
open debate on women and peace and security, focused on sexual violence in
conflict. I would also like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict Pramila
Patten and the representatives of civil society for their presentations.
Ukraine reiterates its full support for the mandate and work of the United
Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
reaffirm our commitment to the zero-tolerance policy regarding all forms of sexual
violence and stand in solidarity with victims and survivors of such crimes.
It is worth mentioning that Ukraine aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union (see annex 25).
This year provides a fitting opportunity to assess the effectiveness of two
decades of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action.
As an elected member of the Security Council, Ukraine co-sponsored the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) in 2000, reaffirming the important role of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations, peacebuilding,
peacekeeping, humanitarian response and post-conflict reconstruction.
Unfortunately, in recent years the global security environment has only
worsened, and this year it was further undermined by the coronavirus disease
pandemic. After years of joint efforts, the international community has not tackled
the main drivers of this violence.
The reality of sexual violence against women and men and girls and boys
continues to constitute a part of each and every armed conflict around the globe.
Sexual violence has become a part of warfare tactics, torture, terrorism, interrogations,
repressions and even control of some territories. We are particularly concerned that
sexual violence and related human trafficking could be used by terrorist groups to
generate revenue and lead to abductions of human beings, especially women and
girls, for sale.
The report (S/2020/487) before us clearly indicates that focusing on
19 countries only points out the difficulties related to the underreporting of incidents
resulting from the intimidation and stigmatization of survivors, as well as the limited
capacities of United Nations staff.
At the same time, it is imperative to follow up on General Assembly resolutions
that include provisions directly dedicated to the situation of human rights in conflicts
and in the occupied territories. We expect that future Secretary-General reports on
the topic will be more comprehensive and reflect situations in major conflict-affected
zones. In this connection, we fully support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to continue to include sexual violence as a stand-alone designation criterion for
sanctions and targeted measures.
Since the establishment of the mandate of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, more than
10 years ago, the Security Council has adopted a number of resolutions focused, first
and foremost, on the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence. Nevertheless,
the list of perpetrators presented in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General
has remained almost unchanged for years. This is a result of poor compliance with
relevant obligations and commitments not only by non-State actors, but also by States.

118/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

We cannot tolerate such behaviour and should send a clear message to
those who commit these grave violations under international law that statements
about the inevitability of accountability and justice will not remain merely solemn
declarations, but will be translated into concrete, immediate actions. Perpetrators of
sexual violence must, regardless of their affiliation or rank, be held to account.
It is therefore imperative that the international community, and the Security
Council in particular, continue to look for the most effective ways to enhance the
implementation of the existing resolutions on the women and peace and security
agenda in order to tackle and to prevent atrocities from being committed.
In that light, Ukraine, as the country that pioneered the issue of prevention
and initiated the relevant process in the Human Rights Council, fully supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendations regarding the strengthening of prevention
efforts by demanding that all State and non-State actors make formal commitments
to including the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence in security sector
reform. Nonetheless, the path towards the prevention of all forms of gender-based
violence lies in the genuine empowerment of women, ensuring gender equality in all
spheres of life.
Ukraine attaches great importance to the equal and full participation of women
in all activities in areas of national security, conflict prevention and resolution,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
With the aim of implementing the women and peace and security agenda at
the national level, Ukraine, while facing foreign military aggression, was among the
first countries to adopt a comprehensive national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) for 2016-2020. The national action plan is aimed, inter alia,
at achieving the greater participation of women in decision-making, in particular
in the areas of national security and defence and peacemaking, and at ensuring the
protection of all victims of violence, including the prevention of and response to
conflicts and gender-based violence.
The plan also includes a recommendation on the national strategy for the
prevention and response to the conflict-related sexual violence in Ukraine, in
particular relating to education and training programmes for the security sector on
aspects of prevention, protection and response, along with psychological assistance
and rehabilitation programmes for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, as
well as an information campaign on the prevention of sexual violence.
The active integration of gender equality into the activities of the armed
forces of Ukraine fostered changes to the list of military specialties and positions
open to women candidates. Currently, the Government of Ukraine, in cooperation
with international and non-governmental organizations, is developing a new national
action plan for the period 2021-2025, which is expected to be adopted by the end of
this year. The Government of Ukraine has enhanced its efforts to ensure gender
equality and women’s empowerment in all spheres of public life, as well as the
necessary support for, and reintegration of, women victims who have suffered sexual
violence as the result of the ongoing foreign aggression.
In the light of that I have mentioned, I must once again reiterate our regret at
the omission of a reference to the Russian-Ukrainian armed conflict and its victims
in the Secretary-General’s latest thematic report.
In conclusion, I would like to report that, in May, Ukraine joined the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security and will continue its efforts aimed at
promoting awareness of the women and peace and security agenda and strengthening
its implementation within the United Nations, in particular advancing women’s
rights and protecting them from sexual and gender-based violence.
20-09874119/124

S/2020/727

Annex 58
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations, Lana Nusseibeh
I would like thank Minister Maas and Germany for convening this meeting.
I also thank Special Representative Pramila Patten and Special Envoy of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Angelina Jolie for highlighting many
important points today.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action. Despite some progress, sexual violence, including rape,
continues to be widely used as a tactic of war in conflict situations, with devastating
consequences both for individuals and their families and for the broader sustainability
of peace and economic recovery. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has also
exacerbated sexual and gender-based violence, which underlines the need for the
international community to increase its efforts to combat conflict-related sexual
violence in its response to the pandemic. My country has supported the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic, which
would reduce conflict-related sexual violence and enable the delivery of services
for victims.
Our region is still recovering from the horrors of Da’esh and the aftermath
of the pain and suffering inflicted upon the people of Syria and Iraq. We must not
forget the women and children who were forced into sexual slavery and tortured
at the hands of terrorists and extremists. It is unacceptable that to this day the
perpetrators have not been brought to justice to answer for their crimes. As Member
States, we have a responsibility to ensure that perpetrators of sexual violence are
held accountable and are brought to justice.
Last year, the Council adopted resolution 2467 (2019), which strengthens
justice and accountability and calls for a survivor-centred approach to the prevention
of, and response to, conflict-related sexual violence. I would like to take this
opportunity to share the efforts of the United Arab Emirates towards this outcome.
The United Arab Emirates has recognized the plight of Yazidi women and
has worked with Nadia’s initiative to ensure that the community of Sinjar recovers
from conflict-related sexual violence. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/487)
confirms that more than 1,000 cases of conflict-related sexual violence were
predominantly against Yazidi women and girls. Nadia’s initiative is a true advocate
for survivors of genocide and sexual violence, and its programmes are communitydriven and survivor-centric. The United Arab Emirates has funded reconstruction
efforts and donated over $2 million to provide comprehensive potable water,
sanitation and hygiene projects for more than 60,000 Yazidis living in six villages
in Sinjar. It is vital that survivors of sexual violence have a chance to start afresh in
their homeland.
Last year, the United Arab Emirates also co-hosted the Ending Sexual and
Gender-Based Violence in Humanitarian Crises conference with Norway, the
United Nations and other partners, including a $10 million pledge to fund a range of
anti-sexual and gender-based violence entities. Similarly, we made one of the largestever humanitarian contributions, of $25 million, to the United Nations Population
Fund in 2019, allowing the agency to continue its work on behalf of women in conflictafflicted communities. The United Arab Emirates has also earmarked its financial
contribution to the United Nations Investigative Team to promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to enhance the
work of the team with respect to the investigation of sexual and gender-based crimes.
120/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

Earlier this year, the second cohort of the United Arab Emirates and UN-Women
joint women, peace and security programme successfully completed its military
and peacekeeping training. The new cohort of graduates included 223 women from
11 countries in Asia, Africa and the Middle East. The programme has managed to
build the capacity of women in our region and beyond. The meaningful participation
of women in the security sector actively protects against and prevents conflictrelated sexual violence and creates an empowering environment for women around
the world.
As part of our panel series with the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace
and Security, we will host a high-level panel examining women’s access to justice
in post-conflict reconstruction in New York on 23 July. The panel will include an
in-depth discussion on improving the implementation of gender-sensitive legislation
and address cultural and structural barriers to women’s access to justice.
Furthermore, the United Arab Emirates takes note of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on conflict-related sexual violence, and we would like to highlight
the following priorities.
First, noting the rise in sexual and gender-based violence during the COVID-19
pandemic, we call on fellow Member States to continue to financially and politically
support the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict to enable it to continue with its critical work of ensuring accountability
for sexual violence crimes.
Secondly, in order to strengthen prevention in the context of security sector
reform, we must support affected countries financially and with technical expertise
to enhance their response to conflict-related sexual violence. We must also increase
the representation of women in national police services, considering in particular
the positive correlation between the percentage of female officers and the reporting
rates for sexual violence-related crimes.
Thirdly, we need to ensure that all our efforts to document and investigate
sexual violence are survivor-centred and well-coordinated and that they adhere to the
principles of safety, confidentiality, informed consent, independence and impartiality.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the commitment of the United Arab Emirates
to addressing sexual violence in conflict situations. We must work together to
enhance compliance measures and dismantle structural barriers in order to achieve
more for survivors and those at risk of sexual and gender-based violence, especially
during these challenging times of the COVID-19 pandemic.

20-09874121/124

S/2020/727

Annex 59
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Uruguay thanks Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening this
timely open debate and aligns itself with the statement submitted by Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see annex 20).
Sexual violence in conflict is one of the most serious and degrading violations
of human dignity. That form of violence inflicts unspeakable suffering on the victims
and causes long-lasting trauma that ruthlessly destroys the social fabric of entire
communities, threatening their recovery and development prospects.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/487) shows that sexual violence
in conflict unfortunately continues to be used as a tactic of war and terrorism.
Meanwhile, the global crisis of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which is
devastating the planet, is further exacerbating sexual and gender-based violence. It
is therefore essential to move from commitment to compliance and to find solutions
to end that grave scourge.
First, Uruguay believes that the most effective tool to achieve that objective
is prevention. There is no doubt that peace continues to be the best way to combat
sexual violence in conflict. According to the Secretary-General’s report, the ultimate
goal of the agenda against that kind of violence is not a war without violations but
a world without wars. The Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire to combat
the COVID-19 pandemic, which was supported a few days ago by resolution 2532
(2020), is a step in that direction.
Another key factor in prevention is establishing an environment that respects
women’s rights, allowing them to participate on an equal footing in political,
economic and social life and to fully contribute to the growth of their societies. The
common denominator of sexual violence is that it finds fertile ground where there
are well-established patterns of structural gender discrimination. States therefore
need to address those underlying causes, which perpetuate violence, and promote the
full realization of human rights.
Uruguay believes that this task requires a sustained effort, both in conflict
situations and in times of peace. In that regard, the Uruguayan Government has
continued to strengthen its legal system and has adopted new laws, including on
combating human trafficking and eradicating violence against women and other
human rights violations, as well as on the care and reparation of victims.
For Uruguay, education, apart being a right in itself, plays a fundamental
role in promoting other women’s rights. Education provides women and girls with
opportunities for their economic, political and social empowerment, and equips
them with better tools for overcoming discrimination and violence. The increasing
number of attacks on schools and universities in different conflict situations is
regrettable. States that have not done so are therefore encouraged to endorse the Safe
Schools Declaration.
Secondly, Governments must adopt effective mechanisms to address the
recovery and reintegration of victims through services and programmes that are not
only limited to health care, but also provide psychosocial care to survivors so that
they can overcome trauma and stigmatization, and empower them to successfully
reintegrate into society. As recognized in resolution 2467 (2019), the focus should
be on the victims. They are not a homogeneous group. It is therefore necessary to
address the specific needs of different groups, such as women and girls, men and
122/124

20-09874

S/2020/727

boys who have been victims of sexual violence, people with disabilities, refugees and
internally displaced persons, ethnic minorities and stigmatized and marginalized
communities, as well as children born of war. Continuing such services must remain
a priority during the current global health crisis, in which the risks of sexual and
gender-based violence are increasing.
Thirdly, accountability is essential to combating impunity for perpetrators
of sexual violence in conflict, deterring and preventing such crimes and providing
redress to victims. COVID-19 has had a negative impact on accountability, limiting
the ability of States to receive complaints and conduct investigations and trials.
Delivering justice is one of the most important duties of States. Efforts must be
made to ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice in these exceptional times.
That can be achieved through the innovative solutions that some States have already
begun to implement, such as the use of tele-hearings with due guarantees of legality
and transparency, the application of remote justice through electronic files, digital
signatures of judges and parties and the use of in-person justice, respecting distances.
In order to deliver justice, Uruguay has reopened its court offices with
in-person hearings. Measures were introduced to mitigate health risks and ensure
social distancing in court buildings, such as more spaced out scheduling, virtual
procedures to reduce the flow of people in offices and summoning witnesses to trials
for shorter periods and sequentially.
When the national legal system fails, international law should apply. The Rome
Statute includes sexual violence in the category of crimes against humanity and war
crimes and recognizes the possibility that it may amount to the crime of genocide.
Crimes of that magnitude should not go unpunished. Uruguay therefore encourages
the Security Council to refer such cases to the International Criminal Court.
Fourthly, the Security Council has the primary responsibility for preventing
and combating sexual violence in conflict. Consequently, it must ensure that the
issue is duly considered in the sanctions committees, which should systematically
include the names of perpetrators in their listings. The prevention of sexual violence
should also be included in country-specific resolutions and in the mandates of peace
operations, and gender advisers should be deployed on the ground. Uruguay is
committed to cooperating as far as possible with the Security Council to ensure the
proper functioning of peacekeeping operations. It therefore provides predeployment
training to its troops on protection issues and on the detection of early warning
indicators of conflict-related sexual violence. It has also increased women’s
participation in its contingents, which have excelled in preventing and responding to
sexual violence and human rights violations.
Finally, Uruguay would like to highlight the important role of an actor that
has been closely linked to the origin and development of the women and peace and
security agenda and without which implementation will not be possible — civil
society. At a time when COVID-19 is affecting the already restricted space for
action by women human rights defenders and peacebuilders, they often continue
to be victims of crimes against them. A gender component is clearly identified
in a significant number of attacks against them, resulting in threats and attacks,
including rape and sexual violence. The authorities have an obligation to prevent
such attacks, effectively investigate complaints, punish the perpetrators and refrain
from imposing excessive restrictions that hinder the work of women human rights
defenders and peacebuilders. Creating an adequate environment for their work,
implementing special mechanisms and protocols for protection and the prevention
of crimes against them, and establishing specialized offices and personnel to
investigate and process complaints are measures that States can adopt to legitimize
the work they do.
20-09874123/124

S/2020/727

At a time when human rights are being constrained, the work of those activists
is more necessary than ever in order to implement public health measures. Uruguay
would therefore like to conclude by acknowledging the selfless work that they do
with courage and dedication in the most difficult and risky environments, devoting
their lives to building a more equitable foundation for the future and defending
victims of sexual violence and the rights of the most oppressed and vulnerable in
the world.

124/124

20-09874
