V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

term effects on developing countries, in particular those
that import food.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
43/192.

Report of the Committee on the Development
and Utilization of New and Renewable Sources
of Energy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions concerning new and renewable
sources of energy, in particular resolution 41/ 170 of 5
December 1986,
Stressing that trends in the energy sector do not diminish
the importance of the continued development of new and
renewable sources of energy,
Considering that new and renewable sources of energy
could constitute a significant share of total world energy
supplies, particularly in developing countries,
Noting the continuing need to strengthen the activities of
the United Nations in the field of development and utilization of new and renewable sources of energy,
l. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the
Development and Utilization of New and Renewable
Sources of Energy on its fourth session49 and endorses the
resolutions and decision contained therein;
2. Reaffirms the importance of the Nairobi Programme of Action for the Development and Utilization of
New and Renewable Sources of Energy 50 as the basic
framework for action in that field and calls for its speedy
and full implementation;
3. Urges the States members of the Committee, at its
fifth session, to consider further measures to strengthen
the activities of the United Nations in this field, particularly to enable the Committee to assure full and more effective implementation of the Nairobi Programme of Action;
4. Invites interested States to inform the Committee, at
its fifth session, oftheir ongoing technical and scientific activities and/or evaluations with regard to selected substantive themes, and invites interested States, organizations of
the United Nations system and other interested organizations to convene technical and scientific meetings, related
to the substantive themes, that would contribute to the examination of such themes in depth, and to inform the
Committee, also at its fifth session, of the results of those
meetings;
5. Calls upon the international community to implement effectively the proposals contained in the conclusions and recommendations of the Colloquium of Highlevel Experts on New and Renewable Sources of Energy,
held at Castelgandolfo, Italy, in 1987, as contained in
paragraph 2 of resolution 2 (IV) of 8 April 1988 of the
Committee, 51 which are aimed at giving new ímpetus to
the implementation of the Nairobi Programme of Action,
and requests the Secretary-General to convene an ad hoc
panel of experts to prepare specific recommendations regarding information systems on new and renewable
sources of energy;
49 Officia/ Records of the General Assembly. Forty-third Session.
Suf¡1ement No. 36 (A/43/36).
Report of the United Nations Conference on New and Renewab/e
Sources of Energy, Nairobi, 10-2 I Augusr 1981 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.81.1.24), chap. I, sect. A.
51 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-third Session,
Supplement No. 36 (A/43/36), annex.

145

6. Reiterates the need to pursue actively ways and
means of mobilizing adequate additional financial resources commensurate with the needs of developing countries in the field of new and renewable sources of energy
and emphasizes the need to utilize existing channels fully,
including the United Nations Trust Fund for New and
Renewable Sources of Energy, and urges donor countries
to continue voluntary contributions to that Fund;
7. Reaffirms the importance of increasing inter-agency
co-operation within the United Nations system, as well as
co-ordination of development activities for new and
renewable sources of energy at ali levels.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 1988
43/193.

Development of the energy resources of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, contained in its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, contained in its resolution 3281
(XXIX) of 12 December 1974, its resolution 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation, and the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, contained in the annex to its resolution 35/56 of 5
December 1980,
Recalling also its resolution 40/208 of 17 December
1985 on the development of the energy resources of developing countries,
Reaffirming the importance of the development of the
energy resources of developing countries and the need for
measures by the international community to assist and
support the efforts of the developing countries, in particular the energy-deficient among them, to develop their energy resources, in order to meet their needs through cooperation, assistance and investment in the field of
conventional and of new and renewable sources of energy,
consistent with their national plans and priorities,
l. Reaffirms its resolution 40/208 and calls for the effective implementation of ali its provisions;
2. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
energy exploration and development trends in developing
countries;' 2
3. Notes with concern that these trends have been on
the decline in recent years, and therefore requests the Secretary-General to outline a programme of action aimed at
the acceleration ofthe exploration and development ofthe
energy resources of developing countries;
4. Welcomes the convening of symposia and other
similar undertakings called for in resolution 40/208 and
calls upon interested Member States, in co-operation with
the appropriate organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system, to continue to explore ways and
means to support the efforts of developing countries in the
exploration and development of their energy resources;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to undertake appropriate studies and analyses of trends in energy exploration and development of energy resources of
developing countries, taking into account the activities of
relevant organizations of the United Nations system in
52 A/43/476 and Corr. 1
