A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/82
11 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 69
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/49/706)]
49/82.

Implementation of the Declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
contained in its resolution 2832 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, and recalling
also its resolution 48/82 of 16 December 1993 and other relevant resolutions,
Recalling also the report of the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland
States of the Indian Ocean held in July 1979, 1/
Noting that the emerging international climate of confidence, trust and
cooperation has been further enhanced by significant new developments in the
Indian Ocean region, including the establishment of the democratic, non-racial
Government of South Africa, as well as encouraging developments in the Middle
East,
Welcoming these positive developments, which have been reflected in the
work of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean as providing favourable
opportunities to pursue global and regional cooperation in the Indian Ocean
region,
Having considered new alternative approaches in the Ad Hoc Committee
with a view to reaching early agreement to give new impetus to the process of

1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session,
Supplement No. 45 and corrigendum (A/34/45 and Corr.1).
95-76081
/...

A/RES/49/82
Page 2

strengthening cooperation and ensuring peace, security and stability in the
Indian Ocean region,
Considering that confidence-building measures at different regional
levels, building incrementally on cooperation among various regional and other
parties, as appropriate, on specific issues, have made an important
contribution to the attainment of the goals of peace, security and stability
in the Indian Ocean region and that they should be pursued further,
Emphasizing the need for the permanent members of the Security Council
and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean to cooperate with and
participate in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee, particularly at a time when
the Committee is actively engaged in the task of developing new alternative
approaches,
1.
Ocean; 2/

Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian

2.
Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to continue its elaboration of new
alternative approaches, including those discussed during the session held in
1994, with a view to giving new impetus to the process of strengthening
cooperation and ensuring peace, security and stability in the Indian Ocean
region;
3.
Notes that the entry into force in November 1994 of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 3/ would enhance prospects for
mutually accommodative measures of cooperation on a regional as well as global
basis, including the freedom of the high seas, in conformity with the
Convention;
4.
Reiterates its conviction that the participation of all permanent
members of the Security Council as well as major maritime users in the work of
the Ad Hoc Committee is important and would greatly facilitate development of
a mutually beneficial dialogue to advance peace, security and stability in the
Indian Ocean region;
5.
Requests the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee to apprise the
Governments of the permanent members of the Security Council concerned and the
major maritime users of the progress of work in the Committee, and to consult
with them in order to encourage their renewed participation and cooperation in
the work of the Committee;
6.
Recalls the general recognition of the need to pursue both global
and regional efforts in a complementary way, bearing in mind that the States
of the region could provide their own specific constructive contribution to
the strengthening of peace, security, stability and cooperation in the Indian
Ocean region;

2/

Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 29 (A/49/29).

3/
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3), document
A/CONF.62/122.
/...

A/RES/49/82
Page 3

7.
Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to hold a session during 1995, of a
duration of not more than five working days;
8.
Also requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit to the General
Assembly at its fiftieth session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render all necessary
assistance to the Ad Hoc Committee, including the provision of summary
records;
10.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a Zone of Peace".
90th plenary meeting
15 December 1994
