United Nations

A/RES/55/200

General Assembly

Distr.: General
5 February 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 95 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/55/582/Add.1)]

55/200. Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme on its sixth special session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, by which it
decided to establish the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme,
Recalling also its resolutions 54/216 of 22 December 1999 on the report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its twentieth
session and 53/242 of 28 July 1999 on the report of the Secretary-General on
environment and human settlements,
Recalling further the Nairobi Declaration on the Role and Mandate of the
United Nations Environment Programme, adopted by the Governing Council of the
Programme at its nineteenth session, 1
Underlining the fact that the forthcoming ten-year review of progress achieved
in the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development will provide the international community with a
unique opportunity to take action to implement its commitments and to strengthen
the international cooperation urgently required to address the challenges of
sustainable development in the twenty-first century,
Reaffirming the role of the United Nations Environment Programme in the
preparations for the ten-year review of progress achieved in the implementation of
the outcome of the Conference, as reflected in the decisions taken by the
Commission on Sustainable Development at its eighth session, 2
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme on its sixth special session, 3 takes note
of the decisions contained therein as well as the consultations among member States
in preparation for the twenty-first session, and, in this regard, also takes note of the
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/52/25), annex,
decision 19/1, annex.
2
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 9 (E/2000/29).
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/55/25).

00 61006

A/RES/55/200

ongoing consultations contributing to the further elaboration and implementation of
the water policy and strategy of the Programme;
2.
Welcomes the convening of the First Global Ministerial Environment
Forum, and, in this regard, expresses its deep appreciation to the Government of
Sweden for the generous manner in which it hosted and provided facilities for the
Forum, and takes note with appreciation of the Malmö Ministerial Declaration 4 as
one of the contributions to the Millennium Summit and to the preparations for the
ten-year review of progress achieved in the implementation of the outcome of the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development;
3.
Stresses the importance of the section of the United Nations Millennium
Declaration on protecting our common environment, 5 in which heads of State and
Government reaffirmed the principles of sustainable development as set out in
Agenda 21, 6 and in particular resolved to adopt a new ethic of conservation and
stewardship in all our environmental actions;
4.
Welcomes the decision 7 of the Governing Council on the contribution of
the United Nations Environment Programme to the implementation of Agenda 21
and the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21; 8
5.
Stresses that the United Nations Environment Programme, as the
principal body in the field of the environment within the United Nations system,
should continue to play an important role in the implementation of Agenda 21 and in
the preparations for the ten-year review of progress achieved in the implementation
of the outcome of the Conference;
6.
Underlines the need for sufficient financial resources, on a stable and
predictable basis, to ensure the full implementation of the mandate of the
Programme, in particular with a view to ensuring its strong involvement in the
preparatory process for the ten-year review of progress achieved in the
implementation of the outcome of the Conference at its various levels, and in the
implementation of the outcome of the review;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary resources from
the regular budget of the United Nations to the United Nations Environment
Programme for the biennium 2002-2003, in accordance with current budgetary
practices, and to consider other ways to support the strengthening of the Programme
in view of the ten-year review of progress achieved in the implementation of the
outcome of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.
87th plenary meeting
20 December 2000

4

Ibid., annex I, decision SS.VI/1, annex.
See resolution 55/2.
6
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
7
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/55/25), annex I,
decision SS.VI/3.
8
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
5

2
