UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
T?VENTY-

COUNCIL
RECORDS

FIFTH

1532

YEAR

nd

MEETING:

NEV

12 MARCH 1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l532)

I. . , . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . , .. .. I I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . , . , , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Dahomey, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the Ivory
Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, the United Arab Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682) . , . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SIPV -1532

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a. reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Ofjkial Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-SECOND

Held in New York on Thursday,
President:

Mr. Joaquin VALLEJO
(Colombia).

ARBELAEZ

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l532)
Adoption

2.

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 3 March 1970from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of &-eat Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to
the President of the Security Council by the
representatives
of Algeria,
Botswana,
Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic
Republic of), Dahomey, Equatorial Guinea,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the Ivory
Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco,
Niger, Nigeria, the People’s
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Arab
Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682).

of the agenda.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the decision previously taken by
the Council I propose now to invite the representatives
of Algeria, Senegal and Pakistan to take places at the
Council table.
At the invitatiorz of the President, Mr. N. Harbi
(Algeria), Mr. I. Boye (Senegal) and Mr. S. A. Karim
(Pakistan) took places at the Security Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation porn Spanish):
I wish to inform the Council that I have just received
a communication from the representative of Yugoslavia
[S/9697] in which he asks to be invited to participate
in this debate without the right to vote. If there are
no objections, and with the consent of the Council,
I propose to invite that representative to take a place
at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. L. Mojsov
(Yugoslavia) took a place at the Security Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation j?om Spanish):
The Security Council will now continue the consideration of the question on its agenda. Before calling on
the first speaker on the list, I should like to draw the
attention of members of the Council to the draft resolution co-sponsored by Burundi, Nepal, Sierra Leone,
Syria and Zambia, which has been circulated as document S/9696.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

12 March 1970, at 3 p.m.
tives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, the
Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia,
Uganda, the United Arab Rep>blic, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/9682)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

1.

MEETING

was adopted.

Question concerning the situation in
Southern Rhodesia
Letter dated 3 March 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9675);
Letter dated 6 March 1970 addressed to the President of the Security Council by the representa-

4. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Russian):
Mr. President, before
beginning the statement by the Soviet delegation on
the question under discussion, I should like to say how
glad we are that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia-a country which is closer than all ‘the other
States of Africa to the country in which the situation
(translated

1

from

we are now discussing has arisen-is taking part in
our meetings, and I also want to express our satisfaction at the fact that a large number of representatives
of other countries have expressed the wish to take
part in the discussion of this question, which is important not only for Africa but for the whole world. I
should also like to express our regret that, apparently
for some unsurmountable reasons, the ministers of two
African States who, according to earlier information,
were intending to take part in the discussion of this
question in the Council, are not present at the meeting.

They are not maintaining any economic, political or
other relations or ties with the Southern Rhodesian
racists. The Soviet Union is one of the States which
are complying fully with these decisions of the Council
and implementing them strictly, believing that they are
designed to help liberate the African people of Zimbabwe from colonialist and racist oppression.
10. However, the actual course of events in Southern
Rhodesia shows that these decisions of the Security
Council have not led to positive results-they
have
not led to the liberation of the Zimbabwe people from
the murderous tyranny of the racist rCgime. In fact,
as the representatives of the African countries have
already pointed out in their statements, sanctions have
failed. They have not stopped the Southern Rhodesian
racists, and have not thwarted their criminal plans and
policy. On the contrary, these plans are gradually being
put into effect. Last year, the illegal Salisbury rCgime
adopted a racist “constitution”.
Now this rkgime has
declared Southern Rhodesia a “republic”.
In other
words, what has happened is that the power of the
racists has been consolidated and strengthened and
another Fascist and racist rCgime has been established
in southern Africa alongside the rCgime of the same
kind in South Africa, An inhuman system of racial
oppression has been set up in the image and likeness
of the systems already existing in southern Africa.

5. I cannot refrain from observing, either, that the
problem which the Security Council is discussing is
in the full sense of the word a pan-African problem.
This is confirmed by two circumstances. First, the
Organization of African Unity specially authorized the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia and two othei
ministers to bring the question of Southern Rhodesia
before the Security Council as an important and urgent
matter directly related to the situation in Africa and
to peace in Africa. Secondly, this question is being
discussed at the request of about forty African States.
These two facts indicate-and
make it quite clear to
the Security Council-that
the problem under discussion is in the full sense of the word a pan-African problem and that all African peoples and States are
interested in its solution.
6. As you are aware, this is not the first time that
the Security Council is considering the question of the
situation in Southern Rhodesia-a
situation which is
becoming increasingly explosive with the consolidation
in this African country of the illegal anti-African racist
and Fascist rigime, which has enslaved the Zimbabwe
people-a
people of four million-and
is creating a
threat to the other peoples of Africa.

11. The Security Council has already stated in its
resolutions that the situation in Southern Rhodesia constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
The General Assembly, for its part, has with full justification described the whole policy of the racist rCgime
in that country as a crime against humanity. The latest
events show that the situation in Southern Rhodesia
is sharply deteriorating and that the threat to peace,
far from diminishing, is in fact increasing.

7. It cannot be said that the Security Council has
not taken any measures against this rCgime. On 16
December 1966 the Council in its resolution 232 (1966)
instituted partial economic sanctions covering fifteen
main commodity groups in which trade with Southern
Rhodesia was prohibited. On 29 May 1968, the Councii
adopted its tie&known resolution 253 (1968), which
provided for considerably more extensive economic
sanctions and otherboycott measures. These decisions
of the Council were taken within the framework of
Chapter VII, Article 41, of the United Nations Charter;
and, under the terms of Article 25 of the Charter, they
are mandatory for all Member States.

12. The Soviet delegation has listened with close
attention to the statements made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zambia and the representatives of
certain other African countries, who know the situation
in Southern Rhodesia better than many of us do. They
have all expressed justified and legitimate alarm concerning the fate of the Zimbabwe people and the fate
of peace in Africa and of international peace.
13. The position of the Soviet Union on this question
has recently been expressed in a special statement by
the official agency TASS. This statement has been
issued today, 12 March 1970, as a Security Council
document [S/9700]. The delegation of the USSR would
like to make some comments on the situation which
has arisen and on the measures which the Security
Council should take,

8. The purpose of these measures was to pIace the
racist and Fascist r&gime of Southern Rhodesia in a
‘position in which it would be unable any longer to
remain in power, and its elimination would clear the
way for the Iiberation of the African people of Zimbabwe, for the establishment by that people of a truly
independent State and for the removal of the threat
posed by the racists in Southern Rhodesia to the security of the neighbouring States of Africa.

14. What, in fact, is happening’? How is it that a situation has arisen in which the Security Council is taking
decisions whose effective implementation
would help
to liquidate the racist rCgime of foreign oppressors in
Southern Rhodesia; but the result is quite the opposite?
In fact, theracistrkgime
in Salisbury continues to exist,
and is moreover stabilizing and consolidating itself.

9. It is well-known that many States, guided by these
legitimate objectives, are complying strictly with the
Security Council decisions on Southern Rhodesia.
2

15. The fact is that a number of influential
States-and,
we must say frankly here, nearly all of
them are members of one and the same NATO military
bloc-are
protecting the racist r6gime in Southern
Rhodesia. Some of them, in spite of the decisions of
the Security Council, are giving it open support. To
mention these States by their names, they are first
of all, the Republic of South Africa, Portugal, the
United States of America, the Federal Republic of Germanv. some other States which are allied to them and,
final& and above all, the State which bears the main
and direct responsibility for the emergence of the racist
regime in Southern Rhodesia and for its existence until
now--the United Kingdom.

in Southern Rhodesia are continuing to expand, in spite
of all the decisions taken by the United Nations. For
example, in paragraph 68 of this document it is stated
that in the first nine months of 1969 mining companies
of Western countries members of the same NATO military bloc received forty-one exclusive prospecting concessions in Southern Rhodesia. The concessions
granted so far cover an area of more than 6,000 square
miles, of which 3,271 square miles in the territory of
Southern Rhodesia were granted in 1969-in other
words, quite recently. The imperialist monopolies
which have thus quite recently-since the introduction
of sanctions by the Security Council-received
concessions in Southern Rhodesia include United States,
United Kingdom and Netherlands companies, and
companies based in other countries dominated by
United Kingdom and United States capital although
they are formally registered in South Africa.

16. The roles played by these States in emasculating
the Security Council resolutions on sanctions and nullifying their significance differ in form, but are identical
in their essence and effects. South Africa and Portugal
are openly disregarding the Council’s decisions and
are continuing
to develop extensive trade, transport,
military and all other kinds of relations with Southern
Rhodesia.
The United Kingdom, and also the Federal
Republic
of’Germany,
the United States of America
and certain other States, are in their statements supporting the Security Council’s decisions on sanctions,
but in reality they are conducting large-scale trade and
developing
economic relations with the Republic of
South Africa and Portugal and through them-in
fact
-with
Southern Rhodesia itself.

19. This is the second and very important means of
getting round sanctions. In the light of these facts and
the documentary data, we are bound to agree with
the view expressed by the New Uork Wall Street
Journal, which is very well informed on economic and
financial matters. In September 1969 this newspaper
contained the following statement on the question of
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia: “The sanctions
program, which began with all the elements of a spy
novel” --those
were the words used “SPY
novel”-“may
be degenerating into a gumshoe
comedy”. This newspaper knows what it is referring
to and what it is talking about.

17. The representatives of Ihe African countries have
already referred to this aspect of the matter here. Additional evidence is to be found in the statistics produced
by the Internatidnal
Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development.
These statistics show that in eight months of last year
alone, for example, the value of exports from the
United
States of America to the Republic of South
Africa was $18.8 million higher than for the same period
in 1968; exports from the United Kingdom increased
by $17.5 million; West Germany increased its exports
to the country ruled by the South African racists--the
bitterest
enemies of the peoples of Africa-by
$38.4
milEon;
Japan over the same period increased its
exports to that country by $48 million, and so on. It
is scarcely surprising that a considerable proportion
of the goods exported by these countries to South
Africa ultimately
find their way across the unchecked
frontiers
between the Republic of South Africa and
Southern
Rhodesia and reach the markets for which
they were in fact originally intended, the markets of
racist Southern Rhodesia.

20. The failure of economic sanctions has also been
officially recognized by the Security Council committee, which is normally known as the Sanctions Committee, in paragraph 48 of its report of 12 June 1969
to the Council [s/9252).
21. There is yet another aspect of the matter, which
is related not to the economic but to the direct political
support received by the racist rCgime of Salisbury.
What we are referring to here is the maintenance until
recently of consular and other missions in Southern
Rhodesia, which have in fact served as screens for
political and diplomatic relations between a number
of Western countries and the Southern Rhodesian
racists. Until very recently the United States of
America, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, the
Netherlands, Greece and other Western European
countries-not
to mention South Africa and Portugal-have,
as is well known, been maintaining consular missions at Salisbury. There is no doubt that
in this way the Governments of Western countries have
been giving considerable political support to the illegal
rkgime in Southern Rhodesia. Now there has been a
rush, on the part of a number of countries, to close
their consulates in Southern Rhodesia. It would be
a good thing if this rush were followed by a rush to
withdraw investments from Southern Rhodesia and to
terminate economic and other relations of all kinds
with the racist rCgime in that country.

18. Another integral part of the machinery for thwarting sanctions against Southern Rhodesia is the activity
and investments
of imperialist, monopolies. The facts
set forth in a United Nations Secretariat working
paper* prepared for the Committee of Twenty-Four’
show that the activities of these foreign monopolies
1 Document A/AC.109/L.616 of 27 February 1970.
’ Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,

22. The Soviet delegation has drawn attention merely
to some of the manoeuvres which are being adopted
3

by the monopolies
of Western countries and by the
countries concerned themselves, in order to circumvent and thus to thwart sanctions. At the same time,
the representatives
of these countries in the Security
Council are doing everything to prevent the adoption
of full-scale sanctions and the application of sanctions
against the main violators, South Africa and Portugal.
This became very clear last year when, for example,
the United Kingdom,
with the support of the United
States and a number of other allies and friends, prevented the adoption in the Security Council of an AfroAsian draft resoIution’
which would have extended
economic sanctions to South Africa and Portugal as
well.

27. This secret aspect of&e policy is that the United
Kingdom is in fact continuing to provide economic
and political support to the rCgime of the Southern
Rhodesian racists, and to protect this rCgime which
has in fact been created and fostered by United Kingdom ruling circles. The United Kingdom is continuing
to support extensive economic and trade relations with
Southern Rhodesia-if
not directly, then through South
Africa and Portugal. The United Kingdom, together
with its NATO allies, is preventing the adoption by
the Security Council of more effective measures in
regard to the rtgime of the Southern Rhodesian racists;
the United Kingdom is stubbornly refusing to take any
substantive measures itself with a view to removing
measures which would lead to it:
this rBgime-i.e.,
liquidation-as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia pointed out at some length and so persuasively
in his brilliant
statement here yesterday [2531st

23. The present discussion on the question of Southern Rhodesia will show whether these countries members of the Security Council are intending to oppose
the adoption by the Council of effective measures
against the racist rkgime of Salisbury and against the
racist and colonialist rkgimes of Pretoria and Lisbon,
those loyal friends and allies of the Southern Rhodesian
racists and enemies of Africa.

meetin.g].

28. Here in the Security Council, Lord Caradon,
speaking officially on behalf of the United Kingdom
Government,
calls the Southern Rhodesian racists
“rebels”, and he calls their rigime “illegal”.
But it
is well known that in his country there are strict laws
dealing with rebels. Since the beginning of the
nineteenth century in Britain there has been one exceptionally severe law-the Treason Act. This law states
that any act of treachery-any
treason against the British Crown-is punishable by death. The acts of the
rebels in Salisbury, and of the ringleader of the illegal
rebel rkgime in Southern Rhodesia, come entirely
within the scope of the Treason Act. Then, why has
this Act not yet been applied to them by the United
answer
is
Kingdom
Government?
The
obvious-because
Mr. Smith and his henchmen are
committing
treachery and unlawful misdeeds not
against the United Kingdom Government, but against
Africa and against the Zimbabwe people and all African
peoples. This is the crux of the matter. The Rhodesian
racists are not acting against United Kingdom capital
or against United Kingdom imperialist monopolies.
They regard them as their friends, brothers and protectors. This is the crux of the matter, The crux of the
matter lies simply in the realities of imperialism and
neo-colonialism and no wordy rhetoric can hide these
well-known and obvious facts.

24. In this whole system of protection and support
for the Fascist and racist rCgime in Southern Rhodesia,
a special role is being played by the United Kingdom.
United Kingdom policy on the question of Southern
Rhodesia has two facets, one open and one secret.
25. On the one hand, the United Kingdom Government does not deny its special responsibility for the
territory of Southern Rhodesia, which wasfor a century
under British colonial rule. The United Kingdom
Government publicly declares its support for the Security Council resolutions calling for sanctions. Its representatives in the United Nations voted for those
resolutions. They are providing the Security Council
Sanctions Committee
with information
from United
Kingdom sources on cases of suspicious trade transactions which might involve violation of the Security
Council resolutions on sanctions. In the Committee,
they criticize
and even condemn
the Southern
Rhodesian rbgime, calling it racist and illegal. Only
a few days ago, the United Kingdom representative
to the United Nations went so far as to request an
urgent meeting of the Security Council to consider
measures to be taken in connexion with the proclamation of a self-styled
“republic”
by the Southern
Rhodesian racists, and insisted that the Council should
be convened even before the arrival of the ministers
of the African countries.

29. The United Kingdom’s policy in regard to Southern Rhodesia-like
that of Western Germany, the
United States of America and other Western countries-is based primarily on the selfish economic interests of the imperialist monopolies, and also on the military and strategic objectives of these countries in southern Africa. For the sake of these objectives, the fundamental interests of the Zimbabwe people and the
peoples of all Africa are being sacrificed, ignored and
trampled upon. The representative of Zambia and the
representatives of. Algeria, Burundi and Sierra Leone
have drawn attention to this here very eloquently and
persuasively.

26. However, quite frankly, one cannot help having
the impression that all this is, as they say, mere “sound
and fury, signifying nothing”,
This situation can only
he described as a simulation
of seething activity. In
fact, this visible-or,
rather, ostensible-aspect
of
United Kingdom
policy on the question of Southern
Rhodesia is designed to conceal the other hidden and
secret aspect, and to distract the attention of the United
Nations, the Security Council and world public opinion
from it.

30. The imperialist
monopolies and the Southern
Rhodesian racists have a complete community of interests, objectives and plans. Both of them have a deadly

4 Ofi&/
Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourth Year,
Strpplement for April, May and June 1969, docurmt S/927WRev. 1.

4

hatred of the Africans and are trying to continue the
enslavement of the African peoples of southern Africa.
But the United Nations and the Security Council-if
at last all its members are intending to comply strictly
with the Charter-cannot
have any community of interests either with the Southern Rhodesian racists or with
Ihe imperialist
monopolies. The Security Council, as
the main United Nations organ for the maintenance
of peace and the security of peoples, has other objectives and other purposes-to
safeguard peace and
watch over the rights of peoples. The Security Council
has another compass to plot its course-namely,
the
Charter of the United Nations. Guided by these noble
objectives and by this compass, the Security Council
must adopt an effective decision which would at last
make it possible to turn the development of events
in Southern
Rhodesia in another direction-in
the
direction
of liberating
the Zimbabwe people and
eliminating
the threat to peace in Africa and to the
security of independent African States.

35. In full knowledge of its responsibility, and with
a feeling of pride in this policy pursued by the State
it represents, the delegation of the USSR wishes to
state in the Security Council that the Soviet Union
is, as always, ready to co-operate with other States
Members of the United Nations and to back these
words with appropriate deeds.
36. Mr. BHATT (Nepal): On behalf of my delegation
Sir, may I offer our congratulations on your assumption
of the office of President of the Security Council for
this month? My delegation has full confidence in your
leadership. May I also pledge the full co-operation of
my delegation in the discharge of your great responsibility as our President?
37. The decade of the 196Os, and particularly the
period since 1965, has seen the continual deterioration
of the situation in Southern Rhodesia. Not only has
a group of minority settlers seized power illegally in
a professed bid to perpetuate the white supremacy
regime, but, despite decent public opinion everywhere,
despite the efforts of the United Nations, and despite
the wishful thinking of the administering Power that
the policy of non-recognition and sanctions would suffice to bring an end to the rebellion, that illegal regime
has managed not merely to survive but to strengthen
its hold!

31. In the Soviet delegation’s view, the draft resolution proposed by the African and Asian States members
of the Security Council [S/9696], provides the necessary basis for this, The purpose of this ‘draft resolution
is effectively
to isolate the racist and Fascist regime
in Salisbury
politically,
economically
and in every
other way. It provides for measures which would make
it impossible
for the Southern Rhodesian racists to
obtain support from their protectors. This draft resolution also demands that the United Kingdom should
at last fully assume entire responsibility for the territory
Of Southern
Rhodesia, and should stop pursuing a dual
policy-an
open policy and a secret policy-in
regard
to the question of Southern Rhodesia. Africa and the
world demand that the United Kingdom should take
the action it has a duty to take in regard to the racist
rdgime of Southern Rhodesia, which it officially recognizes as rebel and illegal. All freedom-loving and peaceloving States and peoples are expecting it to do this.

38. The recent proclamation of a republic is a further
manifestation of the policy of defiance pursued by the
white supremacy regime. It is, of course, a logical outcome of political developments in recent years, arising,
in the first instance, from the failure of the policies
advocated by the administering Power, and, secondly,
from the general unwillingness of most permanent
members of the Security Council to help initiate all
appropriate measures to correct a situation which has
already been recognized as one representing a threat
to international peace and security.

32. For the foregoing reasons, the Soviet delegation
will support the draft resolution of the African and
Asian States members of the Security Council, and
it appeals to all members of the Council to do likewise.

39. My delegation welcomes the decision of a number
of countries which have economic and other interests
in Southern Rhodesia not to accord any measure of
recognition to the new status assumed by the rebel
regime. That certainly is a step in the direction of isolating that regime. None the less, we in the Security Council are not primarily concerned with the proclamation
of a republic in itself, which is but another illegal act
on the part of an illegal regime.

33.
True to its unwavering Leninist foreign policy
of support for the national liberation struggle of the
peoples, the Soviet Union wholeheartedly supports the
Zimbab’we
people in its just struggle for freedom and
genuine
national independence. This is the Soviet
Union’s
policy of principle.
34.
It was reaffirmed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral
of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid Ilich Brezhnev, at
the twenty-third
Congress of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union, In this report it was stated that the
Communist
Party of the Soviet Union and the Soviet
State “will continue to provide support of every kind
to peoples struggling for their liberation, and will continue to strive for the immediate granting of independence to all colonial countries and peoples”.4

40. Is mere non-recognition and condemnation of the
republic all the progress that we seek? Were the Security Council to remain content with that course of
action-or inaction, if I may say so-it would serve
only as an encouragement to the white supremacy
regime and be another disappointment to the people
of Southern Rhodesia, because it is a policy which
has failed in the past, and there is no likelihood that
it will succeed in the future. The recent history of
Southern Rhodesia is a history of lost opportunities,
of broken promises, of shattered hopes and, above
all, of abdication of power. At this stage in the development of the situation in Southern Rhodesia, the Security Council, as a progressive institution primarily

4 Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: Records of the 7wenty-fhird
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Moscow,
1966, p, 23.

5

responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, should not lose another opportunity,
break another promise, shatter fresh hopes and, above
all, abdicate its power by doing nothing in the matter.

45. Thus we understand and share fully the feelings
expressed in the communication of thirty-nine States
Members
of the United Nations
[S/9682] and
expounded in the Council by the accredited representatives of the Organization for African Unity in behalf
of all African States.

4 1. The Council should rise to the occasion. We urge
the administering
Power, even at this late stage, to
assert its authority by all the means at its disposal,
including the use of force, with a view to putting an
end to the rebellion and conceding immediate independence to Southern Rhodesia on the basis of well-known
democratic principles; and we urge the Security Council-in
particular its permanent members-to
take all
appropriate measures to that end. After all, the problem
of Southern Rhodesia has been fully identified; the
goal has been set. We also know that our efforts so
far have not been successful. What is more important,
we know why those efforts have failed. The scope
and nature of those efforts have been largely limited
and other colonial and race supremacy rkgimes have
actively collaborated with the Smith rCgime to defeat
the purpose of those efforts. In our considered opinion,
it is time that the nature and scope of our efforts were
extended and the defaulting Governments brought to
task. The stakes in the situation are very high. It portends the risk of bitter and prolonged racial warfare
in the whole of southern Africa. It is about time that
the Security Council understood this.

46. At this stage the situation in Southern Rhodesia
requires that the Council-and
here I fully share the
view expressed yesterday by the representative of
Algeria [I531st nzeetingl-make
a thorough study of
all of the facts of the problem. First of all, there should
be a clear and precise reaffirmation of the objectives
of the United Nations; then, an analysis of the reasons
why, far from achieving those objectives, we are today
compelled to note a further act of defiance by the Salisbury regime; and finally, a recommendation
encompassing all the measures necessary to put an end to
this situation.
47. With respect to the objective of the United
Nations, it was, and continues to be, to allow the people
of the Territory to exercise their inalienable right to
decide their own destiny in ‘accordance with their own
wishes. That is the essence, the basic factor, as well
as the final goal. All of the measures that we take
should be subordinated to that objective, of which they
are part and parcel.

42. Mr. KUTJAGA
(PoIand) (interpret&on
from
F!~lzch): May I first of all tell you, Mr, President, how
pleased my delegation is to see you preside over the
Security Council during this month of March, which
we, like you, hope will be a month of peace. We are
only too well aware of your diplomatic experience and
the many qualities that you have already displayed
during the Council’s deliberations this month, and thus
we are convinced that under your guidance the Council
will discharge with distinction the tasks entrusted to
it.

48. It was from that point of view th& I listened
carefully, as I always do, to the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom, Lord &radon
[ibid.]. I noted in particular his appeal for unity of
action in the Council, focused on an appeal for nonrecognition of the unlawful proclamation by Salisbury.
As for my delegation’s view on this point, we agree
that unity in the Council-and particularly in the Council-is necessary. But upon what should we build that
unity? Should we build it on the basis suggested by
Lord Caradon-in
other words, on the least common,
denominator, the appeal for non-recognition
of the
unlawful republic-or
rather on the basis of the only
denominator which is common to the United Nations
and the Zimbabwe people, namely, the right of that
people to freedom aud independence in equality?

43. I should also like to avail myself of this opportunity to express our congratulations
to Ambassador
Terence, who was President of the Council for the
month of January.
44. It is only a bit over a month since we debated
the question of Namibia,
and now a serious colonial
problem is again inscribed on our agenda. The illegal
proclamation
of a so-called republic by the minority
Salisbury rkgime constitutes a new phase in the process
through which an implanted
minority intends finally
to impose on a whole nation, on the world and on
the United Nations a system of colonialism, combined
with racism into a synthesis of complete oppression.
That declaration is designed to strengthen the process
of the evolution, expansion and consolidation of a system which defies the fundampntal concepts that should
govern relations among human beings and nations and
that constitute the foundation
of the Charter. That
declaration
increases the tension and thus increases
the threat to peace and security, a threat emanating
from southern Africa which is spreading throughout
Africa and the world.

49. As far as my delegation is concerned, we have
no difficulty in supporting those who consider that the
only means of settling this problem is to adopt a solution
which would of course include condemnation of the
rBgime and certainly an appeal for non-recognition
of
that rtgime as well, but in addition it should include
all measures likely to deliver the people of the Territory
from colonialist and racist oppression, to enable them
to enjoy the rights that we all enjoy here as natural
rights, to eliminate the existence of a growing threat
to peace and security, which this Council has already
recognized in its resoluiion 217 (1965).
50. It is no pleasure for my delegation to recall the
long and sorry history of the problem of Rhodesia-the
road which has brought a handful of racist settlers to
the point of establishing a so-called independent repub6

lit and where they have acquired the de f&to status
of gncrleilers of npnrtheid in Southern Rhodesia,

56. I recall these few striking facts about the
Rhodesian question, not to call into question the past
and present intentions of the administering Power but
rather to bring out in objective terms the facts that
have led to what is perhaps one of the greatest
anachronisms in recent history, namely, the establishment of a racist minority r&gime in the decade marked
by the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, I have done so,
in order once again to remind the Council that it is
the administering Power and its allies that bear full
responsibility for the failure of the United Nations
action, for they, despite the attitude of the majority,
determined the limited scope and thus the ineffectiveness of that action.

51. We need only glance at the resolutions submitted,
and so often rejected or ignored, to see how just and
far-sighted was the attitude of the very large majority
of the Members
of the United Nations, and how wellfounded were the energetic measures proposed by this
Qrganization
to crush a puts& which threatened to
become transformed into a revolt. It suffices to glance
over
the records of the declarations and acts of the
administering
Power to realize how open to criticism
was’the dilatory attitude, the application of the formula
“too little and too late” that it adopted on the problem
of Rhodesia, It suffices to look at the record bf votes
in the United Nations on this problem to realize how
vast is the joint responsibility of the States that have
supported that attitude of the administering Power.

57. Economic sanctions were the remedy recommended by the administering Power to bring about the
immediate downfall of the Smith rCgime. The facts
submitted to the Council by the Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs for Zambia have shown the complete
failure of that course. Indeed, could it have turned
out otherwise? Prior notice of at least two and a half
years was given to the Smith rCgime to foresee the
consequences, and that rkgime did nbt fail to take
advantage of the warning by developing the production
of goods to replace imports. Whereas in 1966 we still
noted a net capital deficit in Southern Rhodesia, by
1967 we were already obliged to note a net surplus
amounting toE12.7 million Rhodesian, and in 1968 the
figure was c25.2 million. How c,ould it be otherwise
when the doors to South Africa and to the Portuguese
colonies were left wide open, through which aid flowed
into the country, from sources which are so closely
linked to and dependent on the economic and military
interests of a certain number of Western NATO
countries?

52. When in 1962 thirteen then independent countries
of Africa drew the General Assembly’s attention to
the fact that the promulgation of the new Constitution
threatened to increase the complexity and seriousness
of the situation in Southern Rhodesia, the United Kingdom representative
answered that a debate on that
question would only “raise passions’,‘5 and that “the
essence. of the position in the territory is the need to
compromise
and con$liate”.G The result of that policy
of compromise
and conciliation proved to be the entry
into force of the racist Constitution of 1961.
53. When in 1963 three Afro-Asian countries called
upon the Security Council to adopt a draft resolutioir7
which would request “the Government of the United
Kingdom
not to transfer to its colonies of Southern
Rhodesia
armed forces and aircraft as was proposed
at the Conference of Central Africa in 1963”, the
United Kingdom representative, maintaining that the
situation
in Southern Rhodesia was “neithel explosive
nor critical”,
brought about the rejection of that draft
resolution.
In that case the result was to provide the
racist r&me with the military means for imposing its
doctrine.

58. Therefore, it is not surprising to hear Ian Smith
state, as he did at the press conference held with United
States journalists at Salisbury on 2 March 1970, that
Rhodesia had benefited from the sanctions by developing and diversifying its industry. Thus it is not surprising to see the Smith rkgime, after the vote on expanded
sanctions adopted by the Security Council in 1968,
proclaim a racist Constitution, have it approved by
a referendum and then proclaim the republic and
schedule elections for April, The Smith rkgime does
not consider itself threatened by the United Nations
action in its present form and scope; it has confidence
in its impunity. It is strengthening its domination over
the Zimbabwe people by force and terror and is taking
a hostile attitude towards the African countries and
a defiant attitude towards the United Nations.

54.
When there was every indication that the’ Smith
rkgime was preparing to declare its independence, the
United
Kingdom informed that regime that in no case
would it have recourse to force to oppose that usurpation of power, The Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
bf Zambia recalled that fact to us in eloquent terms
in his statements yesterday [ibid.].
55. It was only a little more than a year after the
proclamation
of independence by the Smith r6gime that
the Security Council in resolution 232 (1966) voted for
the first selective sanctions, and only after two and
a half years that it called for the application of broader
economic
sanctions in its resolution 253 (1968).
’ See Official

Records

of the General

Assembly,

P!erlary Meetings,
1109th meeting, para. 23.
* Ibid., 1120th meeting, para. 52.
’ see Oflciaf

S~~pphwtt
S15425IRev.

for

1.

Records of the Security Council,
July, August
and September

Sixteenth

59. We can no longer tolerate the impunity of the
racist regime of Southern Rhodesia, the provocative
attitude of countries which support it openly, or the
atmosphere of tacit agreement on the part of other
countries which try to cloak their presence in Southern
Rhodesia in the most inoffensive garments. Nor can
we pass over in silence the actions of influential circles
in certain Western countries which are linked to
specific interests in Southern Rhodesia and are
designed to consecrate the minority rhgime. But, above

Session,

Eighteenth
Year,
1963, document

7

all, we cannot fail to note the administering Power’s
dilatory attitude and its policy of half measures and
we cannot fail to demand of that Power that it fully
discharge by all necessary means the obligations
incumbent upon it, obligations which it has always
claimed towards the people of the Territory.

Security Council during the month of January, in the
course of which another African question was discussed, the question of Namibia.
65. I think that we all owe a debt of gratitude and
thanks to the Organization of African Unity for having
sent to this meeting Foreign Ministers or Ministers
of State, and we already have among us the Foreign
Minister of Zambia. If this illustrates anything, it is
the importance that the Organization of African Unity
attaches to the strengthening of international peace and
security by bringing its problems in all their aspects
to open debate in the Council. My delegation wishes
particularly again to thank the Foreign Minister of Zambia for the illuminating
and factual statements which
he made yesterday [1531st meeting]. Because they
came spontaneously from a heart which feels deeply
the problems of Africa, we were all indeed touched
and moved by the sincerity and genuineness of his
words.

60. From the outset the Peoples Republic of Poland
has adopted a firm and consistent attitude towards the
racist rCgime in Southern Rhodesia. We have refused
any form of recognition to that rCgime; we have not
maintained and do not maintain any relations with it;
we engage in no trade either direct or indirect with
it. After the unilateral declaration of independence we
broke off all postal and telegraphic communications
between Poland and Southern Rhodesia on 17 February
1966. In the United Nations our delegation has offered
active support for the proposals designed to eliminate
the racist rCgime and to restore the freedom of the
oppressed people of Zimbabwe. We support and shall
continue to support that people in its struggle for
independence, In this connexion permit me to quote
from a statement made by the Polish Committee of
Solidarity with the Peoples of Asia and Africa, condemning the illegal proclamation by Salisbury:
“We have always offered and shall continue to
offer our full support for the peoples struggling for
their freedom and independence and we shall continue to support the national Iiberation struggle being
carried on by the Zimbabwe patriots.”

66. No description of the nefarious impact of the
Southern Rhodesian question on the United Nations
as an international
Organization, on its principles as
the fundamental rules supposed to govern international
relations and on its objectives-the
reign of peace and
the saving of mankind from the scourge of war-can
be exaggerated.
67. In fact, it was the Security Council itself, in its
resolution 232 (1966), which came to the conclusion
that the situation in Southern Rhodesia constituted a
threat to international peace and security. Besides, the
oppression by a fanatic minority not exceeding a quarter of a million of an African majority of four million,
and the suppression of the right to self-determination
run counter to every norm of international law and
justice, counter to the concept of human’ rights, and
counter to the interests of humanity at large. Indeed,
it is a phenomenon that is declared inadmissible by
the very administering
Power which originally was
instrumental in bringing about this minority control
and,, once this had been done, abstained from any radical action that could put down the rebellion.

61. Accordingly, we shall support any draft resolution
which is in line with the opinions that I have just
expressed, and I would add that we look favourably
on the draft resolution submitted by five Afro-Asian
countries [S/9696].
62. The PRESIDENT
(int~rpr,ctatiorz~orn Spa&~):
I thank Ambassador Kulaga, the representative of
Poland, for the words of welcome which he extended
to me as President. I should like also to offer my personal thanks to Mr. Bhatt of Nepal for his offer of
co-operation and for his words of welcome,
63. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): First of all, may I join those
representatives who have preceded me in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the Presidency
of the Security Council? We have in you a distinguished
statesman of Colombia, a man of high learningLand
great achievements. In addition tC,this, I, as refiresentative of Syria, have special reason to congratulate you:
for my own people, from the dawn of history, caught
with that eternal wanderlust, have always looked’for
hdrizons outside their own shores, and they migrated
to various parts of the world, including your own, and
other Latin American countries where they found
friendship, generosity and understanding. So we are
in the peculiar position that, whereas I represent the
people and country of Syria:, you, Sir, have among
your constituents citizens of Colombia who are of
Syrian, Lebanese’and Arab origin,
64. I wish also to reiterate our congratulations
representative of. Burundi on his Presidency

to the
of the

68. Together with this, the sanctions determined by
the Security Council have failed to produce their effects
because both the Governnient of South Africa and the
colonia1 r&&me of Lisboo, through its hold on Mozambique, have thwarted these sanctions outright. South
Africa has gone ‘even further in supplying the rebels
with equipment and armed forces. The success of the
sanctions requires their application by all States, but
South Africa and Portugal have virtually been given
the assurance that no drastic measure will be taken
against them if they choose not to comply with the
sanctions.

.

$9. This is indeed the purport of the stand of those
Powers--the first and foremost of which is the administering Power itself-which
opposed the application of
the relevant Chtipters of the Charter against South
Africa and Portugal.

70, In these circumstances the latest move by the
illegal racist regime of Salisbury to sever its symbolic
relationship with the British Crown by declaring itself
a republic was to be expected; but in the context of
the whoYe tragedy it has minor significance. What matters is not what form of rCgime the rebels attribute
to themselves;
what matters indeed is the usurpation
of the government of Zimbabwe, the oppressive control
and suppression of the rights of four million innocent
African people entitled, like everybody else, to enjoy
freedom and independence.

sions, especially the Governments of South Africa and
Portugal. The preambular paragraphs allude to the key
elements of the question. On the one hand, the primary
responsibility
of the Government of the United
Kingdom, as administering Power, to enable the people
of Zimbabwe to exercise their right of selfdetermination and independence is affirmed; and, on
the other hand, the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination, freedom and independence-and hence the legitimacy of their struggle-is
stressed. The preamble, of course, places the measures
suggested in the operative paragraphs within their
natural frame of reference: Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter.

71. That is why the delegations of Burundi, Nepal,
Sierra Leone, Zambia, and my own country, Syria,
sought to re-establish the question in its real, proper
context. Of course, we all realize that no one should
grant
recognition
to the illegal racist regime
and-among
other things-to its latest so-called status
of a republic, A decision by the Security Council to
bar such recognition is quite pertinent, but we maintain
that it deals with but one aspect of the question. The
decision we have to take in the Security Council is
one that ensures the end of the illegal racist rCgime
itself and the granting to the whole people of Zimbabwe, black and white, its right to an independent
Government
based on majority rule and equal citizenship among its people. Accordingly, the five delegations developed a draft resolution that reflects the tenor
of the decisions of the Organization of African Unity.
In this connexion we respectfully request that the
resolution
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization
of African States in Addis Ababa on 3
March 1970 be considered as an official document of
the Security Council, The draft resolution well represents the large consensus among the Afro-Asian
nations which are deeply perturbed by the daily deterio-.
ration of the situation in Southern Rhodesia and concerned about the fate of their 4 million brothers under.
the tyranny of ruthless oppressors.

74. The operative part of the draft resolution deals
with the main aspects of the question, one after the
other. The first three paragraphs embody the idea of
the United Kingdom
draft resolution on nonrecognition, thus heeding the emphasis put by the
delegation of the United Kingdom on the significance
of this problem.
75. Paragraphs 4 and 5 deal with the responsibility
and role of the administering Power. If Paragraph 4
emphasizes its responsibility with regard to the situation prevailing today in Southern Rhodesia, it is
because of the compelling evidence abundantly manifested in the past conduct of the United Kingdom.
It facilitated that classic brand of colonialism, “settler
in the area, and in other areas of the
colonialism”,
world, and did little to check its nefarious effects on
the rightful, legitimate people who constitute the
immense, overwhelming majority of the inhabitants.
It encouraged European immigration. It was its laws
and acts that introduced racial discrimination and gave
the immigrants undue privileges which they still enjoy.
The “Labour Conciliation Act” and the “Land Apportionment Act”- the former blocking progress by Africans with respect to acquiring skill and know-how,
the latter dispossessing the African masses of their
land and pushing them back and back into the arid
regions-stand as monuments conveying, louder than
any other expression, the gessage of racial superiority,
privileges of the few over the unfortunate masses and
the degree to which lust for power and expansion can
blind one to moral and human values. The responsibility of the administering Power is there, and it is
undeniable, This being the case, it should have fulfilled
its task in a manner commensurate with such a heavy
responsibility. It should have used force, the only language that the racist and the Fascist understand and
obey-yesterday
and today. The use of force would
have been legitimate. It would have been in defence
of the inalienable I;ights of the subjugated people. It
would have been in defence of the Charter. It would
have been in defence of the United Nations. It still
is.

72.
The draft resolution is now before the members
of the Security Council[S/9696). On behalf of the sponsors-Burundi,
Nepal, Sierra Leone, Zambia and my
own country, Syria-I have the honour to submit this
draft resolution.
However, in doing so, may I draw
attention
to the following? Paragraph 3, as it appears
in the document that has been circulated, reads: “Calls
zrpon all States to take appropriate action. . .“, and
SO on. It should iii. fact read:
L’Req~e~t~ that all States shall undertake national
measures as appropriate to ensure that any act performed
by officials and institutions of the illegal
regime in Rhodesia shall not be accorded official
or judicial
notice by the competent organs of their
State”.
Also,

ment
upon

paragraph 7 should begin “Requests the Governof the United Kingdom . , . ” instead of “Calls
the Government of the United Kingdom , . .“.

76. The Security Council, in paragraph 5 of the draft
resolution, is therefore campelled to condemn the
refusal by the administering Power to tise force, the
more so as on various occasions it has demonstrated
its readiness to use force, if public laid and order would
otherwise be perturbed. ‘Was not that assertion tan-

73, It, will be noted that this draft resolution in its
preambular
paragraphs contrasts the various resolutions adopted pi-eviously by the Security Council since
1965 with the steady deterioration of the situation and
the non-compliance
of some States with those decii

9

tamount to saying that as long as the European minority
held power order was considered safe, but that when
the African masses try to reconquer their rights, concern arises immediately and force is envisaged by the
administering Power?

to strengthen the illegal racist regime in Southern
Rhodesia, all kinds of sanctions remain indeed futile.
If any effect is to be expected from United Nations
resolutions and, above all, from Security Council
resolutions, all Member States and specialized agencies
must carry them out.

77, I wish here to quote from the concluding words
of a chapter in the book A Start in F’reedom, by Sir
Hugh Foot, the representative of the United Kingdom
himself, now Lord Caradon. It is a chapter on the
United Nations. Speaking of the great danger of a situation in which the United Nations would be too weak
to meet its obligations, and specifically with reference
to the problem we are discussing at this moment,
namely the problem of Southern Rhodesia, the permanent representative of the United Kingdom said that
strong measures had to be adopted by the United
Nations to give it significance; he stated the following:
“If that time comes, the greatest responsibility
will rest on those whose policy towards the United
Nations has been negative, those who have sought
to limit its powers and diminish its authority, It will
be too late then to blame the South African Government or the Afro-Asians. The burden of blame will
rest on those who have neglected over many years
to support and strengthen the United Nations, who
have formulated no positive policies, who have been
content to watch the drift to disaster.“8

82. That is the tenor of paragraph 10. But paragraph
11 emphasizes in particular the value of assistance in
the implementation
of those measures by Member
States having a primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. If they
oppose those measures or merely refrain from assisting
in their implementation,
while they, more than anybody
else, have at their disposal the means to implement
them, the rule of law will be relegated to the realm
OFplatitudes.
83. In this episode of struggle between right and
wrong, it is the merit of the freedom-fighters that they
advocate the very cause of the United Nations: the
cause of freedom, self-determination, equality, justice,
and peace in justice and brotherhood. It is no less
incumbent on the United Nations and on all States
to assist them materially and morally, so that the very
principles of the Charter may be vindicated. That is
the sense of paragraph 12 of the draft resolution, with
its great and urgent expectation of a concrete attitude
on the part of Member States, and particularly those
which have ready access to power and resources.

Since those words were written, the representative of
the United Kingdom and we ourselves have indeed
watched the drift to disaster.

84. The Secretary-General’s concern over this tragic
question and, indeed, over the fate of the United
Nations in these critical times is well known and highly
appreciated by every fair-minded Member, and it gives
my delegation great pleasure to pay a tribute to him.
The draft resolution calls on all States to report to
the Secretary-General on the implementation
of these
measures and requests him to report to the Security
Council on the progress achieved.

78. We maintain that the United Kingdom, backed
by the material and moral support of the United
Nations, is still in a position to fulfil its obligations
and to redress the injustice that, to a large extent,
it was responsible for inflicting upon the 4 million Africans and, actually, upon the whole continent of Africa.
79. In paragraphs 6 and 7 of the draft resolution the
severance by all Slates of all relations with the racist
minority rkgime is stipulated and, in order to give that
prescription its full scope, the Government of the
United Kingdom is called upon to abrogate any existing
agreement on the basis of which commercial or other
foreign consular missions can be maintained in Southern Rhodesia.

85. The delegations which have honoured me by their
request to speak on their behalf place their confident
hope in the members of this Council. They think that
time is running out. International peace is exposed,
and might, not right, is increasingly prevalent. They
expect the Council unanimously to halt this downward
course, which will engulf not one State nor one continent but the whole of mankind.

80. Paragraphs 8 and 9 deal with another, no less
radical, obstruction of Security Council resolution 253
(1968), brought about by the assistance given by the
Governments ofPortugal and South Africa and by other
imperialist Powers, to the illegal racist minority rkgime.
That assistance is condemned and the authors of the
draft resolution, realizing that what defeated the sanctions against the Smith regime was precisely the violation by South Africa and Portugal of the measures set
out in resolution 253 (1968), have introduced paragraph
9 in order to apply the same measures against both.

86. As the representative of Algeria stated yes&day:
“The time for disquisitions is past. The time for action
has come, and we invite the Council to take such action
now” [1531st meeting, para. 771. That view was also
voiced by the representative of Zambia and other African speakers. To my delegation, there could be no
better formulation of the need for the adoption of more
radical measures.
87. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I am grateful to the representative of Syria, Ambassador Tomeh, for his kind words of welcome to me,
and particularly his eloquent recognition of my country’s broad attitude towards immigrants-who
in turn
have done so much for Colombia.

81, It is facts, not speculation, which prove that
unless those two rigimes are deprived of the means
LLSir Hugh Foot, A Slavr irz Freedom (London,
Stoughton, 19641, p. 230.

Hodder

and

10

88. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretation jhm
Frenclz): Mr. President, my delegation is grateful to
you for calling upon us at this stage of the debate.
Nevertheless, we should like to state that our remarks
will be confined to the draft resolution, since our formal
statement will be made at a subsequent meeting.

submitted

to us by the United

Kingdom

delegation

[S/9676/Rev.l] confines itself to one aspect. But that

aspect-and this is one further demonstration of our
frank co-operation-is
also to be found in our own
draft resolution, in operative paragraph 4 and in paragraphs I and 2, which repeat almost word for word
the language of the United Kingdom representative.

89. I should like now to speak to the draft resolution
sponsored by Burundi, Nepal, Sierra Leone, Syria and
Zambia [S/9696]. In both form and substance, the draft
resolution shows the spirit of understanding and compromise of our delegations-so
much so that it should
command the CounciI’s unanimous support. It goes
without saying that we are determined to co-operate
with all members, including the administering Power
whose task we should like to make easier, so that it
would itself be unable to resist such a spirit of understanding. The draft resolution is of course based on
the position adopted last week at Addis Ababa by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity.

94. These are the major reasons which should make
it possible for our draft resolution to receive the unanimous support of the Council. We do not say that this
draft is ideal, but we regard it as the only satisfactory
formula in the present situation. We have taken into
account the real situation in the Security Council. If
those realities had not been taken into account, a far
better draft might have been prepared, a draft better
in keeping with the situation of Rhodesia
95. As the representative of Syria indicated, the sponsors of the draft resolution, whose names I have already
read out, are accordingly seeking a compromise which,
we hope, will be supported by all members of the
Council.

90. The draft resolution does, of course, attempt to
present a formula which is not confined to a mere marginal declaration.
It tries to go to the heart of the problem,
that is to say, it proposes that the Security Council
discharge its responsibilities,
that it play its role and
that it find an adequate solution to the problem of
Rhodesia.

96. Some members lllay see certain drawbacks in this
draft resolution. We have attempted to avoid such
drawbacks precisely by taking into account what might
be the reactions of certain delegations. Consequently,
we would appeal to everyone and say that if it should
be found necessary or useful to hold a dialogue, our
delegations would always be prepared to enter into
negotiations with a view to finding an adequate solution, a vigorous solution, a solution which can lead
to what we all want, namely, an end to the situation
created by Ian Smith and his henchmen. But we still
believe that it is for the United Kingdom to assume
the main responsibility,
that it should co-operate to
the utmost, and in the final analysis face up to the
situation which, all in all, is its responsibility because
it did not fail to promote it-indeed, to create it.

91. We should like to address an appeal to all members of the Security Council and, in particular, to the
States that are friends of the United Kingdom, to lend
their support to this draft resolution. For this is a test
of what I might call genuine friendship on the part
of those States which, because of their solidarity with
the United
Kingdom, may find themselves in some
difficulty.
But, as we have stated from the outset, we
are not trying to embarrass the United Kingdom; rather
we
are trying to assist that country to carry out its
responsibilities
and to play the role which any administering Power is called upon to play, with the assistance
of the United Nations Security Council and, of course,
of the Zimbabwe people themselves, who are reaching
out to the Security Council. It would be a matter for
regret if the Security Council should disappoint those
hopes.

97. The PRESIDENT
(interpr.etationfrom Spanish):
The last speaker on my list is the representative’ of
Senegal, on whom I now call.
98. Mr. BOYE
(Senegal) (interpretation
from
French): As you know, Mr. President, it is customary
in the Security Council for the representative of a
Member State not a member of the Council to refrain
from paying tribute to the President and his prodecessors. Out of respect for that tradition, I shall therefore
refrain from doing so. And, as a matter of fact, cjoes
it not constitute a tribute to the Council and to YOU,
Sir, that I observe that tradition?

92. The objective of the draft resolution is clearly
to help the London Government to go forward, to prepare for a democratic process, and by that same process
to advance the people of Zimbabwe towards independence and sovereignty so that, in the final analysis,
there will be a climate of co-operation and understanding with the United Kingdom itself and, of course,
with alI other countries of the world. For so long as
this question remains unresolved, so long as the United
Kil;lgdom
persists in avoiding the most appropriate solution,
unfortunately
this will always be an obstacle
to what I shall have occasion later to call the final
reconciliation
between Africa and the former metropolitan
Powers,

99. I should like, once again Mr. President, to thank
you and, through you, to thank all the members of
the Council for having allowed the delegation of
Senegal to participate in your debates without the right
to vote. Through its participation, Senegal will thus
be able to discharge the task entrusted to it by the
Organization of African Unity.

43. It goes without saying that so far as the people
of Zimbabwe
are concerned, as my delegation had an
opportunity
to state a few days ago, the draft resolution

100. Now, what is the issue before us? It is again
the problem of Southern Rhodesia. I have already had
11

an opportunity to deal with this question, last year,
in this very hall of the Security Council. At that-time
I had occasion to say that the sanctions that had been
decreed against the rebel government of Southern
Rhodesia would not prevent Ian Smith and his clique
from pursuing their course towards a complete rupture
of their ties with the Crown. And that is what has
now happened.

ing on each other. The Commission expressed the fear
that the interests of the European landholders might
be compromised
by the proximity
of Africanlandowners. The Commission pointed out that the
white landholder “questions the honesty of the natives
and fears that his crops and his equipment may be
stolen. For social reasons the white landholder is also
opposed to having the native as his neighbour”. In
conclusion, the Commission praised what it called the
“prudence” displayed by the Union of South Africa
in adopting its Land Act of 1913.

101, In order to understand the attitudes of both sides,
it is well for us to make a careful review of the whole
history of the Rhodesian case. We shall then better
understand what has just taken place and why the African countries are disturbed about the fate of the Zimbabwe people. I shall rely on facts that I have reported
to another United Nations body.

107. The Legislative Assembly accepted the Commission’s report and proceeded to apply its recommendations by adopting the Land Apportionment
Act of
1930. That Act constitutes the legal foundation for
racial discrimination in Rhodesia. Since that time, other
laws have been enacted to strengthen the 1930 law.
Legislation concerning land distribution divided the
land into European regions and African regions. The
law empowers the Governor to order anyone to leave
his traditional village and settle in another specified
area.

102. Why are we being urged to adopt a policy of
compromise and conciliation? Before the arrival of the
European settlers in Rhodesia, the lands were occupied
by Africans in accordance with their customs and traditions, and their traditional chiefs were the guardians
of that heritage.
103. In 1889, Rhodesia was annexed by Great Britain
and became a colony of that country. The Royal Charter that authorized the British South Africa Company
to administer Rhodesia guaranteed Africans the right
to “acquire, hold and mortgage lands and to dispose
of them under the same conditions as apply to persons
who are not natives”. However, in 1895, with the creation of the first two “native reserves”, the settlers
began to infringe the land rights of the Africans.

108. In 1964, the term “riative reserves” was
eliminated and replaced by the new expression “tribal
zones”, The land-ownership system was not changed.
The tribal zones bring together the former special
native regions and the “native reserves”, and the situation at present is as follows: European zones, 36 million
acres; total for African zones, 44.64 million acres.
109. During the census of the African population
taken in April and May of 1962, the African popuIation
totalled 3,618,150, 82 per cent of whom were living
in rural areas. According to the census carried out
in September 1961, the European population amounted
to 221,504 persons of whom 70 per cent lived in urban
areas.

104. Those first two reserves were intended to
receive Africans removed from their traditional homes.
That was one of the causes of the 1896 rebellion. Peace
negotiations were begun, and Cecil Rhodes assured
the Africans that they would all be returned to their
homes. But that promise was not kept, and at the end
of 1902 the system of native reserves was extended
to include Mashonaland.

110. It is clear from certain official data that rainfall
is less than twenty inches in a great many of the African
zones. Certain other zones are located in areas of heavy
rainfall that is harmful to crops. The soil and geologic
structure of the African zones are generally second-rate
and subject in great measure‘to erosion. The land in
the tribal zones does not suffice to provide a living
for more than 940,000 people. Since 1961, an increasing
number of Africans have been dislodged from their
traditional lands and sent to regions reserved for
“natives”. In 1963, the Rhodesian Secretary for Internal Affairs stated that 2,891 families had been removed
in the course of that one year.

105. In 1921 the delegation of settlers that went to
London to ask for the installation of a responsible government in Rhodesia called for the designation of certain areas where only “natives” could acquire land
and where Europeans would not be authorized to do
so, The British Government then requested the settlers
to prove by means of a referendum that the Rhodesian
population
supported the proposed changes. The
referendum, in which the Africans, since they did not
have the right to vote, did not participate, was favourable to the changes that formed part of the whole series
of proposals affecting the establishment of a “responsible government”. Those proposals were accepted
in 1923.

111. On 11 November 1965 the rebel regime of Southern Rhodesia unilaterally proclaimed the independence
of that territory and adopted a so-called constitution
which was approved on 20 June 1969 by a referendum
which affected almost only the white minority. Under
the provisions of that constitution the President exercises the legislative power jointly with the Senate and
the Assembly. The Senate is to be composed of twentythree senators, ten of whom are to be Europeans
elected by the European members of the Assembly,
Ten of the senators are to be African chiefs elected

106. On 10 November 1925, the Royal Commission
designated by the Governor of the colony for the purpose of examining the whole system of land tenure,
concluded that the act that granted Africans and Europeans rights concerning the purchase of land was
“unsound’ ’ , and it recommended that the two races
should not be allowed to purchase land in areas border12

by an electoral college composed of chiefs who are
members of the Council of Chiefs, and three are to
be appointed by the President. The Assembly is to
consist of sixty-six members: fifty Europeans elected
by the Europeans inscribed on the rolls of fifty European electoral districts, and sixteen Africans, eight of
whom will be elected by the Africans listed on the
electoral rolls; the eight others in the Tribal Trust
Lands will be selected by electoral colleges made up
of chiefs of Headmen and advisers elected by the African councils.

116. Under the security laws African political organizations are prohibited. In the reserves, schools in most
instances had been set up by missions. Parents were
required to pay a minimal enrolment fee and provide
the labour needed to maintain the schools.
117. In 1966 the Government examined what was
henceforth called the “New Plan” of education for
Africans. The plan contained certain rigid elements
of “Bantu education” which is offered in South Africa.
Churches would no longer be authorized to .-open new
schools for Africans. This applied to primary schools
as of 1968 and secondary schools as of 1970. Existing
schools would be subjected to pressure to bring them
under the control of African councils set up on the
tribal Iands under the aegis of the Government which
announced that for reasons of economy, the duration
of the primary school cycle would be reduced from
eight to seven years. Moreover, many parents, according to an, inquiry carried out in 1968 by the Society
of Jesus in Southern Rhodesia, cannot pay for the
teaching of their children, and thus a considerable
number of African children leave school before having
completed their studies.

112. The second annex to the 1969 “constitution”
contains a so-called Declaration of Rights, the provisions of which are similar to those which appeared
in the “1965 constitution”.
By not according to the
courts the power to decide on the validity of an act
which they consider to be in violation of the “Declaration of Rights”, and by arrogating to itself the powers spelt out in article 11 of that “declaration”,
the
illegal rCgime places the legislation in clear contradiction with itself’ and exposes to the broad light of day
the dishonesty of its intentions.
113. In any event, it appears that the majority of Africans living in the tribal zones are not permitted to
vote. They do not satisfy the requirements as to education and income necessary to obtain the right to vote.
They fiave no control over the administration
of the
country as a whole. In respect of local affairs, they
are placed under the control of the white district commissioners
who impose their will through puppet
chiefs.

118. With respect to economic conditions for Africans, I would say that an average family of about thirty
persons living in the reserves may succeed in producing
ten to fifteen sacks of wheat per annum, and it is with
the money obtained from the sale of that wheat that
they are supposed to live for the whole year and provide
themselves with food, clothing and pay school fees.
The Council will easily understand that the African
population in that part of the world is struggling for
its very survival and it is a miracle that it has been
able even to survive in those conditions.

114. Since 1965 the policy of the removal of populations has been rigorously applied. Thus in 1967, 5,000
Africans
were removed to Gokvo, a region infested
with the tse-tse fly. According to The New York Times
of 19 September
1969, the Tangwena people, under
the leadership of Chief Rekayi, were forcibly removed
from their ancestral lands in the eastern part of the
country
on 18 September 1969. That population had
been resisting eviction for some time. In July 1968
the High Court of Southern Rhodesiaunanimously
supported the argument of Chief Rekayi to the effect that
the Tangwena people were entitled to remain on their
lands. The Government immediately reacted by enacting a special eviction ordinance which nullified thefinding of the High Court. In answering the Government
order, the Chief stated:
“This
is our land. Five chiefs are buried there.
For as long as we can remember we have always
lived here. If we are compelled to leave, we will
come back. If they burn my house, I will build it
again. ’ ’

119. According to the last report of the Special Committee of Twenty-Four,g the figures communicated by
the illegal rkgime show that, as of 1 January 1969,
142 persons had been held under emergency legislation
and 237 had been sentenced to restriction-that
is to
say, a total of 379 persons were deprived of their freedom under the emergency legislation as against 435
in October 1968.1a
120, Need it be said that the security police of Southern Rhodesia work closely hand in hand with the South
African authorities? In the course of an inquiry that
we carried out in 1968, we learned that a large number
of prisoners condemned to death-approximately
118
at that time-had
been awaiting a final decision on
their case for a very long time. The Council will easily
understand the state of extreme anxiety in which those
prisoners found themselves. Such a situation constituted a violation not only of the elementary rules
of humanity and dignity, but also of the fundamental
principle non his in idem, that is to say, double
jeopardy, which is reaffirmed in particular in article 14,

115. On
18 September
1969 the Government
mobilized
troops and armoured divisions; soldiers were
sent out to theregion and houses weredestroyed. Many
traditional
chiefs were removed from office and
replaced by others who were appointed by the Government and who are under the control of the district
commissioners
and who have no respect for the local
population.

DSpecial Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.
lo See Official Records of the Gene@ Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23, chapter VI, para. 52.

13

paragraph 7, of the International
and Political Rights-l’

Covenant on Civil

speakers for today had been exhausted; otherwise I
would have notified you earlier that I wished to say
merely this word. Of course, a number of points have
been raised this afternoon which might well call for
some reply on my part. I think it may be better, however, with your permission, if I delay unti1 a later stage
commenting on what has been said today and what
will be said subsequently, and if I also postpone commenting on the draft resolution that has now been submitted to us. I did intend at one stage this afternoon
to make one exception: to reply to what had been said
by Ambassador Malik of the Soviet Union; but since
what I had in mind to say might be regarded as somewhat harsh, I think it would perhaps be better for me
to postpone my comments until I have the pleasure
of his personal presence, So, with your permission,
I shall say no more now, except, of course, that I
trust I shall have an opportunity later of commenting
on some of the points that have been made in the debate
this afternoon.

121. I have taken the liberty of going over the whole
history of the case of Rhodesia to enable the Council
unequivocally to pass judgement on the illegal rCgirne
of Salisbury. In my delegation’s opinion, economic or
other sanctions are not the tools that will cause Ian
Smith and his clique to back down. It is necessary
for the administering Power to use more energetic
means to bring down the Salisbury rebellion which
constitutes a permanent defiance of the international
community. But is it going to do that? I doubt it, for
long before the unilateral declaration of independence,
the sovereign Government of Southern Rhodesia had
always proved to be passive in the face of the demands
of the settlers. Today those settlers have just ignominiously repudiated their link with the Crown. It is now
up to the Council, and particularly the great Powers,
to restore the dignity of the Zimbabwe people who,
anxious about theirfate, are awaiting there the decision
that you, gentlemen, are about to take.

123. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I apologize for not realizing that the list of

124. Mr. ISSRAELYAN
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President,
Ambassador Malik has had to leave this meeting of
the Security Council on account of the opening in New
York today of the photographic exhibition entitled
“USSR-‘Photo
1970’ “, which illustrates the manysided life of the Soviet people. As he left the meeting,
Ambassador Maiik told me to expect a statement by
the United Kingdom representative. I must say that
Ambassador Malik proved to be quite right in his prediction and the Soviet delegation would have been prepared to answer any remarks made by the United Kingdom representative. However, as Lord Caradon prefers to make his comments when Ambassador Malik
is here, it will not be possible to do this until the next
meeting when Ambassador Malik will be present.

” See General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

122. The
PRESIDENT
(irzterp~tntion
f~.o/n
Spnnish): There being no more speakers on my list,
I propose to adjourn this meeting. However, before
doing so, I should like to inform members that I have
just received a communication [,!?/9699] fromthe representative of India, Mr. Samar Sen, in which he asks
to be invited to participate, without the right to vote,
in this debate. If I hear no objections, and with the
consent of the Council, I propose to invite that representative to participate in our deliberations at the
next meeting of the Council.

14
Price:

SU.S.

0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

8202.5~June

1973-2.050
