A/60/PV.88

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixtieth session

88

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 6 June 2006, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eliasson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Sweden)

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items: reopening of the consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 54
The President: I would like to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to the report of the SecretaryGeneral contained in document A/60/871, which has
been circulated under sub-item (c) of agenda item 54,
“International migration and development”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda
item 54 at its 69th plenary meeting, on 23 December
2005. In order to enable the General Assembly to
consider the report of the Secretary-General, it will be
necessary to reopen the consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 54. May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to reopen its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will recall that, at its
17th plenary meeting, on 20 September 2005, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (c) of
agenda item 54 to the Second Committee. In order for
the General Assembly to proceed expeditiously with its
consideration of the sub-item, may I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to consider sub-item (c)
of agenda 54 directly in plenary meeting under

heading B of the agenda, namely, “Promotion of
sustained
economic
growth
and
sustainable
development in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United
Nations conferences”?
It was so decided.
The President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 54 (continued)
Globalization and interdependence
(c) International migration and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/60/871)
The President: Today the General Assembly will
embark on a series of events in preparation for the
High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development, which will take place on 14 and
15 September, at the beginning of the sixty-first
session.
International migration is a global issue that
affects us all. Today there are more than 191 million
migrants in the world. International migration has an
impact both on countries of destination and on
countries of origin, in developing and developed
countries alike. We can all learn from each other’s

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-37670 (E)

*0637670*

A/60/PV.88

experience and engage in a dialogue to widen our
common understanding of the interrelationship
between international migration and development.
At the 2005 World Summit, our heads of State or
Government acknowledged the important nexus
between international migration and development and
the need to deal with the challenges and opportunities
that migration presents to countries of origin,
destination and transit. They recognized that
international migration brings benefits as well as
challenges to the global community.
They also welcomed the High-level Dialogue as
an opportunity to discuss the multidimensional aspects
of international migration and development in order to
identify appropriate ways and means to maximize their
development benefits and minimize their negative
impact. The path leading to the High-level Dialogue
has not always been an easy one. The issue of
international migration in relation to development
began to gain visibility at the time of the 1994
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development, held in Cairo.
One year later, the Second Committee of the
General Assembly considered the first report on
international migration and development (E/1995/69).
Furthermore, most of the conferences and summits that
followed the Cairo Conference devoted attention to
international migration and development.
As a result, the United Nations has already a
fairly comprehensive set of principles, objectives and
recommendations in regard to international migration.
In addition, the Global Commission on International
Migration issued a report just last year, and also
presented a set of principles and recommendations, as
members know. Shortly, I will invite the SecretaryGeneral to introduce his report entitled “International
migration and development”, which will provide a
comprehensive overview of studies on the
multidimensional
aspects
of
migration
and
development as well as highlight the developmental
potential of migration.
Before doing so, I would like to remind members
of a number of upcoming General Assembly events in
preparation for the High-level Dialogue, so that they
may note them in their calendars. On Thursday, 8 June,
the first of two panel discussions on international
migration and development will take place here in New
York. In that regard, I wish to refer to my letter of

2

31 May; another letter with further details will be sent
from my Office later this afternoon. The second panel
discussion will take place in Geneva on 4 July. On
12 July there will be an informal interactive hearing
with
representatives
from
non-governmental
organizations, civil society organizations and the
private sector, here in New York. I encourage members
to actively and constructively participate in those
events, which will be an important contribution to the
successful organization and outcome of the High-level
Dialogue in September.
I now warmly welcome the Secretary-General to
the General Assembly, and invite him to introduce his
report.
The Secretary-General: In preparation for the
High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development, which the General Assembly is to hold
on 14 and 15 September 2006, I have the honour to
submit the report (A/60/871) that the Assembly
requested from me in resolution 59/241, which was
reiterated by resolution 60/227.
The report offers a comprehensive review of
recent trends in international migration, focusing
particularly on the impact that it has both on countries
of destination and on countries of origin. It draws on
many previous studies, including the very valuable one
undertaken by the Global Commission on International
Migration,
which
presented
its
report
and
recommendations to me last year.
In the report before the Assembly today, I focus
on the aspects of international migration that are most
relevant to development. The report makes a strong
case that international migration, supported by the right
policies, can be highly beneficial for the development
both of the countries that migrants come from and of
those in which they arrive. But it also stresses that
those benefits are contingent on the rights of migrants
themselves being respected and upheld. It shows that,
contrary to some received opinion, migration involves
women and men in almost equal numbers. It therefore
considers the role of gender in international migration
and the impact on gender-related issues.
Perhaps most important, the report explores new
ways by which Governments are seeking to manage the
flows and skills of people in order to make the greatest
use of migration’s development potential. It surveys
existing intergovernmental cooperation in this field,
including the normative framework, the various global

06-37670

A/60/PV.88

and regional initiatives that have been taken and the
bilateral approaches that are being tried, such as
agreements on the portability of pensions and health
benefits. It points out that international cooperation is
also crucial in the struggle to protect people against the
odious crime of human trafficking.
Member States will of course draw their own
conclusions from the facts set out in the report. But I
have ventured, in the foreword to the report, to make
some tentative suggestions, which I will summarize for
the Assembly now.
First, I should like to congratulate the Assembly
on its decision to hold a High-level Dialogue on this
subject, preceded by high-level panels and a hearing
with representatives of civil society. The report shows
very clearly that we are in the midst of a new era of
migration, and that international migration today is
indeed a global phenomenon. Large numbers of people
migrate in search of a better life, not only between
neighbouring countries or within a region but to and
from the uttermost ends of the Earth. If anyone
harbours doubts on that point, a stroll through this city
of New York should quickly put them right.
There can be very few countries that are not
affected by international migration in one way or other.
Policy-makers are increasingly recognizing its
importance for development. Therefore, a global
discussion on international migration and development
could hardly be more timely. To ensure that its
importance is fully appreciated at the highest level,
Peter Sutherland — who, as the Assembly knows, was
the founding Director-General of the World Trade
Organization — has kindly agreed to serve as my
Special Representative for Migration. He is already
engaged in intensive consultations with Governments,
and he will continue to urge them to bring their best
ideas to the Dialogue in September.
My second point is that evidence of the benefits
brought about by international migration is
accumulating. It is no coincidence, and it should be no
surprise, that many countries that not so long ago were
primarily sources of migrants — for instance Ireland,
several countries in southern Europe, the Republic of
Korea and Chile — have developed spectacularly, and
now boast thriving economies which make them
attractive destinations for migrants. Benefits, both to
countries of origin and to countries of destination, are
highly relevant to development, since both categories

06-37670

include many developing countries. Indeed, some
developing countries, such as Malaysia and Thailand,
are at this moment making the transition from one
category to the other.
Yet — and this is my third point — it would
clearly be naive to pretend that all is for the best in the
best of all migratory worlds. We are all too familiar
with the abuses to which many migrants are subjected,
whether in transit, where they fall prey to smugglers
and traffickers, sometimes with fatal consequences, or
in the countries where they settle, where they are often
exposed to exploitation by unprincipled employers, as
well as to xenophobic reactions from parts of the
resident population, including sometimes even
representatives of public authority.
By the same token, we must all be aware of the
social and cultural tensions that have arisen in many
countries where there are large and recently established
populations of foreign origin, especially when those
populations have traditions or beliefs sharply different
from those that long-term residents of the country are
used to. The benefits that migrants bring to a country
as a whole, and over time, are often eclipsed by more
immediate and local grievances, whether well-founded
or not. Most of us must also now be aware of negative
effects felt in some countries of origin, particularly
when workers with badly needed skills, for instance in
the health sector, are drained away by better conditions
and higher salaries abroad.
For all those reasons, it seems clear that few, if
any, countries would be willing, so to speak, to lie back
and enjoy the benefits of migration without seeking to
manage it. But it would be equally foolish to try to stop
it altogether, as that could be achieved only by an
application of State power so draconian that it would
threaten the freedom, as well as the prosperity, of any
country that resorted to it.
It is therefore not surprising that more and more
Governments are seeking to channel the flow of
migrants, whether out of or into their own countries, in
ways that maximize the benefits while minimizing the
adverse side effects. For instance, countries of
destination seek to select migrants whose skills are
most needed and have experimented with various
policies aimed at promoting harmony and mutual
respect between new communities and established
citizens. Meanwhile, countries of origin seek more and
more to spread the benefits of remittances among their

3

A/60/PV.88

populations and to work with communities of migrants
abroad and give them incentives to invest their
acquired skills and capital back home.
Many of those policies require, or can be
facilitated by, cooperation between the Governments
concerned. Even where that is not the case, there is
much to be gained from sharing experiences, both
positive and negative, and from exchanging ideas. That
of course is precisely the point of the Dialogue that
Governments will hold in September. Those two days,
and the preparations for them — to which I hope my
report will prove a useful contribution — promise to be
a very rich learning experience for all concerned.
My only fear is that two days will not be enough.
It seems to me that this topic will not be soon
exhausted. International migration is likely to be with
us as long as human societies continue to develop. It
has increased significantly in recent decades, as it did
in previous periods of economic integration, such as
the one preceding the First World War. In all
probability, it will continue to rise in the decades
ahead. Both the opportunities and the challenges
associated with this most dynamic phenomenon will
continue to evolve. Humankind’s response will need to
be constantly reinvented in ways that will no doubt
require Governments to intensify their cooperation.
That is why in my report I have suggested that
Governments may wish the High-level Dialogue to
mark not the end but the beginning of serious global
cooperation on this issue.
I do not for one minute suggest, or imagine, that
Governments would relinquish any control of their
borders or of their policies in an area so central to
national identity and sovereignty. But, I do suggest
that, if they find the High-level Dialogue as valuable as
I believe they will, they may wish to establish a
permanent forum of a voluntary and consultative
nature, with a view to continuing the debate, the
sharing of experience and the exchange of ideas.
If they do so wish, it goes without saying that the
United Nations is available as a venue, and that its staff
are ready to give Member States whatever assistance
they may require in organizing and servicing such a
forum. Indeed, that would be a highly appropriate role
for the Organization, dedicated as it is by its Charter to
promote social progress and better standards of life in
larger freedom.

4

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his important and illuminating statement.
We know we are dealing with a very important,
and in some regards complicated, subject. I think it is
very good that we have these events in preparation for
the High-level Dialogue in September. I trust that
members will participate as much as possible in the
panel discussions this week, on 8 June, and in Geneva
on 4 July, which is an important date for one
delegation, as well as in the 12 July informal
interactive meeting in New York with representatives
from non-governmental organizations and civil society.
Let us go to work.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda
item 54.
Agenda item 32 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/60/478/Add.1)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) that is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position. The
positions of delegations regarding the recommendation
of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are
reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee”.

06-37670

A/60/PV.88

May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of vote
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee, unless notified otherwise
in advance.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/263).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 31.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items: reopening of the consideration of
sub-item (i) of agenda item 97
The President: I would like to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to document A/60/L.55,
which has been circulated under sub-item (i) of agenda
item 97, entitled “Convening of the fourth special
session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of agenda item 97 at its
69th plenary, on 23 December 2005. In order to enable
the General Assembly to consider draft decision
A/60/L.55, it will be necessary to re-open the
consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda item 97. May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to reopen its consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda item
97?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will recall also that, at
its 17th plenary meeting, on 20 September 2005, the

06-37670

General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (i) of
agenda item 97 to the First Committee. In order for the
General Assembly to proceed expeditiously with its
consideration of the draft decision issued as document
A/60/L.55 under this sub-item, may I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to consider subitem (i) of agenda 97 directly in plenary meeting under
heading G of the agenda, namely, “Disarmament”?
It was so decided.
The President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda item 97?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 97 (continued)
General and complete disarmament
(i) Convening of the fourth special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament
Draft decision (A/60/L.55)
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia to introduce draft decision
A/60/L.55.
Mr. Rachmianto (Indonesia): I am speaking on
behalf of the States members of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Before I proceed, allow me to make a small
correction on the title of draft decision A/60/L.55. The
title of the draft decision should read “Convening of
the fourth special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament”.
In accordance with resolution 59/71, adopted by
the General Assembly on 3 December 2004, the Openended Working Group on the fourth special session of
the General Assembly devoted to disarmament was
supposed to hold an organizational session, to be
followed by three substantive sessions on the dates that
had been scheduled for 2006. However, due to the fact
that a chairperson for the Open-ended Working Group
could not be found at the time that the substantive
session was to start, we decided to postpone the work
of the Open-ended Working Group to a later date.
In that regard, following informal consultations
with delegations, and for the purpose of reporting to

5

A/60/PV.88

the General Assembly before the end of the sixtieth
session, as requested by the aforementioned resolution,
we would like to introduce the draft decision contained
in document A/60/L.55, as orally corrected, for
consideration and adoption by the Assembly.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft decision A/60/L.55, as orally corrected by the
representative of Indonesia.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/60/L.55, as orally corrected, entitled
“Convening of the fourth special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament”. May I take it that
the Assembly decides to adopt draft decision
A/60/L.55, as orally corrected?
Draft decision A/60/L.55, as orally corrected,
was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (i)
of agenda item 97.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items: request for the inclusion of an
additional item on the agenda
Note by the Secretary-General (A/60/238)
The President: As indicated in the SecretaryGeneral’s note, the current term of the permanent
judges of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda comes to an end on 24 May 2007. The Statute
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda does
not provide for extending the term of office of the
permanent judges. In the absence of such a provision,
the approval of the Security Council, as the parent
organ of the Tribunal, and of the General Assembly, as
the organ that elects its judges, would be needed in
order to extend the term of office of the permanent
judges of the Tribunal until 31 December 2008.
In that connection, the Secretary-General has the
honour to request, pursuant to rule 15 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, the inclusion in the

6

agenda of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly
of an additional item entitled “Extension of the term of
the permanent judges of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994”.
Owing to the nature of the item, unless there is
any objection, may I take it that the General Assembly
agrees that the relevant provision of rule 40 of the rules
of procedure, which would require a meeting of the
General Committee on the question of the inclusion of
that item on the agenda, can be waived?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that the General
Assembly, on the proposal of the Secretary-General,
wishes to include on the agenda of the current session
an additional item entitled “Extension of the term of
the permanent judges of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994” under heading I of the agenda,
entitled “Organizational, administrative and other
matters”?
It was so decided.
The President: The item is therefore included as
item 161.
In his note, the Secretary-General further requests
that the item be considered directly in plenary meeting.
May I take it that the General Assembly, as requested
by the Secretary-General, wishes to consider this item
directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

06-37670
