S/2021/1117

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 January 2022
Original: English

Situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2584 (2021), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2022 and requested the Secretary-General to report to the
Council every three months on the implementation of the resolution. The present
report covers major developments in Mali since the previous report (S/2021/844)
dated 1 October 2021.

II. Major developments
2.
During the reporting period, the transition authorities pursued efforts to
implement their political agenda on the basis of the transitional Government ’s action
plan, notably electoral reforms and the establishment of a single election management
body, as well as the holding of a wide-ranging national dialogue on reform (Assises
nationales de la refondation) to lay the foundation for political and institutional
reforms. These initiatives took place against the backdrop of divergent views between
the transitional Government and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) on the timeline for the political transition, including the holding of
legislative and presidential elections by February 2022 to mark the end of the
transition period, as well as the deteriorating security situation. Limited progress was
achieved in implementing the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, while
efforts to develop a comprehensive politically-led strategy for central Mali continued.

A.

Political transition, reforms and elections
3.
During the reporting period, political stakeholders remained divided on the
substantive aspects of the transition, notably the transitional Government’s reform
agenda, electoral reforms and the holding of the national dialogue on reform. The
national dialogue is conceived as a consultative process with key stakeholders from all
segments of society to launch political and institutional reforms to address the root
causes of recurrent crises in Mali. Several political parties, groupings and movements
expressed their support for the transition authorities and confirmed their willingness to
participate in the national dialogue. Conversely, the political coalition of parties
regrouped under the Cadre d’échange des partis et regroupements de partis politiques

21-19350 (E)

070122

*2119350*

S/2021/1117

pour une transition réussie au Mali, comprising allies of the former presidential
majority, continued to publicly oppose core elements of the transition authorities’
agenda. Following their meeting with the President of the transitional Government on
19 November, the Cadre d’échange announced in a communiqué that, owing to the
erosion of trust between the transitional Government and political parties, the grouping
would not participate in the national dialogue. Furthermore, the Cadre d’échange
reiterated its calls for adherence to the transition time frame and the organization of
elections and expressed its willingness to support a successful transition, but indicated
that it remained open to dialogue with the transition authorities.
4.
In support of the transition authorities and the armed forces, peaceful
demonstrations were held throughout October in several cities, including Bamako,
Bougouni, Kayes, Mopti, Sévaré and Sikasso. Other national stakeholders, including
civil society, also stated their positions: on 6 November, in a press conference,
Synergie 22, a platform of 22 civil society organizations involved in election
monitoring, expressed concerns over the entrenched political polarization on m atters
related to electoral reforms; and the imam Mahmoud Dicko, in a mass prayer
gathering that he organized on 28 November, expressed concern about the trajectory
of the transition as a contributing factor to the continued isolation of Mali and called
for the convergence of all the nation’s active forces for a successful transition.
5.
In accordance with its agenda, the transitional Government continued
preparations for holding the national dialogue on reform. On 16 October, the Prime
Minister of the transitional Government issued a decree appointing 30 members of
the organizing committee of the national dialogue, including 10 women (33.3 per
cent). In another decree signed the same day, 18 public figures were appointed to the
high-level panel of the national dialogue, including 7 women (38.9 per cent). Both
structures are in compliance with the gender parity law and the designated officials
are respected across the political spectrum. On 20 October, the Council of Ministers
approved the draft terms of reference and timetable of the national dialogue. The highlevel panel was formally launched by the President of the transitional Government on
26 October and was tasked with: (a) conducting consultations with political and social
stakeholders to ensure wide participation and foster consensus; (b) implementing the
calendar of the national dialogue; (c) developing and implementing a communication
plan and monitoring its implementation; and (d) drafting the final report on the
national dialogue for submission to the President of the transitional Government. On
28 October, the Prime Minister of the transitional Government inaugurated the
organizing committee for the national dialogue.
6.
In view of the continued political polarization, the transition authorities, notably
the Prime Minister and the Minister of State Reform, initiated consultations with key
stakeholders to galvanize support for the Government’s agenda, notably the national
dialogue on reform. The President of the transitional Government also held a series
of consultations with political parties and groupings, trade unions and traditional,
customary and religious authorities between 12 and 22 November. On 23 November,
the President of the National Transition Council received a delegation from the High
Islamic Council of Mali.
7.
The national dialogue on reform was scheduled to commence at the cercle and
commune levels on 22 November and at the national level on 21 December. However,
on 22 November, the high-level panel issued a communiqué announcing that, owing
to ongoing consultations, the dialogue would be postponed until further notice. In a
communiqué issued on 3 December, the panel announced a new timeline for the
national dialogue, beginning on 11 December at the cercle level, on 15 December at
the commune level and between 27 and 30 December at the national level.

2/17

21-19350

S/2021/1117

8.
While uncertainty remains regarding the electoral timetable, some steps were
taken to organize elections. On 24 November, the Council of Ministers adopted a draft
electoral law that provides for: (a) the establishment of a single electoral management
body; (b) a revised electoral map for legislative elections; (c) the reform of the voting
system, including the introduction of electronic voting and, for parliamentary elections,
a system of proportional representation; (d) the capping and control of campaignrelated expenses; and (e) the obligation to release individual polling station results and
the electronic transmission of vote counts. MINUSMA provided logistical support for
the annual revision of the voter register, which began on 1 October and will run until
31 December, including the deployment of materials to the northern regions.
9.
Reacting to the adoption of the draft law, the Cadre d’échange, in a communiqué
issued on 25 November, called on the transitional authorities to: (a) work towards
consensus, inclusivity and neutrality of the Government; (b) respect ECOWAS
normative frameworks precluding the modification of electoral laws six months
before scheduled elections, except with the consent of a majority of political actors;
and (c) comply with the outcome of the workshop organized by the Ministry of
Territorial Administration and Decentralization concluded on 30 June, in which it was
recommended that the existing electoral architecture should be retained, with some
improvements. On their part, the Mission d’observation électorale au Mali and the
Coalition pour l’observation citoyenne des élections au Mali welcomed the new draft
electoral law, while suggesting areas of improvement.
10. A series of investigations and legal proceedings against some Malians was
initiated. On 26 October, the fourth Vice-President of the National Transition Council
was arrested for allegedly posting subversive remarks on social media. Several
political parties issued communiqués denouncing the arrest. On 4 November, the
Council adopted a resolution calling for his parliamentary immunity to be respected
and for the case to be dismissed by the tribunal. However, a presidential decree issued
on 9 November removed him as a Council member and nullified his parliamentary
immunity. He was released from detention but is currently awaiting trial. On
5 November, the prosecutor for commune VI in Bamako district announced the
initiation of judicial investigations against six individuals: five former State security
and police officials and the former Secretary-General of the Presidency under the
former President of the transitional Government, Bah N’Daw. The charges against
them include allegations of criminal conspiracy and plotting against the Government.
It is worth recalling that the former Prime Minister, Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga, and
the former Secretary-General of the Presidency, Kalilou Doumbia, remain in detention
over accusations of corruption related to the purchase of a presidential plane and
military equipment under the regime of the former President, Ibrahim Boubacar Keita.
Engagement with the international community
11. The international community remained actively engaged in support of the
transition process. On 17 October, the President of Ghana, Nana Akufo-Addo, in his
capacity as Chair of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government,
travelled to Bamako for meetings with the transition authorities. During his
interactions, the authorities laid out the challenges facing the country, notably a weak
State presence beyond the capital and the security situation, and their priorities to
ensure that elections are held in a conducive environment and that the return to
constitutional rule is lasting. They announced that the election timetable would be
issued at the end of the national dialogue on reform. The Government reiterated the
same messages to the Security Council delegation, which visited Mali on 23 and
24 October. On 25 October, the transitional authorities expelled the Special
Representative of ECOWAS to Mali from the country citing “actions incompatible
with his status”.
21-19350

3/17

S/2021/1117

12. On 7 November, ECOWAS convened an extraordinary session in Accra to discuss
the situation in Mali and Guinea. Prior to the summit, the President of the transitional
Government formally notified the Chair of ECOWAS that elections could not be held
in February 2022 as envisaged and requested additional time to convey a new date. In
its final communiqué, the summit deplored the lack of progress in preparations for the
elections, including the absence of a detailed timetable. It decided to impose targeted
sanctions, with immediate effect, on most members of the transition authorities, their
families and the other transition institutions in the form of a travel ban and a freeze on
financial assets. ECOWAS called on the United Nations, the African Union and other
bilateral and multilateral partners to follow suit. On 15 November, the Foreign Affairs
Council of the European Union agreed to establish a dedicated framework for restrictive
measures on Mali. Earlier, on 2 November, the United States of America formally
announced the suspension of trading concessions granted to Mali under the African
Growth and Opportunity Act, effective 1 January 2022.
13. The outcome of the ECOWAS summit provoked mixed reactions among
political stakeholders in Mali. The transitional Government issued a communiqué on
8 November in which it, inter alia: (a) stated that it regretted the Authority’s decisions,
opining that they did not sufficiently consider the aspirations of the Malian people
and the transition authorities’ efforts; and (b) reaffirmed the transitional
Government’s willingness to maintain dialogue with ECOWAS. Political parties
critical of the transition authorities’ approach called for actions to reassure
international, regional and bilateral partners. Other political and civil society actors
criticized the summit outcome, emphasizing respect for national sovereignty and the
prevailing challenges in the country.
14. Meanwhile, at the national level, using his good offices as well as through the
local follow-up committee composed of the Special Representatives of ECOWAS, the
African Union and MINUSMA, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Mali maintained regular consultations with transition authorities, political actors
and other stakeholders, as well as representatives of the diplomatic corps, to promote
dialogue and explore ways to build consensus on major political priorities.

B.

Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
15. Overall, there were limited advances in the implementation of the Agreement.
The increased focus placed on the political transition diverted attention from its
implementation. Despite the efforts deployed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the international mediation team, no progress was made
regarding the integration of the remaining 1,136 ex-combatants as part of the
accelerated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process. Although the
transitional Government demonstrated its willingness to proceed, both the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and the Plateforme are yet to submit lists
of their combatants, delaying the process even further. These challenges
notwithstanding, following good offices efforts by the international mediation team
and the Special Representative, the signatory parties agreed to proceed with the
socioeconomic reinsertion of former combatants, with an initial batch of 300 elements
per region. Negotiations are still ongoing for the implementation of these
reintegration initiatives.
16. In a significant development, at the forty-fifth session of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee, held in Bamako on 5 October, the Minister of National
Reconciliation, Colonel-Major Ismaël Wagué, who is in charge of the implementation
of the Agreement, announced the transitional Government’s intention to integrate
13,000 ex-combatants into the armed and security forces before the end of 2021 and
an additional 13,000 within the next two to three years. However, the optimism that

4/17

21-19350

S/2021/1117

this announcement created was dampened when, on 7 October, the Permanent
Strategic Framework, a coalition created by the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad and a wing of the Plateforme in April, announced its withdrawal from
the inter-Malian consultative framework, a mechanism designed to maintain dialogue
between the signatory parties between the sessions of the Committee. The decision
was motivated by remarks made by Colonel-Major Wagué at the Committee meeting
that the transitional Government was not part of the Permanent Strategic Framework
and urging international partners to refrain from supporting the body without prior
consultation with the transitional Government.
17. Against this backdrop, on 2 November, the Permanent Strategic Framework
embarked on a tour across all northern regions aimed at raising awareness among
local populations of the need for peaceful coexistence. In a show of force, the
coalition deployed a convoy of some 200 vehicles for the tour. Also on 2 November,
the Malian Armed Forces announced the launch of a special recruitment process in
the northern and central regions aimed at integrating 2,000 individuals with
serviceable weapons into the army, the national guard and the gendarmerie. To date,
about 440 young men have been registered in Ansongo, Gao and Ménaka.
18. There was no change regarding the inclusion of women in mechanisms to
support and monitor the implementation of the Agreement. The appointment of an
additional 15 women is still pending. Furthermore, consultations to establish an
independent women’s observatory with a view to enhancing the role of women in the
peace and political processes are ongoing. On 28 October, to promote the participation
of women in political and peace processes, the transitional Government, with support
from MINUSMA, launched women’s situation rooms with the participation of 200
women from civil society organizations and political parties. This peacebuildi ng
mechanism provides a physical space and framework to work with communities,
especially women and young people, in advocating, mediating and intervening in
violent and tense situations, notably during elections, and to promote equitable access
and the participation of women in political and electoral processes during the
transition period. Situation rooms have been established in Bamako and seven regions
across Mali. During the reporting period, no progress was made in establishing the
independent women’s observatory.
19. In a positive development, on 21 October, the Minister of Economy and Finance
presided over a signing ceremony for the launch of 16 projects of the Sustainable
Development Fund amounting to over $65 million (38 billion West African CFA
francs). The event marked an important step forward in the implementation of title IV
of the Agreement on socioeconomic and cultural development. Also on 21 October,
the transitional Government of Mali and the heads of regional councils, including
regional interim authorities, signed the first memorandum of understanding regarding
the disbursement of 70 per cent of the pre-approved funds ($77 million) for the nine
projects led by local authorities in the north under the Northern Development Zone.
However, the continued delay in appointing members of the Zone secretariat risks
further slowing implementation of the reporting mechanism as well as compliance
with public procurement rules, as requested by the Minister of Economy and Finance.
Support from the international community
20. To defuse these tensions, Algeria invited the Minister of National Reconciliation
and representatives of the signatory movements to Algiers from 22 to 24 October,
after which the Strategic Partnership Framework resumed its participation in the interMalian consultative framework. The Special Representative, working with members
of the international mediation team, also reached out to the parties to stress the need
to focus on the speedy implementation of the Agreement.

21-19350

5/17

S/2021/1117

21. On 25 November, the international mediation team convened a virtual meeting
as part of its support for peace efforts in Mali. In its final communiqué it, among other
things, reaffirmed its determination to exercise its arbitration power and encouraged
signatory parties to engage in constructive dialogue towards completing the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
22. MINUSMA continued to provide technical assistance to the transition authorities
for the development of the national security policy, the integration of former
combatants into the Malian Defence and Security Forces and the subsequent
redeployment of reconstituted units to northern Mali. The support was focused on
capacity-building activities, the rehabilitation of infrastructure and the implementation
of national strategies and policies related to security and defence matters.

C.

Regional developments
23. During the reporting period, the Special Representative continued his
consultations with regional stakeholders and neighbouring troop- and policecontributing countries, specifically Algeria, Chad, Mauritania, the Niger and Senegal,
to discuss their contributions to peace and stability in Mali, including supporting the
transition and implementing the Agreement. In the same vein, he conducted a joint
visit to Togo with the High Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Mali and the Sahel. He also maintained regular consultations with
the African Union, ECOWAS and the Group of Five for the Sahel and its Joint Force
on overall support to Mali and specific questions related to it throughout the period
under review. One of the key issues raised by regional stakeholders relates to the
mandate of MINUSMA, which they deemed to be inadequate given the prevailing
security situation. The Special Representative took the opportunity to apprise his
interlocutors of the ongoing adaptation plan and to point out that the key challenge
facing the Mission is related to shortfalls in capabilities, which need to be bridged
urgently to enable the full implementation of the mandate. MINUSMA continued to
cooperate with United Nations presences in the subregion, including the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel. In this connection, the Special
Representative participated in the thirty-sixth high-level meeting of United Nations
heads of mission in West Africa and the Sahel on 15 November.
24. As part of the reconfiguration of the military presence of France in the Sahel
region, French forces closed their bases in Kidal and Tessalit in northern Mali on
13 November and in Timbuktu on 15 December.

D.

Stabilization and restoration of State authority in the centre
25. In the central regions, the reporting period was marked by continued complex
security challenges, the marked increase in and complexity of threats and attacks by
violent extremist and terrorist groups as well as intercommunal violence and a further
deepening of the multidimensional crisis, with serious governance, socioeconomic,
humanitarian and human rights repercussions. Intercommunity violence continued, in
particular in Djenné and Niono cercles. The Special Representative continued to
engage regularly with the transitional authorities on the stabilization of the central
regions and visited the Mopti Region, including the village of Ogossogou, on
5 November.
26. The transition authorities embarked on the elaboration of a consolidated
comprehensive politically-led strategy for central Mali, coordinated by the Permanent
Secretary of the Cadre politique de gestion de la crise au centre du Mali, with
integrated support from the United Nations. After the initial field mission to the centre

6/17

21-19350

S/2021/1117

from 27 September to 2 October, which consisted of a three-day workshop in Mopti
followed by two one-day visits to Bandiagara and Douentza, respectively, the
Permanent Secretary conducted consultations with relevant stakeholders from the
Ségou and San Regions, which constituted the former Ségou Region, from 2 to
4 November in the town of Ségou. These consultations convened a broad range of
regional and local officials, civil society organizations, trade unions, women’s, youth
and minority groups and other stakeholders. The workshops canvassed input from
participants on a range of thematic priorities for a revised strategy to stabilize the
centre by addressing existing challenges, including in the fields of security,
governance, development and humanitarian assistance. The Mission continues to
support the transition authorities in the process.
27. The Mission pursued its support to the structures of the Cadre politique de
gestion de la crise au centre du Mali, including its Permanent Secretariat. It also
continued to implement community violence reduction projects across the regions. A
total of 10 projects were completed and 15 were launched during the reporting period,
focusing on vocational training, basic infrastructural rehabilitation, income generating activities, lighting and security, agriculture, solar-powered water systems
and animal husbandry.
Promotion of reconciliation
28. On 8 October, the villages of Ogossogou Peulh and Ogossogou Dogon, where
two major attacks took place in 2019 and 2020 killing 192 civilians, and 10 other
Peulh and Dogon villages in the communes of Bankass and Dimmbal signed a loca l
reconciliation agreement. The agreement provides for the free movement of people
and goods, the resumption of agricultural and pastoral activities, the unhindered
exploitation of natural resources as well as access to markets, health facilities and
other services. The process was supported by the Équipe régionale d’appui à la
réconciliation and MINUSMA, notably through mediation and reconciliation efforts
since November 2020, coupled with the deployment of a MINUSMA temporary
operating base in Ogossogou. As a result, Ogossogou community leaders resumed
mutual visits and communities started to move freely to undertake agricultural and
pastoral activities. Cattle raided in an earlier attack on the village of Dimmbal were
returned, and dwellings in abandoned Fulani villages are being rebuilt for the return
of internally displaced persons. The situation remains fragile, however, with the
ultimate success of the ongoing stabilization efforts contingent upon a host of factors,
including cross-border intercommunal dynamics.
Restoration of State authority
29. As at 31 October, 73 per cent of mayors, 93 per cent of prefects and 19 per cent
of sub-prefects were effectively present in the central regions. These figures show a
slight decrease in the presence of mayors (from 78 per cent) and of sub-prefects (from
20 per cent) and an increase in the presence of prefects (from 80 per cent) since May.
However, variations across districts are significant. All mayors but one were deployed
in Ségou and San Regions in October, formerly constituting the Segou region, while
only about 50 per cent were present in the former Mopti Region, consisting of the
regions of Bandiagara, Douentza and Mopti. The same tendency is observed for
sub-prefects, of whom 28 per cent were present in the former Ségou Region in
October, while only 12 per cent were present in the former Mopti Region.
30. Despite the precarious security situation in the area, MINUSMA and the United
Nations Development Programme jointly supported the transformation of the justice
of the peace system (a one-magistrate tribunal) of Djenné into a court of first instance
to ensure the division of responsibilities between the prosecutor and the two judges.

21-19350

7/17

S/2021/1117

Fight against impunity
31. On 18 October, the Special Representative met with the Minister of Justice in
follow-up to Security Council resolution 2589 (2021) to discuss accountability for
crimes against peacekeepers and urged the transitional Government to undertake
further steps to hold those who attack MINUSMA personnel and premises accountable.

III. Major security developments
32. Between 1 October and 15 December, a total of 324 attacks against civilians
were reported, a slight decrease compared with the previous reporting period, during
which there were 326 attacks. The latest attacks resulted in 80 civilians killed, 95
injured and 90 abducted.
33. While the overall number of incidents against civilians has reportedly
decreased, three trends indicate important shifts in the overall security environment.
First, the Mission received few reports of confirmed incidents or threats of violence
in areas effectively controlled by violent extremist and terrorist groups despite
allegations of severe human rights violations, potentially indicating a high level of
coercion occurring in those areas. Second, reported security incidents occurred
primarily in areas where different groups are vying for control against either the State
or community-based armed groups and militias, such as in Bandiagara, San and Ségou
Regions, the entirety of the Gourma and key strategic access routes where radical
armed elements are seemingly attempting to establish effective control. Third,
incident trends indicate a continued shift from the centre to the south of the country,
with an increase noted in attacks by unidentified armed individuals or members of
violent extremist and terrorist groups in Koutiala, San and Sikasso, as well as
increased intercommunal tension affecting in particular the Diabali and Dogofri
communes in Niono district, Ségou Region.
34. This spread of incidents from the centre southwards is due in part to the lack of
an effective State presence, including the Malian Defence and Security Forces, in
most of the rural areas of central Mali and is visible in threats by violent extremist
and terrorist groups, the climate of fear, increased school closures and the absence of
basic services and humanitarian activities. An increase in the use of embargoes or
siege tactics was observed, as well as the strategic destruction of critical
infrastructure, most importantly bridges and telecommunication installations, and the
use of improvised explosive devices, which seems to be a deliberate tactic of war to
further isolate communities.
35. Violence along community lines continued to occur in the central regions, in
particular in Djenné and Niono cercles. A major clash between dozos and violent
extremist groups was reported on 20 October in Marébougou in the Djenné comm une,
Mopti Region, leading to mass displacement and the deterioration of humanitarian
conditions. In an attempt to break the siege laid by the extremists, local dozos, with
reinforcements from Bandiagara, Djenné cercle and the Ségou and San Regions,
clashed with radical armed elements linked to Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin. This resulted in at least 12 dozos killed and 52 wounded, with the
population trapped between the warring factions. On 3 December, presumed radical
armed elements attacked a truck with several traders on board near the village of
Songo, Bandiagara cercle and Region. The attack resulted in the death of over 30
civilians, including women and children, and 18 others injured. All of the victims
identified are reportedly Dogon from the villages of Kori-Kori, Ficko and Songo.
36. In Gao Region, an uptick in the movement of large violent extremist and terrorist
groups was reported, appearing increasingly to close in on the town of Ansongo, while
8/17

21-19350

S/2021/1117

the area of Ouattagouna is believed to be serving as an advance point for violent
extremist and terrorist groups expanding activities in the region. MINUSMA
responded to all early warning indications with the timely redeployment of its forces
to show its presence in key areas around the town and cercle of Ansongo, although
the chronic lack of aerial assets and personnel hinders the Mission’s ability to increase
its deterrent activities and operations.
37. In Timbuktu Region, the destabilizing activities of violent extremist groups
attest to the scope and scale of their influence and reach, through intimidation, threats,
extortion, kidnapping and the sabotaging of mobile network antennae, including with
the use of explosive devices. During the reporting period, threats by these groups
increased. In the affected localities, violent extremist groups continue to impose new
rules using threats and terror tactics, with consequences for civilians, in particular
children and women. In some areas of the Gourma, in the Timbuktu Region,
MINUSMA continued to implement its force’s deterrence operations to reassure the
civilian population against threats by those groups.

A.

Asymmetric and other attacks
38. The 53 incidents involving improvised explosive devices recorded since
October 2021 represent the highest monthly total in Mali since the Mission’s
inception. Of the attacks, 42 were carried out against MINUSMA (23 in Kidal, 9 in
Gao, 6 in Mopti, 2 in Ménaka and 2 in Timbuktu), resulting in 16 peacekeepers injured
and 9 killed. This is an increase compared with the previous reporting period, in which
34 attacks were recorded against MINUSMA and 19 against the Malian Defence and
Security Forces, resulting in 48 peacekeepers injured. The most serious attack against
MINUSMA using an improvised explosive device occurred on 2 October against a
logistics convoy in Kidal, resulting in one peacekeeper killed and three injured. In
another serious incident, a MINUSMA civilian contractor was killed on 3 December,
when a MINUSMA force logistics convoy was shot at in the Gao Region. On
6 December, one peacekeeper succumbed to the injuries that he sustained during an
attack with an improvised explosive device on 22 November. On 8 December, a
MINUSMA logistical convoy travelling from Douentza to Sévaré struck an
improvised explosive device near the village of Mbéba in the Lowol-Guéou commune
of the Bandiagara cercle and Region, approximately 70 km north-east of Sévaré,
killing seven peacekeepers and injuring three others.
39. A total of 68 asymmetric attacks were carried out against national and
international forces, MINUSMA and signatory armed groups, including 45 in the
north (22 in Kidal, 11 in Gao, 11 in Timbuktu and 1 in Ménaka). There were 18 attacks
in the centre (14 in Mopti and 4 in Ségou), and in the south there were 4 in Koulikoro
and 1 in Kayes. This is an increase in central Mali compared with the previous
reporting period, in which 27 attacks were recorded against security forces and
signatory groups. An international force’s logistics convoy was targeted in an incident
involving an improvised explosive device, which resulted in two civilians injured on
4 October between Bourem and Tarkint in the Gao Region.
40. The Malian Defence and Security Forces were targeted in 28 attacks (8 in Mopti,
8 in Timbuktu, 4 in Koulikoro, 2 in Kidal, 2 in Ségou, 1 in Kayes and 1 in Gao). There
were 40 people killed (34 members of the Malian Armed Forces, 3 police/gendarmerie
personnel and 3 civilians) and 52 injured (44 members of the Malian Armed Forces,
6 police/gendarmerie personnel and 2 civilians). The deadliest attack occurred on
6 October and involved an ambush against the Malian Armed Forces approximately
14 km south-west of Bandiagara in the Bandiagara commune, Mopti Region, killing
17 members of the Malian Armed Forces and injuring 11 others. A signatory armed
group (Coordination des mouvements et fronts patriotiques de résistance) was

21-19350

9/17

S/2021/1117

targeted in an attack in Gounzoureye commune, 5 km south of the town of Gao,
resulting in 10 people killed, 6 injured and 3 kidnapped.

B.

Support for Malian defence and security institutions
41. During the reporting period, 42 training sessions were conducted in Bamako and
the regions for 489 members of the Malian Defence and Security Forces (including
176 women). Of these, 18 training sessions were conducted in the centre and the north
for 168 members of the Malian Defence and Security Forces (including 8 women).
The partnership with the European Union capacity-building mission in the Sahel
continues through the holding of joint training sessions and the implementation of
evaluation tools. United Nations police have conducted predeployment training for
the Malian Defence and Security Forces, in particular for police officers deployed at
the new police stations built as part of the efforts to establish State authority.
42. MINUSMA provided logistical support to Malian Armed Forces units across the
country. The MINUSMA force also conducted six medical evacuation missions in
which 28 Malian Armed Forces personnel were evacuated. In addition, MINUSMA
transported Malian Armed Forces personnel from Bamako to Ménaka between 8 and
22 October to support the redeployment of Malian forces.

C.

Small arms, light weapons and explosive threat mitigation
43. To support Malian initiatives against the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, MINUSMA conducted, jointly with the Permanent Secretariat to Counter
the Illicit Proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons, a campaign in Bamako and
the central regions to raise awareness of the risks associated with the illegal detention,
trafficking and trading of weapons.

D.

Rule of law
44. The Ministry of Justice, with MINUSMA support, established a statistical
information system for the justice sector in Mali, a management tool that will
contribute to enhancing the functioning of tribunals and prisons in the north and the
centre. The Mission continued to provide technical support to reinforce prison
security, including by revising the interministerial decree on the integrated prison
security plan on 15 and 16 November. In October, it provided support for the
establishment, training and equipment of a national prison intervention team to enable
the prison service to respond to internal and external security needs.
45. MINUSMA and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime continued to
support the Specialized Judicial Unit against Terrorism and Transnational Organized
Crime and other judicial institutions in the prosecution of those accused of serious
crimes. This included providing technical and logistical support for an in situ mission
to Aguelhok, Kidal Region, to investigate and undertake prosecutions for the attack
on 2 April that caused the death of four peacekeepers. As at 7 December, a total of 34
individuals had been identified as suspects, 4 of whom were being held in relation to
the attacks. A total of 44 investigations are under way.
46. The Mission supported the judicial administration in trial cases of human rights
violations and terrorism-related charges, including monitoring trial sessions against
the applicable international human rights norms and standards. The judiciary
completed, for example, a special criminal trial session of 41 terrorism -related trials
involving 53 defendants, resulting in 46 found guilty. This brings the number of

10/17

21-19350

S/2021/1117

terrorism-related suspects tried since the Specialized Judicial Unit became
operational in 2017 to 229, leading to 189 convictions and 40 acquittals. On
10 November, the Military Justice Tribunal held its first criminal session of 2021 in
Bamako, with three cases tried: one assassination, one murder and one rape.

IV. Human rights situation
47. The human rights situation remained worrisome in the country, including in
areas that were previously the least affected by violence. Extremist groups
systematically targeted civilians and vital infrastructure in central and northern Mali,
while attacks against victims of contemporary forms of slavery persisted in the
southern part of the country. There were allegations of serious violations committed
by national forces during counterterrorism or military operations, notably in the
centre. The situation of women and children in conflict settings remained dire.
48. Against this backdrop, MINUSMA documented 324 human rights incidents (92
violations and 232 abuses). These comprised extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions (16), other killings (84), injuring (94), abductions or enforced disappearances
(60), torture or ill-treatment (1) and illegal arrests and detentions, in particular prolonged
detentions and violations of due process guarantees in terrorism-related cases (69), as
well as instances of death threats and intimidation, besieging of civilian populations,
property destruction and looting, cattle raiding and forced displacement.
49. Central Mali remained the epicentre of violence, with gross violations and
abuses documented in the regions of Bandiagara (65), Douentza (2), Mopti (51) and
Ségou (57). Violations and abuses were also documented in the regions of Dioila (1),
Gao (26), Koutiala (1), Ménaka (20), Sikasso (4) and Timbuktu (22), as well as in the
district of Bamako (75).
50. The perpetrators of the violations or abuses were national forces (22), regional or
international forces (1), signatory and compliant armed groups (17), community-based
armed groups and militias (21) and extremist armed groups (194). Judicial authorities
failed to fully uphold the due process rights of 69 terrorism-related suspects.
51. The United Nations recorded an increase in the number of grave violations
against children (252, compared with 228 violations during the previous period).
Recruitment and use of children (102) and sexual violence against children (16)
remain prevalent, while killing and maiming (22) were also verified. A total of 91
children associated with armed groups were separated and handed over to civilian
child protection actors. There were 26 verified attacks on schools. It is of concern that
a minimum of 1,664 schools remained non-functional, owing mostly to insecurity,
especially in the central regions as well as in Timbuktu, affecting at least 499,200
children and 9,984 teachers. There were also 57 verified incidents of denial of
humanitarian access. Of the 252 grave violations, 122 were attributed to unidentified
armed elements, while others were attributed to the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad (62), the Plateforme (27), dozo traditional hunters (14), Katiba
Macina (9), Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (7), the Malian Armed Forces (5), Dan
Nan Ambassagou (4) and Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin (2). Grave
violations were verified in central Mali (95), with others in Gao (71), Kidal (37),
Ménaka (19), Timbuktu (28), Sikasso (1) and Bamako (1).
52. Through the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements, MINUSMA
documented 14 cases of conflict-related sexual violence, an increase of 9 compared
with the previous period. These included the forced and early marriage of six girls in
Karou-Gourma, Gao Region, and cases of sexual assault against four adult male
migrants and the attempted rape of three adult female migrants by armed smugglers in

21-19350

11/17

S/2021/1117

Timbuktu Region – all in late September. One woman was allegedly gang-raped by 12
elements of the Malian Armed Forces at the military camp in the town of Mopti on
22 October. The gender-based violence sub-clusters in Gao and Mopti reported that
parents were being coerced by extremist elements to offer their daughters (both adults
and children) in exchange for protection. Two fathers in Ansongo were reportedly
killed by the perpetrators when they resisted this practice. In Gao cercle, extremist
elements allegedly abducted girls during wedding ceremonies and raped them.
53. On 28 October, the transitional Government of Mali and the United Nations
adopted an action plan to implement the provisions of a joint communiqué addressing
conflict-related sexual violence, signed by both parties in March 2019. The
implementation of the action plan would ensure the country’s compliance with its
commitment to prevent, judicially respond to and holistically support survivors of
such violence.
54. On 1 November, an investigating judge ordered the arrest of 21 pro-slavery
suspects, all men, for their alleged role in violently attacking victims of slavery in the
village of Souroubiré, Kayes Region, on 28 and 29 September. The suspects are in
detention at the central prison in the town of Kayes. This development follows robust
advocacy efforts by the United Nations for concrete accountability measures to
address this phenomenon in the affected areas.
55. In accordance with the human rights due diligence policy, MINUSMA
conducted 19 risk assessments of requests for support from the United Nations to
non-United Nations forces (9 for the Malian Defence and Security Forces and 10 for
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel). In this respect, several mitigation
measures were recommended to the entities requesting support to enhance their
human rights compliance and trigger investigations into eventual violations. More
efforts are required to ensure the effective implementation of those mitigation
measures. During the reporting period, 19 elements of the Joint Force and 10 members
of the Malian Defence and Security Forces received awareness-raising training on the
human rights due diligence policy.

V. Humanitarian situation
56. The deterioration of the security situation limits not only humanitarian access
to affected populations, but also the capacity of affected communities to reach basic
social services, in part owing to persistent security incidents on the main road axes
and attacks on bridges and communications infrastructure, which has an impact on
humanitarian access.
57. Instability and insecurity have continued to forcibly displace people and
increase humanitarian needs: internal displacement almost quadrupled in two years,
exceeding 400,000 people as at 7 December, of whom 64 per cent were children and
55 per cent were women and girls. This increase can be explained by the worsening
security situation in the Ségou, Mopti and Timbuktu Regions. As of October 2021,
more than 154,000 Malian refugees remained in neighbouring countries, notably
Burkina Faso and Mauritania. Mali hosts and provides protection and assistance to
nearly 45,000 refugees, mainly from Burkina Faso (13,000), the Niger (17,000) and
Mauritania (15,000).
58. Conflict and violence and the effects of climate change have led food insecurity
and malnutrition to rise to alarming levels. There are 1.3 million people currently in
immediate need of food assistance. Food insecurity is very high in the regions of Gao
(41.5 per cent), Mopti (40.8 per cent), Kidal (29.6 per cent), Timbuktu (26.5 per cent)
and Koulikoro (26.1 per cent).

12/17

21-19350

S/2021/1117

59. Funding does not match the increasing humanitarian demands. Some
$563 million is requested in the 2021 humanitarian response plan to assist 4.7 million
people. As at 7 December 2021, only 38 per cent of the requisite funds had been
mobilized. Despite the challenging context, limited funding and access, humanitarian
actors have managed to assist 2.5 million people so far in 2021 with support in the
areas of food security, water and sanitation measures, health, nutrition, education,
shelter and protection.

VI. Economic situation
60. Real gross domestic product, which dropped to -1.2 per cent in 2020 during the
pandemic, is projected to recover to between 2.5 to 4.6 per cent in 2021. However,
the prevailing political, security, health and humanitarian crises impeded economic
development. Extreme poverty was estimated to be 41.9 per cent at the nat ional level
in 2020 and inequality has been rising since 2016, adding to the plight of the
population. In the 2022 national budget, security spending was increased by 21 per
cent to $357.7 million, exceeding the increases for health (11 per cent) and educa tion
(4.4 per cent), despite only 30 per cent of children having access to school and 50 per
cent of people having access to health care.
61. During the reporting period, MINUSMA approved 31 quick-impact projects
totalling $1.35 million to provide small-scale infrastructure and basic services for
vulnerable populations, capacity-building and training, income generation,
agriculture, social cohesion, conflict resolution, rule of law and support to local
authorities and the security forces. Some 35 per cent of projects (11) targeted the
centre, while 65 per cent (20) were for the north.
62. The trust fund in support of peace and security in Mali launched four new
projects during the reporting period, for a total of $2.5 million. These projects, focused
mainly on the Gao Region, support water distribution, the development of irrigated
crops, the resilience of local populations and transport assistance for the deployment
of 2,000 troops in new units as part of the reconstitution of the security forces.

VII. External communications
63. The Mission enhanced its multimedia and social media outreach through live
interactive communications with Malian civil society, community and religious leaders
as well as women and young people. Similar outreach efforts were made in countries
of the region, most of which contribute troops or police to MINUSMA. The renewed
outreach was useful in enhancing understanding of the mandate of the Mission.
64. MINUSMA also showcased its achievements through storytelling, highlighting
beneficiaries’ experiences, especially in the central and northern regions. This
involved highlighting tangible impacts of its presence in the country and countering
misinformation.

VIII. Capacities of the Mission
Military
65. As at 13 December, 12,824 military personnel were deployed, corresponding to
96.52 per cent of the authorized strength of 13,286 personnel, including 485 staff
officers and 12,339 contingent personnel. Women accounted for 4.31 per cent of
military personnel.

21-19350

13/17

S/2021/1117

Police
66. As at 13 December, United Nations police had a capacity of 1,740 personnel,
corresponding to 90.63 per cent of the authorized strength of 1,920 personnel,
including 289 individual police officers and 1,451 formed police unit personnel. It is
important to note that one formed police unit is still incomplete. Women accounted
for 20.29 per cent of individual police officers and 12.70 per cent of formed police
unit personnel.
Civilian personnel
67. As at 31 October, 93 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff were deployed,
including 43 per cent of international staff, 10 per cent of United Nations Volunteers
and 47 per cent of national staff. Women accounted for 30 per cent of international
posts, 43 per cent of United Nations Volunteer positions and 17 per cent of national
staff posts.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
68. In the light of the continued terrorist attacks, including direct and indirect fire,
as well as the frequent use of unidentified unmanned aerial vehicles flying over
MINUSMA camps, the United Nations premises underwent maintenance,
improvements and the application of innovative technical solutions for security.
Security and defence systems were enhanced at MINUSMA camps and in adjacent
areas in Aguelhok, Ansongo, Ber, Douentza, Ménaka, Gao, Goundam, Kidal, Mopti,
Tessalit and Timbuktu.
69. Protection and prevention measures related to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic continued to be applied throughout the Mission, including
self-isolation upon return from abroad. The Mission continued to streamline
preventive and mitigating measures, including enhanced surveillance, contact tracing
and tracking, quarantine procedures, a safe and healthy return to work and troop
rotation modalities. As at 9 November, MINUSMA had administered 27,371 doses of
the COVID-19 vaccine.
Conduct and discipline
70. No allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were recorded during the period
under review. MINUSMA continued to implement its strategy to prevent misconduct,
in particular sexual exploitation and abuse, by delivering induction and refresher
training to all categories of personnel. It also continued to conduct outreach activities,
including awareness-raising for local populations, and to provide assistance to victims
of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Environmental issues
71. MINUSMA continued to ensure environmental monitoring of camps and
contractor facilities. It obtained a score of 71 points out of 100, as awarded by the
Department of Operational Support, on its environmental scorecard for the 2020–2021
fiscal period, a linear improvement from previous years. The main improvements
were in the water and wastewater and wider impact pillars.

IX. Observations
72. I am deeply concerned about the continued deterioration of the security situation
in Mali, characterized by increasing attacks targeting civilians and peacekeepers in
the centre and north of the country and the expansion of the terrorist threat in the
14/17

21-19350

S/2021/1117

south. I am saddened by the tragic loss of life of many civilians and nine MINUSMA
peacekeepers since my previous report. This calls for urgent measures by the
transitional Government to address the existing security challenges, better protect
civilians and increase the State presence in areas of concern, as well as longer-term
reforms addressing the underlying governance issues and deficits and continued
international support.
73. Against this backdrop, the need to ensure the timely conclusion of the ongoing
political transition cannot be overemphasized. No effort should be spared to create
the requisite conditions to that end and lay the foundations for lasting stability. I urge
the transitional Government, all political parties and civil society to work together
and reach a consensus on necessary political and institutional reforms and the
electoral calendar to pave the way for the transition to a democratically elected
Government. The United Nations will work with ECOWAS and the African Union to
support Mali in navigating its way towards this end.
74. The Special Representative and members of the local follow-up committee on
the political transition will continue to actively engage all relevant stakeholders with
a view to finding consensual solutions to emerging challenges.
75. I remain concerned about the slow pace of implementation of the Agreement.
With regard to commitments expressed on advancing the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, there is a need for concrete progress on this
long overdue benchmark. Completing the deployment of the reconstituted units in
northern Mali remains an important priority. Delaying tactics should be set aside in
the common interest of peace and development. Differences need to be addressed
within established mechanisms. I am, therefore, concerned that discussions within the
inter-Malian consultative framework have stalled. I urge signatory parties to resume,
without further delay, consultations on the implementation of their respective
commitments. I welcome the international mediation team’s commitment to play a
greater role, including making use of its arbitration powers, with a view to helping
the parties to break deadlocks and build mutual trust. The active participation of
women in the peace and political processes must also be further strengthened. In that
regard, greater efforts are needed to operationalize the women’s observatory.
76. I am appalled by the deadly attacks by violent extremist and terrorist groups on
civilians as well as national, regional and international forces in Mali and the Sahel
region. Brutal attacks targeting security forces and civilians over the past months
underline once again the urgent need to step up comprehensive political and security
responses to the expanding threat of violent extremism. I am particularly concerned
about the situation in central Mali, where the presence of violent extremist and other
armed groups has a negative impact on the lives of most communities. These groups
spread violence, physical threats and fear and expand control over many territories,
while establishing alternative and repressive forms of governance. MINUSMA
peacekeepers are doing their utmost to implement their mandate in this most volatile
area, at great personal risk. I am deeply concerned by the recent and significant increase
in attacks against MINUSMA camps and personnel with increasingly sophisticated
methods. Nine peacekeepers have lost their lives owing to such attacks since my
previous report, making the ultimate sacrifice in their service for peace. I condemn
these heinous acts in the strongest terms and recall that they may constitute a crime
against humanity. I urge the Malian authorities to hold the perpetrators accountable.
77. I welcome the transitional Government’s efforts to develop a consolidated,
comprehensive, politically-led strategy for central Mali and support its effective
implementation once it has been finalized. In this respect, commitment at the highest
level of the national authorities will be critical. MINUSMA will remain actively
engaged in this process. In this connection, I reiterate my call to scale up the ca pacity
21-19350

15/17

S/2021/1117

of the Mission’s uniformed personnel to enhance its ability to support national
authorities in protecting civilians, as recommended in my report on the adaptation
and authorized strength of MINUSMA (S/2021/657).
78. Human rights violations and abuses continue unabated in several parts of Mali.
I strongly condemn such violations and call for swift investigations to bring the
perpetrators to justice. This is particularly important when they involve elem ents of
the defence and security forces. Human rights and international humanitarian law
must be upheld. Failure to live up to these international legal obligations erodes
confidence in State institutions and indirectly reinforces the destabilizing activit ies
of violent extremist, terrorist and criminal groups. I welcome the commitment
expressed by the transitional Government to address impunity for human rights
violations and reiterate the continued readiness of the United Nations to support such
efforts.
79. I am encouraged by the renewed momentum in elaborating and implementing
action plans to tackle the issues of sexual violence in conflict and children affected
by armed conflict. The signing by the transitional Government of an action plan to
address sexual violence in conflict offers an important opportunity to find lasting
solutions to the structural causes of sexual and gender-based violence in Mali.
80. I commend the Special Representative, the civilian and uniformed personnel of
MINUSMA and members of the United Nations country team. They are working
under trying conditions to support the transitional Government and population of Mali
in achieving sustainable peace, security and development. I condemn in the strongest
terms terror attacks against United Nations personnel and installations and urge
national authorities to speed up investigations into and prosecution of such crimes. I
remain grateful to regional organizations, bilateral and multilateral partners, as well
as civil society and humanitarian organizations, for their valuable contribution to
efforts to stabilize the situation in Mali and alleviate the suffering of the Malian
people, who bear the brunt of the violence. I call on donors to continue to provide
much-needed resources to address humanitarian needs. Finally, I would like to
express my gratitude to troop- and police-contributing countries, Security Council
members and Member States for supporting MINUSMA in implementing its mandate.

16/17

21-19350

Map
21-19350

Annex

S/2021/1117

17/17
