Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

increase the balance outstanding ( including amounts
previously advanced and outstanding) in respect of any
one agency to an amount in excess of $1,000,000, provided that, notwithstanding the above provisions, the
Interim Commission of the International Trade Organization shall be authorized to postpone until 31
December 1954 repayment of the outstanding balance
of the loans made to the Interim Commission;
( e) Such sums not exceeding $45,000 as may be
required to finance payments of advance insurance premiums where the period of insurance extends beyond
the end of the financial year in which payment is made.
This amount may be increased with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions. The Secretary-General shall
make provision in the budget estimates of each year,
during the life of the related policies, to cover the
charges applicable to each such year.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

789 (VIIl).

Control and limitation of
documentation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 593 (VI) of 4 February
1952 on the control and limitation of documentation,
Noting the observations and suggestions of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions in its first report 34 to the eighth session of
the General Assembly, and the action taken by the
Secretary-General, inter alia, by his instruction 35 of
20 August 1953, to ensure a more effective control of
documentation,
Noting further the steps initiated by the Economic
and Social Council, in its resolution 497 D (XVI) of
29 July 1953, to reduce the number and volume of
certain categories of documents required by it,
Considering that this reduction can be carried out in
full only with the co-operation of Member States,
Expressing the wish that Member States should cooperate in giving effect to the present resolution,
34 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 7.
35 See document ST/AFS/ AI/99.

47

1. Invites the Economic and Social Council to pursue and intensify its efforts to reduce further the documentation required by it, and also by its functional
and regional commissions;
2. Invites all organs of the United Nations likewise
to scrutinize their existing documentation and effect
such reduction therein as may be feasible, and to cooperate with the Secretary-General in his efforts to
reduce the volume and at the same time to improve
the quality of the documentation of the United Nations.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.
790 (VIII). Programme of conferences at
Headquarters and Geneva

The General Assembly,
Having noted the recommendations 36 of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination in its thirteenth report to the Economic and Social Council to
the effect that the regular four-year pattern of conferences approved 37 by the General Assembly at its
seventh session can only fulfil its purpose if it is
strictly adhered to by all the organs concerned,
Noting also the opinion 38 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its
fifth report to the eighth session of the General Assembly to the effect that the Advisory Committee regards
the programme as firmly fixed for the period 1954 to
1957 and that any variations will presumably be authorized only by a special decision of the General
Assembly,
1. Endorses the opinion of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
2. Reaffirms its recommendation that all organs
of the United Nations arrange their meetings in accordance with the dates and places set forth in the
pattern presented by the Secretary-General and that
the specialized agencies concerned be invited to give
due consideration to this pattern 'in drawing up their
own programmes of meetings.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.
See document E/2446, para. 88:
resolution 694 (VII).
38 See document A/2501, para. 37.
36

3 7 See
