11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

---------------42/5.

Co-operation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of
co-operation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States, in particular resolution 41/4 of 17 October
1986,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, 11
Recalling the Articles of the Charter of the United Nations which encourage activities through regional arrangements for the promotion of the purposes and principies of
the United Nations,
Noting with appreciation the desire of the League of
Arab States to consolidate and develop the existing ties
with the United Nations in ali areas relating to the maintenance of international peace and security, and to coopera te in every possible way with the United Nations in
the implementation ofUnited Nations resolutions relating
to the question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East,
Aware of the vital importance for the countries members
of the League of Arab States of achieving a just, comprehensive and durable solution to the Middle East conflict
and the question of Palestine, the core of the conflict,
Realizing that the strengthening of international peace
and security is directly related, inter alia, to disarmament,
decolonization, self-determination and the eradication of
all forms of racism and racial discrimination,
Convinced that the maintenance and further strengthening of co-operation between the United Nations and other
organizations of the United Nations system and the
League of Arab States contribute to the work of the
United Nations system and to the promotion of the purposes and principies of the United Nations,
Recognizing the need for closer co-operation between
the United Nations system and the League of Arab States
and its specialized organizations in realizing the goals and
objectives set forth in the Strategy for Joint Arab Economic Development adopted by the Eleventh Arab Summit Conference, held at Amman from 25 to 27 November
1980,
Having heard the statement of the Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States of 15 October 1987 on cooperation between the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, 12 and having noted the emphasis placed
therein on follow-up actions and procedures on the recommendations in the political, economic, social and cultural
fields adopted at the meeting between representatives of
the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States and
its specialized organizations and the secretariats of the
United Nations and other organizations ofthe United Nations system, held at Tunis from 28 June to l July 1983, 13
as well as on the recommendations relating to political
matters contained in the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the follow-up action taken by him on the proposals

adopted at the meeting between representatives of the
General Secretariat of the League of Arab States and its
specialized organizations and the secretariats of the
United Nations and other organizations ofthe United Nations system held at Tunis and the sectoral meeting on social development in the Arab region, held at Amman from
19 to 21 August 1985, 14 as well as to the specialized agencies and other organizations ofthe United Nations system
for their efforts to facilitate the implementation of the Tunis and Amman proposals;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
strengthen co-operation with the General Secretariat of
the League of Arab States for the purpose of implementing
United Nations resolutions relating to the question of
Palestine and the situation in the Middle East in order to
achieve a just, comprehensive and durable solution to the
Middle East conflict and the question of Palestine, the
core of the conflict;
4. Requests the Secretariat of the United Nations and
the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States,
within their respective fields of competence, further to intensify their co-operation towards the realization of the
purposes and principies of the Charter of the United Nations, the strengthening of international peace and
security, disarmament, decolonization, self-determination
and the eradication of ali forms of racism and racial discrimination;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue bis efforts to strengthen co-operation and co-ordination between the United Nations and other organizations of the
United Nations system and the League of Arab States and
its specialized organizations in order to enhance their
capacity to serve the mutual interests of the two organizations in the political, economic, social and cultural fields;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to coordinate the follow-up action to facilitate the implementation of the proposals of a multilateral nature adopted at
the Tunis meeting in 1983, and to take appropriate action
regarding the multilateral proposals relating to social development adopted at the Amman meeting in 1985, including the following measures:
(a) Promotion of contacts and consultations between
the counterpart programmes, organizations and agencies
con cerned;
(b) Setting up of joint sectoral inter-agency working
groups;
7. Calls upan the specialized agencies, and other organizations and programmes of the United Nations system:
(a) To continue to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral and the programmes, organizations and agencies
concerned within the United Nations system and the
League of Arab States and its specialized organizations in
the follow-up of multilateral proposals aimed at strengthening and expanding co-operation in all fields between the
United Nations system and the League of Arab States and
its specialized organizations;
(b) To maintain and increase contacts and consultations with the counterpart programmes, organizations and
agencies concerned regarding projects of a bilateral nature
in order to facilitate their implementation;
(e) To inform the Secretary-General, not later than
l S May 1988, of the progress of their co-operation with
the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations, in particular the follow-up action taken on the mul-

11 A/42/394 and Add. l and 2.
12 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-second Session,

Plenary Meetings, 40th meeting.
13 A/38/299 and Corr.1, sect. V.

17

14 See A/40/481/Add.l.

18

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

tilateral and bilateral proposals adopted at the Tunis and
Amman meetings;
8. Takes note with appreciation ofthe arrangements for
the convening of a regional workshop on human resources
development in the Arab region in Kuwait on 28 and
29 November 1987, in implementation of paragraph 6 (e)
of resolution 41/4;
9. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations to arrange for ajoint meeting in 1988 ofthe representatives of the United Nations system and the representatives of the League of Arab States and its specialized
organizations in order to review and appraise progress
achieved in their co-operation during the past five years,
with the objective of enhancing future co-operation;
10. Requests both the Secretary-General ofthe United
Nations and the Secretary-General ofthe League of Arab
States to initiate consultations for the purpose of drafting
an agreement of co-operation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States;
11. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in close co-operation with the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States, to hold periodic consultations,
as and when appropriate, between representatives of the
Secretariat of the United Nations and of the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States on follow-up policies, projects, actions and procedures;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its forty-third session a progress report on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Co-operation between the United Nations and the League of Arab States".
40th plenary meeting
15 October 1987

42/6.

Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year
1986, 15
Taking note of the statement of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 19 October
1987, 16 which provides additional information on the
main developments in the Agency's activities during 1987,
Recalling that this year the Agency is celebrating the
thirtieth anniversary of its establishment in 1957,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency
to promote further the application of atomic energy for
peaceful purposes, as envisaged in its statute,
A/so. recognizing _the sp~cial needs of the developing
countnes for techmcal asststance by the Agency in order
to benefit effectively from the application of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes as well as from the contribution of nuclear energy to their economic development,
. Consdous of the importance of the work of the Agency
tn the 1mplementat1on of safeguards provisions of the
15
In_ternational Atomic Energy Agency, TheAnnual Reportfor /986
(Austria. July 1987). (GC(XXXl)/800 and Corr.1); transmitted to the
members of the General Assemhly by a note of the Secretary-General
(A/42/458 and Corr. l).
16 See Official Records of thc General Asscmbly, Forly-second Session.
Plenary Meetings, 42nd meeting

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 17
and other international treaties, conventions and agreements designed to achieve similar objectives, as well as in
ensuring, as far as it is able, that the assistance provided by
the Agency or at its request or under its supervision or
control is not used in such a way as to further any military
purpose, as stated in article II of its statute,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the Agency
on nuclear power, nuclear safety, radiological protection
and radioactive waste management, including its work directed towards assisting developing countries in planning
for the introduction of nuclear power in accordance with
their needs,
Again stressing the need for the highest standards of
safety in the design and operation ofnuclear plants so as to
minimize risks to life, health and the environment,
Welcoming the entry into force on 27 October 1986 and
26 February 1987, of the Convention on Early Notífication of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological
Emergency, 18 and the fact that many States have already
ratified them or consented to be bound by them provisionally pending ratification,
Noting with appreciation the entry into force on 8 February 1987 of the Convcntion on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material,
Bearing in mind resolutions GC(XXXI)/RES/470,
GC(XXXl)/RES/4 72,
GC(XXXl)/RES/ 473,
GC(XXXl)/RES/ 474,
GC(XXXl)/RES/4 7 5
and
GC(XXXl)/RES/485 adopted on 25 September 1987 by
the General Conference of the Agency at its thirty-first
regular session,
1. Takes note ofthe report ofthe International Atomic
Energy Agency;
2. Affirms its confidence in the role of the Agency in
the application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes;
3. Urges ali States to strive for effective and harmonious international co-operation in carrying out the work of
the Agency, pursuant to its statute; in promoting the use
of nuclear energy and the application of the necessary
measures to strengthen· further the safety of nuclear installations and to minimize risks to health; in strengthening
technical assistance and co-operation for developing countries; and in ensuring the effectiveness and efficiency of the
Agency's safeguards system;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency the records ofthe forty-second session ofthe General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
43rd plenary meeting
20 October 1987

42/7.

Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3187
(XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX) of
19 November 1975, 31/40 of30 November 1976, 32/18 of
11 November 1977, 33/50 of 14 December 1978, 34/64 of
17 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
18 See lnternational Atomic Energy Agency, Final Document.
Rewlulions and Convenzions Adopzed by the Firsr Special Session of zhe
General Conference. 24-26 Septcmber 1986, sect,. !-IV.
