178

General Assembly

Refugees, to keep the African refug_ee situation unde~ close
and constant scrutiny and to submit to the_ Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular sess10n of I 98;_, a
report containing up-to-date information on the cond1_t1on
of refugees in the countries concerned m ~rder _to facilitate
consideration by the General Assen:ibiy, a~ its th1~y-seventh
session, of the necessity of convenmg an mte~atl~nal conference in 1983 to review the status of contnbut10ns and
commitments made at the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, and to assess the needs and
measures for further assistance for refugees and returnees
in implementation of programmes for their relief. rehabilitation and resettlement;
7. Invites governmental bodies of specialize~ ag~ncies,
intergovernmental and non-governmental orgam~at10ns to
consider, within their sphere of compete_nce, vanous ways
and means to increase substantially assistance to Afncan
refugees and returnees;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in close co-operation ~ith the Secretary-General
of the Organization of African U~uty, to ke_ep under constant
review the situation of refugees m Afnca m order to ensure
maximum international assistance on a global basis;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to _report to th~ General Assembly at its thirty-seventh sess10n on the implementation of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
/4 December /98/

36/125.

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his Office, 84
as well as the report of the Executive Committee of t~e
Programme of the High Commi~sioner on the w_ork of its
thirty-second session, 85 and havmg heard the High Commissioner's statement, 86
Recalling its resolutions 35/41 A and B and 35/42 of 25
November 1980,
Expressing deep concern at the persistence and gravity
of the problems of refugees and displaced_ perSOf!S in t~e
world, particularly in different parts of Afnca, Asia, Latm
America and Europe,
Noting with great appreciation the positive responses of
Governments to the problems of refugees and displaced
persons of concern to the Office of the High Commissioner
through offers of asylum, vol~ntary r~pat~iation, resettlement, rehabilitation and financial contnbut10ns, as well as
the generous support given to the Office of the High Commissioner in its humanitarian task,
Reaffirming the eminently humanitarian and non-politi_cal
character of the activity of the Office of the High
Commissioner,
Extending its congratulations to the Office of the Hi_gh
Commissioner for the award of the 1981 Nobel Peace Pnze
in recognition of its work for refugees,
Considering the continuing and urgent need for _a substantial international effort to promote durable solutions to
the problems of refugees and displaced persons of concern
to the Office of the High Commissioner through voluntary
.. Ibid.
"'Ibid., Supplement No. 12 A (A/36/12/Add. I).
86
Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Third Committee. 50th meeting. paras.
2-20.

Thirty-sixth Session

repatriation or return and resettlement, drawin!f particular
attention to women and children refugees. and disabled and
elderly refugees,
Noting with satisfaction that a growing number of States
have acceded to the 1951 Convention87 and the 1967 Protocol88 relating to the Status of Refugees,
Noting with great concern ~ha~, despit~ an in~reasingly
broad understanding of the pnnc1p~es of. mtern~t10~al protection, refugees still encounter senous d1fficult1es m many
parts of the world in obtaining asylum_ and that t~ey are
exposed to the threat of refoulement, arbitrary detention and
physical violence,
Deploring, in particular, the insta~ces of military attacks
on refugee camps in southern Afnca and elsewhere and
physical attacks on asylum seekers at sea,
Drawing attention to the problem of r~fu!fees rescue~ at
sea and the difficulties encountered for their disembarkation,
involving threats of refoulement,
Welcoming the success achieved by the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva
on 9 and IO April 1981 , as a first step_ in ar<;msing worldwide interest and support for refugees m Afnca,
I. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and his staff for ~e manne~ !I"! _which they
have continued to discharge their respons1b1ht1es for protecting and assisting refugees and displaced persons of concern to his Office;
2. Takes due note of the proposals made by the H!gh
Commissioner89 and generally endorsed by the ~x~cut1":i
Committee of the Programme of the High Comm1ss1oner
to strengthen the management of his Office on the basis of
the principles and guidelines of the Gen~ral Assembly, and
welcomes his intention to seek the assistance of the Administrative Management Service of the Secret~at in undertaking expeditiously a review of the managenal methods
and organizational structure of his Offi~e_, as ~ecommended
by the Advisory Committee on Admm1strat1ve and Budgetary Questions; 91
3. Calls upon the international community to share the
burden of assisting refugees and displac~d persons the wor\d
over, taking into account the economic and demographic
absorptive capacity of the countries concerned;
4. Reaffirms the fundamental nature of the High _Commissioner's function to provide international protection to
refugees and the importance. of promoting durab!e and
speedy solutions, in consultat10n and agree~~nt with the
countries concerned, through voluntary repatnat1on or return
and subsequent assistance in rehabilitation and, whenever
appropriate, integration in countries of as~lum or resettlement in other countries of refugees and displaced persons
of concern to the Office of the High Commissioner;
S. Urges Governments to intensify their support for
activities which the High Commissioner is carrying out in
accordance with his mandate and relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
especially by:
(a) Facilitating the High Commissioner's efforts in the
field of international protection, in particular by scrupulously observing the principle of asylum and non-refoulement and by protecting asyium seekers !n situations of largescale influx, as endorsed by th,· Executive Committee of the
'' United Nations, Trem,,Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 137.
"Ibid., vol. 606. No. 8791. p. 267.
''' See A1AC.96/5941Add.l and Corr.I.
"'' Official Records o( the General Assembly, Thim·-sixth Session. Supplement No. 12 A (A/36112/Add. I). para. 64.
'" A/AC.961597.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Programme of the High Commissioner at its thirty-second
session; 92
(b) Supporting his efforts to promote, in co-operation
with Governments, United Nations bodies and non-governmental organizations, durable and speedy solutions to the
problems of refugees and displaced persons of concern to
the Office;
6. Urges Governments to join in greater international
efforts in the suppression of piracy on the high seas, in
accordance with their international obligations, and to take
appropriate action to protect asylum seekers from acts of
violence at sea;
7. Notes with great concern the serious humanitarian
problems resulting from armed attacks on refugee camps
and settlements which are the concern of the High Commissioner, and the need for special measures to protect and
ensure the safety of such refugees;
8. Welcomes the measures taken to implement the recommendations on the subject of assistance to women refugees and displaced women of con~ern to the High
Commissioner in the Programme of Act10n for the Second
Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 93 endorsed
in General Assembly resolution 35/ 136 of 11 December
1980;
9. Commends the High Commissioner for his special
efforts on behalf of disabled refugees on the occasion of the
International Year of Disabled Persons;
10. Requests the High Commissioner to continue participating in the follow-up of the International Conference
on Assistance to Refugees in Africa and urges the international community to maintain the momentum gained by
the Conference in providing assistance to refugees in Africa
commensurate with the growing number of African refugees;
11. Urges the High Commissioner to provide humanitarian assistance to meet the needs of the vastly increased
numbers of refugees in various regions of Africa, Asia,
Latin America and Europe;
12. · Stresses the importance of maintaining the relief
efforts and the resettlement momentum for boat and land
cases in South-East Asia, including the Programme of Orderly Departure, and urges all Governments to provide opportunities for durable solutions to those refugees;
13. Urges the High Commissioner further to explore
the elaboration of arrangements in order to facilitate the
disembarkation and resettlement of asylum seekers rescued
at sea;
14. Reaffirms the High Commissioner's leading responsibility in emergency situations regarding refugees and
displaced persons of concern to his Office as well as his
r~sponsibility in the co-ordination of assistance in those
situations and commends him for the considerable progress
made in the elaboration of adequate procedures to meet
emergency situations, in co-ordination with the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system;
15. Requests the High Commissioner, while carrying
out his responsibilities, to co-ordinate and co-operate closely
with other organizations within and outside the United Nations system for greatest efficiency of relief in the case of
major emergencies;
16. Urges all Governments in a position to do so to
contribute generously in order to provide the High Com92
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session. Supplement No. 12 A (N36/12/Add.1), para. 57 (2).
93
See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen. 14-30 July
1980 (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum).
chap. I, sect. A.

179

missioner with the necessary means to attain the objectives
of his humanitarian programme.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

36/126.

United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace

The General Assemblr.
Recalling its resolution 35/136 of 11 December 1980, in
which it endorsed the Programme of Action for the Second
Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 93 and decided to convene in 1985, at the conclusion of the Decade,
a World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women.
Bearing in mind its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order. 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Emphasizing the importance attached in the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade94 to the need to improve the status of women
and ensure their full participation in the development process
as agents and beneficiaries of development,
Taking note of chapter XXV. on the role of women in
development, of the New Delhi Declaration, 95 adopted by
the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 9 to 13 February
1981.
Emphasizing that the recommendations made in the Programme of Action for the Second Half of the Decade and
in other relevant decisions and resolutions adopted by the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women
should immediately be translated into concrete action by
States, the organizations of the United Nations system and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
Welcoming the entry into force on 3 September 1981 of
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 96 and the growing number of
States that have ratified it,
Convinced that the International Research and Training
Institute for the Advancement of Women must be given the
assistance needed to enable it to begin to function as early
as possible in the host country.
Noting that the review and appraisal of the progress made
by Governments in implementing the Programme of Action
will be carried out by the Commission on the Status of
Women every two years. beginning with the Commission's
twenty-ninth session.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women, 97
I. Affirms that the implementation of the Programme
of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade
for Women and of the relevant recommendations, resolutions and decisions adopted by the World Conference of the
United Nations Decade for Women should result in the
complete integration of women into the development process and in the effective realization of the objectives of the
94

Resolution 35/56, annex
A/36/ 116 and Corr. I. annex.
""Resolution 34/180. annex.
''' A/361564.
9

'
