Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

terms and volume of their assistance to the countries of
the Sudano-Sahelian region to the needs of these countries, their financial situation and their external indebtedness, not excluding the consolidation of debts in the
multilateral sphere;
7. Invites all the international financing institutions,
m particular the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, the International Finance Corporation, the International Development Association and
the African Development Bank, to intensify, as a matter
of urgency, their assistance to these countries by appropriating additional investment and development funds
for their projects and programmes aimed at rebuilding
and improving their production, in accordance with the
national and regional priorities established by these
countries;
8. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to grant high priority
during the 1970s to regional development programmes
directly or indirectly concerned with the drought problem, particularly those for developing livestock breeding, increasing food production and developing water
resources in the Sudano-Sahelian region;
9. Invites the Governing Council of the United
N atio■s Development Programme, in collaboration with
the other organizations concerned within the United
Nations system, to intensify current research on developing grain varieties suitable for the Sudano-Sahelian
region and to give its full financial and technical support
to the establishment of national and regional institutions designed to produce better knowledge of and solutions for short-term and long-term problems created by
the drought;
10. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to give priority to the
search for a medium-term and long-term solution to
the problems of desert encroachment in the countries
bordering on the Sahara and other areas with similar
geographical conditions and to take all necessary measures to help the countries concerned to implement their
action program.me;
11. Requests the developed countries and the specialized agencies of the United Nations to grant those
countries affected by the drought which do not enjoy
them benefits similar to those given to the least developed countries with respect to the specific consequences
of the drought and until those consequences are eliminated;
12. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nat ions and the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to use
their experience of emergency relief operations in continuing advance planning and the provision of temporary
assistance in order to overcome the problems of supply,
storage and distribution in 1974;
13. Appeals to Governments and intergovernmental
and non-govemmenta.l organizations to give the most
favourable response possible to the recommendations
m:1de by the mission of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in order to ensure that
the food and nutritional needs of the populations of
1
.hese countries are met in 1973-1974;
14. Invites all other organizations of the United
1\fations svstem, particularlv the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association. the International

39

Monetary Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund,
the International Labour Organisation, the World
Health Organization, the World Meteorological Organization, the World Food Programme, the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research,
to devote as much as possible of their resources, within
their respective programmes, to responding to requests
for assistance from countries in the Sudano-Sahelian
region for reconstructing the economies of these countries;
15. Further invites all Member States to give substantial financial and technical assistance for the improvement and construction of road and rail networks
at the national and regional levels;
16. Urges the Secretary-General to give effective
help to the mobilization of the resources and efforts of
the international community and of the international
financial institutions with a view to the complete and
rapid implementation of the action programme decided
on by the countries concerned;
17. Invites all Governments and intetgovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to co-operate fully
with the co-ordination system set up by the Permanent
Inter-State Committee, in liaison with the Special Sahelian 0£1ce;
18. Invites the executive heads of the specialized
agencies and other organizations and programmes of
the United Nations system to continue intensifying their
efforts, under the guidance of the Secretary-General,
to ensure full co-ordination of the assistance provided
by or through those agencies, organizations and programmes to the drought-stricken countries; .
19. Invites Member States and the Secretary-General to continue providing the Permanent Inter-State
Committee with aU the support it needs to carry out
the task assigned to it;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to report periodically on the efforts of the international community
to aid in the reconstruction and economic and social
development of the drought-stricken Sudano-Sahelian
region and to report to the General Assembly through
the Economic and Social Council.
2155th plenary meeting
17 October 1973

3064 (XXVIII). United Nations Institute for
Training and Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research,
particularly resolution 2950 (XXVII) of 11 December
1972, and the resolutions of the Economic and Social
Council on the same subject,
Having heard the statement of the Executive Director
of the Institute,2 which conveys the views of its Board
of Trustees on the need for increased financial contributions,
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Second Committee, 1535th meeting, paras. 1-10.

40

General Auembly-Twenty-eighth Session

1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training and Rese,arch;:i
2. Notes with satisfaction the increasing effectiveness of the Institute in the discharge of its responsibilities;
3. Expresses the hope that the Institute will have
·
greater and wider financial support.

2164th plenary meeting
9 November 1973
3081 (XXVIII). United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, by which it decided to establish the United
Nations University under certain objectives and principles,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1829 (LV) of 18 October 1973,
Having taken into account the resolution, comments
and observations of the Executive Board of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the draft Charter proposed by the Founding
Committee of the United Nations Uoiversity, 4
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,5
l. Adopts the Charter of the United Nations University contained in the second addendum to the report
of the Secretary-General 6 and invites the University
Council to consider the comments and observations
made in the General Assembly on the above-mentioned
Charter, in consultation with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and to submit its report to the General
Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council,
with a view to enabling the Assembly at its thirtieth
session to consider amendments to the Charter, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedures provided
for in the Charter;
2. Decides that the University Centre of the United
Nations University shall be located in the Tokyo metropolitan area in Japan;
3. Recommends that the University Council, in considering the location of research and training centres
and programmes of the University, as well as its associated institutions, take fully into account offers of
facilities and other types of contribution and, in particular, the views expressed by the General Assembly
concerning the need for support of research and training activities in the developing countries or for their
benefit;
4. Recommends further that the University Council
s.hould consider, as one of its priority tasks, the relationship between the University and the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research, including possible
areas of co-operation in research and training;
5. Endorses section 5 of the remarks of the Founding Committee of the United Nations University appended to the report of the Secretary-General ;7
3 Ibid.,

Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/9014).

4 See A/9149/Add.1.
t1 A/9149 and Add.I and

e A/9149/ Add.2.
f Sec

2.

A/Sll49, &DJlCX I, appendix II.

6. Authorizes the Secretary-General, pen'ding the assumption of office by the Rector, to take all necessary
mea~ures to implement the provisions of the Charter
of the University. in consultation with the Direct?rGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Se1ent1fic
and Cultural Organization, including the wnvening of
such sessions of the University Council as may he fL'
quired, and decides that the expenses involved in the
implementation shall be met from funds, pn:sent and
prospective, of the University;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue efforts for raising the funds required for the dynamic
development of the University from Governments. and
from non-governmental sources, including foundat1om.
universities and individuals.

2192nd plenary meeting
6 December 1973

:l082 (XXVIII). Charter of Economi<· Uil,!hl~
and Duties of States

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, in its resolution 45 (III)
of 18 May I 972. 8 decided to establish a Working Group
of governmental representatives to draw up a draft
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States.
Recalling its resolution 3037 (XXVII) of 19 December 1972, by which it decided to enlarge the composition of the Working Group on the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Reaffirming its conviction of the urgent need to establish or improve norms of universal application for the
development of international economic relations on a
just and equitable basis,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Working Group on the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States 9 and of the comments made thereon
as reflected in the report of the Trade and Development
Board on its thirteenth session; 10
2. Decides, in the light of the progress achieved,
to extend the mandate of the Working Group as estab·
Iished by resolution 45 (III) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development;
3. Further decides that the Working Group shall
hold two sessions in 1974, each of three weeks' duration, as recommend-:d by the Trade and Development
Board in its decision 98 (XIII) of 8 September I 973; 11
4. Urges the Working· Group to complete, as the
first step in the codification and development of the
matter, the elaboration of a final draft Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, to be considered
and approved by the General Assembly at its twentyninth session;
5. Requests the Trade and Development Board to
examine at its fourteenth session, as a matter of priority, the report of the Working Group and to transmit
8 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, RerNt mid
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.Il.D.4).
annex I.A.
9 TD/B/AC.12/1
and Corr.I and TD/B/AC.12/2 and
Add.I.
10 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty·
eighth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/9015/Rev.1), part
three, chap. III.
11 Ibid., part three, annex I.
