46

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

2. Reaffirms Economic and Social Council resolution 1753 (LIV), in particular paragraphs 2, 3 and 4
thereof, and Council resolution 1754 (LIV) of 16
May 1973;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, in consultation with the ag\;ncies and
organizations of the United Nations system concerned,
to continue to consider further ways and means of
using most effectively the resources of the United
Nations Capital Development Fund first and foremost
for the benefit of the least developed among the developing countries and to report on the matter, including the administrative arrangements, to the Governing
Oouncil of the United Nations Development Programme
at its eighteenth session, taking into a~count the views
expressed during the consideration of this item at the
current session of the General Assembly;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General and the
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme to submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth session, through the Economic and Social
Council at its fifty-seventh session, a report on the
implementation of paragrap;1 3 above;
5. Welcomes the increasing trend towards support
for the expansion of the activities of the United Nations
Capital Development Fund and calls upon Member
States and especially the developed countries, particularly in the light of the new orientation of the
Fund, to provide substantial voluntary contributions
to the Fund so as to make it fully operative and effective;
6. Decides to preserve the original functions of tlíe
United Nations Capital Development Fund until 31 December 1974, in accordance with the measures s~t
forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolutión
2321 (XXII) of 15 December 1967.

2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3123 (XXVIII). Partieipation of the Executive
Director of the Unitcd Nations Environment
Programmc in the lnter-A,gen<'y Consultative
Boar(l of the Unitt>cl Nations Development
Programmc

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the '.,overning Council of the United Nations Development Programme 31
and the recommendation of the Economic and Social
Council3 2 concerning the participation in the Programme's Jnter-Agency Consultative Board of the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme,
Believing that the participation of the Executive Director in the Jnter-Agency Consultative Board would
benefit both the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Development Programme,
Decides that the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme shall be invited to
participate, as appropriate, in the meetings of the lnter•1 1 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-fifth Session, Supp/ement No. 2A (E/5365/Rev. l ).
'.2 /bid., Supplcment No. I (E/5400), p. 20.

Agency Consultative Board of the United Nations
Development Programme.

2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3124 (XXVIII). Special pleclging conferencc
of the Unitcd Nations Chilclren's Funcl

The General Assembly,
Having considered the section of the report of the
Economic and Social Council dealing with the United
Nations Children's Fund, 33
Noting with approval the efforts of the United Nations Children's Fund to help developing countries to
serve the needs of children and adolescents within the
framework of a unified approach to economic and
social development,
Recognizing the important contribution which the
United Nations Children's Fund i~ making to the
achievement of the goals of the Second United Nations
Development Decade,
Bearing in mind the necessity of increasing the financia] resources of the United Nations Children's Fund in
arder to enable it to meet more adequately the expanding needs for assistance by the Fund to hasic services
benefiting children in the developing countries,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1709 (LIII) of 28 July 1972 and General Assembly
resolution 3015 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972. in
which the Council and the Assembly, inter alia, reiterated the appeal for increased contributions to the
United Nations Children's Fund to enahle it to reach
its target figure of $ 100 million by 1975,
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1821 (LV) of 9 August 1973;
2. Reaffirms its support for the policies of the United
Nations Children's Fund and commends the Fund for
its invaluable service to children in need over the
past twenty-seven years;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in collahoration with the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund. to convene during the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly, in 1974, a special
pledging conference for voluntary contributions to be
made to the Fund in order to facilitate the attainment
of the target figure of $100 million in the Fund's resources by 1975;
4. Appeals to Governments to extcnd their full cooperation in helping to make the special pledging
conference of the United Nations Children's Fund a
success.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973
3125 (XXVIII). United .Natiom1 Voluntet>rs
proµ;ramme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2659 (XXV) of 7 Deccrnbcr
1970, by which it established the United Nations
Volunteers programme within thc United Nations sys33 Officia/ Records of the Gl'nera/ Assemhly, Twenty-eif{hth
Session, Supp/ement No. 3 ( A/9003 and Corr.l), chap. VI,
sect. D.

47

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the $.,cond Committee

tem, and its resolutions 2810 (XXVI) of 14 December
1971 and 2970 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972,
Expressing its satisfaction with the efforts directed
towards the implementation of resolutions 2659 (XXV)
and 2970 (XXVII),
Reaffirming its conviction that the United Nations
Volunteers programme has the potential to render
valuable service to the developing countries, particularly the Ieast developed among them,
Reaffirming that the involvement of youth in the
collective efforts of the United Nations system will
enhance international understanding and co-operation
between nations and constitutes an important additional source of trained manpower in the over-all
development efforts in the United Nations system,
Taking note of the co-operation provided by the
volunteer organizations, in particular the International
Secretariat for Volunteer Service, to the United Nations Volunteers programme in its early phase,
Bearing in mind that, after the initial phase, the
programme ultimately should assume the principal
responsibility for its own recruitment,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme concerning the
United Nations Volunteers programme34 and expresses
its satisfaction wi-th the progress of the programme;
2. Endorses the action plan for the future development of the United Nations Volunteers programme as
outlined in paragraphs 28 to 31 of the report;
3. Requests the Administrator and the Governing
Council of the United N ations Development Programme
to continue to provide the United Nations Volunteers
programme with every possible assistance to ensure its
rapid expansion and progressive integration into projects assisted by the United Nations;
4. Further requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme, the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the
United Nations system, as well as the resident representatives of the Programme, to continue their efforts
to promote, with the agreement of the countries concerned, the use of United Nations volunteers in projects a~sisted by the United Nations and to co-ordinate
ali voluntary activities in those projects with the Coordinator of the United Nations Volunteers programme;
5. Requests the Co-ordinator of the United Nations Volunteers programme to continuc to pay special attention to the recruitment of a larger proportion
of volunteers from developing countries;
6. Endorses the measures being taken by -the United
Nations Volunteers programme to assume the responsibility for its own recruitment. working directly with
sponsoring agencies and organizations interested in
participating in thc programmc;
7. Requests Governments, intemational organizations and individuals to contribute to the Special Voluntary Fund for the United N:.itions Volunteers;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme
to report, through the Governin~ Council of the Programme and the Economic and Social Council, to the
34 E/5342.

General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on the
progress made in implementing the provisions of the
present resolution.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973
3126 (XXVIII). Reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly
l. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its fifteenth 35 and sixteenth36 sessions;
2. Takes note also of the comments made by delegations during the consideration of these reports.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3127 (XXVIII). Multilateral food aid

The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the progres...;;
report37 submitted l:.y the United Nations/F AO
Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Programme on the implementation of the recommendations contained in its report, issued in 1970, regarding
food aid and related issues during the Second Unitcd
N ations Development Decade.
2199th plenary meeting
13 December 1973

3128 (XXVIII). United Nations ConferenceExposition on Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, in resolution 3001 (XXVII)
of 15 December 1972, to hold a United Nations
Conference~Exposition on Human Settlements,
Noting the importance and priority given to the
problems of human settlements by the United Nations
Conferencc on the Human Environment, held at Stockholm from 5 to 16 June 1972,38
Noting further the full support for the ConfcrenceExposition expressed by the Committee on Housing,
Building and Planning at its eighth session, held at
Geneva in October 1973, the comments of the Committec regarding the Conference-Exposition and the
offer of its expertise,39
35 Offir:ial Records of the Economic and Social Co;mci/,
Fifty-fifth Sessio11. Supplement No. 2 ( E/5256 and Corr. l ¡.
:io !bid., Supplcme11t No. 2A (E/5365/Rev.1).
:i1 WFP/IGC: 23/20. Transmitted to ,the mernliers of \he
Economic and Social Council by a note of the &crctarvGeneral (E/5318/ Add.1).
:is See Report of thc United Nations Con.faencc on tire
Huma11 F11i-ironme11t (United Nations publication. Sak~ No.
E.73.11.A.14).
~ 9 See Official Records o/ the Economic and Social Council,
Fifr_v-síxr/1 S, , . :,.,n. Suprlement No. 2 (E/5.1-17).
