Resolutions adopted on reports of the Sixth Committee
sible and desirable, with a view to ensuring international peace and security and to developing international criminal law, to define aggression by reference
to the elements which constitute it,
Considerin(l further that it would be of definite advantage if directives were formulated for the future
guidance of such international bodies as may be called
upon to determine the aggressor,
1. Decides to include in the agenda of its seventh
session the question of defining aggression;
2. Instructs the Secretary-General to submit to· the
General Assembly at its seventh session a report in
which the question of defining aggression shall be thoroughly discussed in the light of the views expressed
in the Sixth Committee at the sixth session of the General Assembly and which shall duly take into account
the draft resolutions and amendments submitted concerning this question;
3. Requests States Members, when transmitting
their observations on the draft Code to the SecretaryGeneral, to give in particular their views on the problem of defining aggression.
368th plenary meeting,
31 January 1952.
600 (VI). Review of the Statute of the
International Law CommiHion
The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 484 (V) of 12 December
1950 in which it asked the International Law Commission for "recommendations. . .concerning revisions of
the Statute which may appear desirable, in the light of
experience, for the promotion of the Commission's
work",
Considering that, according to the report covering
the work of its third session, the said Commission, in
pursuance of the General Assembly's resolution, recommended7 that, at the time of the next election of its
members, the Commission should be placed on a fulltime basis,
1. Notes tj,e observations and recommendations
contained in chapter V of the report of the International Law Commission;
2. Expresses appreciation for the work done by the
Commission pursuant to the terms of its Statute;
. 3.. Decides, for the tir.n~ being, not to take any action m respect of the rev1s10n of the said Statute until
it has acquired further experience of the functioning
of the Commission.
368th plenary meeting,
31 January 1952.
601 (VI). Report of the International Law Commission covering the work of its third session
( chapters VI, VII and VIII)
The General Assembly,
Pending its consideration of the questions dealt with
in chapters VI, VII and VIII of the reports of the In'Ibid., Supplement No. 9, para. 67.

85

ternational Law Commission covering the work of its
third session,
·
Notes the progress of the Commission's work on
those questions.
368th plenary mettfflg,
31 Janurwy 1952.

602 (VI), Ways and means for making the evidence of customary international law more
readily available
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 9 of the Secretary-General on ways and means for making the evidence of
customary international law more readily available.
1. Notes with satisfaction that a repertoire relating
to the interpretation of the Charter is already under
way;

2. Instructs the Secretary-General to continue his
studies relating to the best methods for securing for the
United Nations the required national legislative material;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its seventh session a report containing detailed plans as to the form, contents and
budgetary implications in regard to the possible publication of:
(a) A United Nations juridical yearbook, taking
into account the suggestions made during the debates
in the Sixth Committee ;
( b) A consolidated index to the League of Nations
Treaty Series;
~ c) A list of treaty collections supplementary to
those already existing;

( d) A volume containing a repertoire of the practice of the Security Council.
369th plenary meeting,
1 February 1952.

603 (VI). Designation of non-member States to
which a certified copy of the Revised General
Act for the Pacific Settlement of International
Disputes shall be communicated by the Secretary-General for the purpose of acceuion
to this Act
The General Assembly,
Considering that only three Members of the United
Nations have become parties to the Revised General
Act for the Pacific Settlement of International Dis• Ibid., Supplement No. 9.
"Ibid., Sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 53, document

A/1934.

General A.eeemMy--Shth Session

86

putes, 10 and that in the circumstances its communication to non-member States under article 43, paragraph
1, of the Act would be premature,
Decides to defer further consideration of the matter
until at least ten Members of the United Nations have
become parties to the Act.
369th plenary meeting,
1 February 1952.
604 (VI). Regulations to give effect to article
III, section 8, of the Headquarters Agreement
between the United Nations and the United
States of America

The General Assembly,
Considering the provisions of article III, section 8,
of the Headquarters Agreement 11 between the United
Nations and the United States of America, which came
into force on 21 November 1947,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 481 (V) of

12 December 1950, which prescribed the method for
giving effect to article III, section 8, of the Headquarters Agreement,
Having considered the report 12 of the Secretary-General containing Headquarters regulation No. 1, which
was promulgated with immediate effect by the Secretary-General on 26 February 1951, and presenting draft
Headquarters regulations N os. 2 and 3 for approval
by the General Assembly,
1. Conforms Headquarters regulation No. 1 of 26
February 1951, on the United Nations social security
system, annexed to the present resolution;

2. Approves Headquarters regulation No. 2 on
qualifications for professional or 9ther special occupational services with the United Nations, and Headquarters regulation No. 3 on the operation of services within
the Headquarters District, as annexed to the present
resolution.
369th plenary meeting,
1 February 1952.
ANNEX

Headquarters Regulations
For the pu,·pose of establishing in the Headquarters District
conditions in all respects necessar~ for the full execution of
the functions of the United Nations, and in particular for the
purposes specified in each regulation, the following regulations
are in effect:

'° For the original text of this .instrument as adopted on 26
September 1928 by the Assembly of the League of Nations
see League of Nations Treaty Series, Volume 1929-1930, Nos'.
I, 2, 3 and 4, page 345 et seq. For the amendments inserted in
this text by the General Assembly of the United Nations see
resolution 268 A (III) a<lopted on 28 April 1949 by the Gdieral
Assembly.
''. Sec resolution 169 (II) adopted on 31 October 1947 by the
General Assembly.
12
See Official Records of the General Assembly Sixth Session
Annexes, agenda item 52, document A/1914.
'
'

REGULATION No. 1
United Nations Social Security Syatem
For the furpose, in the field of staff social security, o giving immediate effect to measures
necessary for avoiding multiple obligations arising
from the possible application of overlapping laws
and regulations :
1. A comprehensive United Nations social security system
having been established for the purpose of affording protection
against all reasonable risks arising out of or incurred during
service with the United Nations, the provisions of the United
Nations social security system shall constitute the only obliga-

tions of the United Nations in respect of such risks.
2. The provisions of the United Nations social security
system shall constitute the sole provisions under which persons
in the service of the United Nations shall be entitled to claim
against the United Nations in respect of any risks within the
purview of the United Nations social security system, and any
payments made under the United Nations social security
system shall constitute the sole payments which any such
person shall be entitled to receive from the United Nations in
respect of any such risks.

3. This regulation shall take effect on the date of its promulgation, without prejudice, however, to any elements of the
United Nations social security system, or any rights or obligations thereunder, already existing at the date of this regulation.
PROMULGATED by the Secretary-General on 26 February 1951,
with immediate effect, in pursuance of the authority conferred
on him by resolution 481 (V) of the General Assembly, and
CONFIRMED by the General Assembly in resolution 604 (VI) of
1 February 19S2.

REGULATION No. 2
Qualifications for professional or other special occupati-J
1ervices with the United Nation■

For the purpose of availing the United Nations of
the professional or special occupational services of
persons recruited on as wide a geographical basis
as possible :
The qualifications and requirements necessary for the performance of professional or other special occupational services
within the Headquarters District shall be determined by the
Secretary-General; provided that, prior to authorizing' medical
or nursing services by any person, the Secretary-General shall
ascertain that such person has been duly qualified to perform
such services in his own or another country.

APPROVED by General Assembly resolution 604 (VI) of l
February ·1952.

REGULATION No. 3
Operation of IICJ'Vices within the Headquartere Didriet

For the purpose of ensuring uninterrupted services
necessary to the proper functionin_g of the principal and subsidiary organs of the United Nations:
'Jhe times and hours of operation of any services and facilities or retail establishments authorized within the Headquarters
District shall be in <!ompliance with schedules fixed by the
Secretary-General ; no regulations, requirements or prohibitions
beyond those so prescribed shall be imposed without his
approval.
APPROVED by General Assembly resolution 604 (VI) of 1
February 1952.
