Resolution■ adopted without reference to a Main Committee

increased. Partial, sporadic and half-hearted measures
will not suffice. On the occasion of this anniversary,
we have proclaimed the 1970s to be the Second
United Nations Development Decade, which coincides with and is linked to the Disarmament Decade,
and have adopted the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade.G We urge all Governments to give
their full support to its most complete and effective
implementation in order to realize the fundamental
obJectives of the Charter.
10. The new frontiers of science and technology
demand Feater international co-operation. We reaffirm our mtention to make full use, inter alia, through
the United Nations, of the unprecedented opportunities created by advances in science and technology for the benefit of peoples everywhere in such
fields as outer s9ace, the peaceful uses of the seabed beyond national jurisdiction and the improvement of the quality of the environment, so that the
developed and developing countries can share equitably scientific and technical advances, thus contributing to the acceleration of economic development
throughout the world.
11. The great increase in the membership of the
Organization since 1945 testifies to its vitality; however, universality in terms of membership in the
Organization has not yet been achieved. We express
the hope that in the near future all other peaceloving States which accept and, in the judgement
of the Organization, are able and willing to carry
out the obligations of the Charter will become
Members. It is furthermore desirable to find ways
and means to strengthen the Organization's effectiveness in dealing with the growing volume and
complexity of its work in all areas of its activities,
and notably those relating to the strengthening of
international peace and security, including a more
rational division and co-ordination of work among
the various agencies and organizations of the United
Nations system.
12. Mankind is confronted today by a critical and
urgent choice: either increased peaceful cooperation and progress or disunity and conflict, even
annihilation. We, the representatives of the States
Members of the United Nations, solemnly observing
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations,
reaffirm our determination to do our utmost to ensure
a lasting peace on earth and to observe the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter, and
express full confidence that the actions of the United
Nations will be conducive to the advancement of
mankind along the road to peace, justice and pro-

gress.
1883rd plenary meeting,
24 October 1970.

s

Deploring the continued occupation of the Arab
territories since 5 June 1967,
Seriously concerned that Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, which was unanimously adopted and which provides for a peaceful
settlement of the situation in the Middle East, has
not yet been implemented,
Having constdered the item entitled "The situation
in the Middle East",
1. Reaffirms that the acquisition of territories by
force is inadmissible and that, consequently, territories
thus occupied must be restored;
2. Reaffirms that the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East should include the
application of both the following principles:
(a) Withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict;
( b) Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for and acknowledgement of the
sovereignty, terntorial integrity and political independence of every State in the area and its right to live in
peace within secure and recognized boundaries free
from threats or acts of force;
3. Recognizes that respect for the rights of the
Palestinians is an indispensable element in the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East;
4. Urges the speedy implementation of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967), which provides for
the peaceful settlement of the situation in the Middle
East, in all its parts;
5. Calls upon the parties directly concerned to
instruct their representatives to resume contact with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to the Middle East in order to enable him to carry
out, at the earliest possible date, his mandate for the
implementation of the Security Council resolution in
all its parts;
6. Recommends to the parties that they extend the
cease-fire for a J?Criod of three months in. order that
they may enter into talks under the auspices of the
Special Representative with a view to giving effect
to Security Council resolution 242 (1967);
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council within a period of two months, and to
the General Assembly as appropriate, on the efforts of
the Special Representative and on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 242 ( 1967) ;
8. Requests the Security Council to consider, if
necessary, making arrangements, under the relevant
Articles of the Charter of the United Nations, to ensure
the implementation of its resolution.
1896th plenary meeting,
4 November 1970.

2628 (XXV). The situation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Seriously concerned that the continuation of the
present grave and deteriorating situation in the Middle
East constitutes a serious threat to international peace
and security,
Reaffirming that no territorial acquisition resulting
from the threat or use of force shall be recognized,
G Resolution

2626 (XXV).

2632 (XXV). Rationalization of the proc~,dures
and organization of the General Asseml,ly

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the growth of its responsibilities
and membership makes desirabk a rev;cw of its pn1cedures and the organization of us work,
Conscious of the fact that the United Nations is
being increasingly called upon to meet new challenges
and undertake new initiatives,

General Auembly-Twenly-fifth Se11lon

'

Mindful of the need to ensure that all important
political and developmental items are discussed in the
appro~riate forum and continue to receive full conaideration,
l. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to establish during its current session a Special Committee on the Rationalization of the Procedures and
Organization of the General Assembly, consisting of
thirty-one Member States, on the basis of equitable
,eographical distribution, to study ways and means of
IDlproving the procedures and organization of the
Assembly in accordance with the provisions of the
Oiarter of the United Nations, including the allocation of agenda items, the organization of work, docuDlCDtation, rules of procedure and related questions,
methods and practices, and to submit a report to the
Assembly at its twenty-sixth session;
2. Requests the Governments of Member States to
pve the Committee all the assistance it may require in
pursuance of the present resolution and to submit their
views and suggestions to the Committee by 28 February 1971;
3. Requests the specialized agencies to provide any
relevant information regarding the procedures applying
to their respective organizations;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to give
every assistance to the Committee in the performance
of ita task;
5. Authorlu1 the Committee to maintain and circulate summary records of its proceedings.
1898th plenary meeting,
9 November 1970.

•

•

•

At tlu 1933rd plenary meeting, on 17 December 1970, the
Pre1ldent of the General As,embly announced that he had
appointed, In pursuance of paragraph I of the above resolution, tlu members of the Special Committee on the Rationtlllu#ion ol the Procedure, and Organization oJ the General
A.,nmbly.
The Committee ii composed of the following Member
State,: AFGHANUTAN, AusTIUA, BAllBADOS, BoLtvJA, BRAm.,,
BURUNDI,

CAMl!llOON,

CANADA,

CHILE,

DENMARIC, FRANCE,

OUECJ!, INDIA, JAPAN, LEBANON, LIBERIA, NETIIElU.ANDS,
NIODIA, PAICISTAN, Pllu.lPPINBS, POLAND, ROMANIA, SENEGAL,
TtJNwA, UNION OP SoVIET SoclAuST REPUBLICS, UNITl!D

AJlAa R»uauc,

UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHEltN WLAND, UNITED STATES OP AMERICA, Vl!NEZVELA,
YUGOSLAVIA and ZAMBIA.

2636 (XXV). Credentials of representatives to
the twenly 6fth session of the General
Aasembly
0

A
Th, General Assembly

Apwoves the first report of the Credentials Committee,6 except with regard to the credentials of the
representatives of the Government of South Africa.
1905th plenary meeting,
13 November 1970.
• Official Records of the General A11embly, Twenty-fifth
Seuion, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/8142.

B
The General Assembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee. 7
1929th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2642 (XXV).

J{epresentation of China ln the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling the recommendation contained in its resolution 396 (V) of 14 December 1950 that, whenever
more than one authority claims to be the Government
entitled to represent a Member State in the United
Nations and this question becomes the subject of controversy in the United Nations, the question should be
considered in the light of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the circumstances of each case,
Recalling further its decision in resolution 1668
(XVI) of 15 December 1961, in accordance with
Articla 18 of the Charter, that any proposal to change
the representation of China is an important question,
which, in General Assembly resolutions 2025 (XX)
of 17 November 1965, 2159 (XXI) of 29 November
1966, 2271 (XXII) of 28 November 1967, 2389
(XXIII) of 19 November 1968 and 2500 (XXIV)
of 11 November 1969, was affirmed as remaining valid,
Affirms again that this decision remains valid.
1913th plenary meeting,
20 November 1970 .

2651 (XXV). Fourth International Conference
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2406 (XXIII) of 16 December 1968 and 2575 (XXN) of 15 December
1969 concerning the holding of the Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic
Energy,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 8 together with the provisional agenda prepared
by the United Nations Scientific Advisory Comrruttee,9
Being of the view that the Conference will contribute
to the more effective dissemination of knowledge and
technology concerning the peaceful uses of atomic
energy among Member States, especially among the
developing countries,
1. Endorses the proposals contained in the report
of the Secretary-General on the convening of the Fourth
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of
Atomic Energy at Geneva in the autumn of 1971;
2. Notes with appreciation the contributions and
close co-operation of the International Atomic Energy
Agency in the preparations for the Conference;
3. Commends the United Nations Scientific Advisory
Committee for its work in drawing up the provisional
agenda for the Conference;
4. Approves the provisional agenda for the Conference;
1 Ibid.,

document A/8142/ Add.I.

s Ibid., agenda item 20, document A/8157.
0 Jbid., annex I.
