A/RES/75/212

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
29 December 2020

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 19 (a)
Sustainable development: towards the achievement of
sustainable development: implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including
through sustainable consumption and production, building
on Agenda 21

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 21 December 2020
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/75/457/Add.1, para. 14)]

75/212.

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive
Review of the Implementation of the Objectives of the
International Decade for Action, “Water for Sustainable
Development”, 2018–2028
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 71/222 of 21 December 2016, by which it proclaimed
the period from 2018 to 2028 the International Decade for Action, “Water for
Sustainable Development”,
Recalling also its resolution 73/226 of 20 December 2018 on the midterm
comprehensive review of the implementation of the International Decade for Action,
“Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolutions 1980/67 of 25 July
1980 on international years and anniversaries and 1989/84 of 24 May 1989 on
guidelines for international decades in economic and social fields and General
Assembly resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006
on the proclamation of international years,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming
our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a
comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and transformative
Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, its

20-17642 (E)

060121

*2017642*

A/RES/75/212

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions –
economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to
building upon the achievements of the Millennium Development Goals and seeking
to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also the sustainable development goals and targets related to water
resources and sanitation, including those contained in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, and determined to achieve the goal of ensuring the
availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all and other
related goals and targets,
Emphasizing that water is critical for sustainable development and the
eradication of poverty and hunger, that water, ecosystems, energy, food security and
nutrition are linked and that water is indispensable for health, well -being and human
development, including the empowerment of women, and a vital ele ment of achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals and other relevant goals in the social,
environmental and economic fields,
Noting with concern that the world is not on track to achieve water-related
Sustainable Development Goals and targets at the glo bal level by 2030 at the current
rate of progress, which has a tremendous impact on human well-being and on the
three dimensions of sustainable development,
Recognizing that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic demonstrates
that it is crucial that safe and affordable drinking water, and adequate and equitable
sanitation and hygiene are available, accessible and affordable to all, which is
essential to global efforts towards strengthening and achieving universal health
coverage, further recognizing that the public health threats of water-borne diseases,
pollution and the health impacts of water-related disasters remain imminent,
emphasizing in that regard that ecosystem health and human health should be
addressed holistically, and recalling that the human rights to safe drinking water and
sanitation are derived from the right to an adequate standard of living and are
inextricably related to the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health, as well as the right to life and human dignity,
Noting with concern that climate change is one of the factors that can exacerbate
the global water stress and the need for climate adaptation strategies to address water
issues, and acknowledging that disasters, many of which are exacerbated by climate
change and are increasing in frequency and intensity, significantly impede progress
towards sustainable development,
Acknowledging that integrated disaster risk-informed water resource
management is necessary for successful disaster preparedness and disaster risk
reduction, and recalling the commitment to step up efforts on all fronts to tackle
desertification, land degradation, erosion and drought, biodiversity loss and water
scarcity, which are seen as major environmental, economic and social ch allenges for
global sustainable development,
Recognizing that water-related issues, including the relevant Sustainable
Development Goals and targets, need to be better reflected in the agendas of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
Reaffirming that the high-level political forum on sustainable development,
convened under the auspices of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, has a central role in overseeing the follow-up and review of the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda at the global level,

2/23

20-17642

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

Recognizing synergies between the 2030 Agenda, the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda, 1 the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change 2 and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030, 3
Emphasizing that the achievement of the water-related goals and targets would
contribute to the successful implementation of the New Urban Agenda, 4 the Paris
Agreement, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway, 5 the Convention on Biological Diversity 6
and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 7
Recalling the political declaration of the high-level political forum on
sustainable development, convened under the auspices of the General Assembly, 8
which recognizes the urgent need to accelerate action on all levels and by all
stakeholders, in order to fulfil the vision and Goals of the 2030 Agenda,
Recalling also the launch of the ambitious and accelerated response to reach our
common vision by 2030, and the pledge to make the coming decade one of action and
delivery for sustainable development,
Taking note of the United Nations World Water Development Report 2020, the
outcome document of the High-level Panel on Water, entitled “Making every drop
count: an agenda for water action”, the Sustainable Development Goal 6 Synthesis
Report on Water and Sanitation, the outcomes and Ministerial Declaration of the
eighth World Water Forum, held in Brasilia from 18 to 23 March 2018, the outcomes
of the United Nations special thematic sessions on water and disasters, the outcomes
of the Budapest Water Summit in 2019 and the Sustainable Development Goal 6
Global Acceleration Framework,
Noting with concern the findings contained in the special reports of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change entitled Global Warming of 1.5°C and
The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate,
Taking note of the Final Declaration, 9 the Co-Chairs’ summary 10 and the Call
for Action and Partnerships of the High-level International Conference on the
International Decade for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028,
co-organized by the Government of Tajikistan and the United Nations, held in
Dushanbe from 20 to 22 June 2018,
Welcoming the activities related to water undertaken by Member States, the
Secretariat and the organizations of the United Nations system, inter alia, through
inter-agency work, as well as contributions from major groups, for the observance
and implementation of the Decade,
Recalling the Secretary-General’s Plan: Water Action Decade 2018–2028,
launched during the high-level event of the seventy-second session of the General

__________________

Resolution 69/313, annex.
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
3
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
4
Resolution 71/256, annex.
5
Resolution 69/15, annex.
6
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
7
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.
8
Resolution 74/4, annex.
9
A/73/166, annex I.
10
Ibid., annex II.
1
2

20-17642

3/23

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

Assembly, held at the initiative of the President of the General Assembly on 22 March
2018, World Water Day,
1.
Reaffirms its decision, in accordance with its resolution 71/222 on the
International Decade for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028,
to review the implementation of the Decade at its seventy-seventh session;
2.
Also reaffirms its decision, in accordance with its resolution 73/226, to
convene, in New York, from 22 to 24 March 2023, coinciding with World Water Day,
the United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review of the
Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade for Action, “Water for
Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028, which are a greater focus on the sustainable
development and integrated management of water resources for the achievement of
social, economic and environmental objectives, on the implementation and promotion
of related programmes and projects, as well as on the furtherance of cooperation and
partnerships at all levels, in order to help to achieve the internationally agreed water related goals and targets, including those contained in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, 11 which will result in a summary of the proceedings of the
Conference, to be prepared by the President of the General Assembly, as its outcome
document, that will feed into the high-level political forum on sustainable development;
3.
Welcomes the generous offer by the Governments of Tajikistan and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands to co-host and assume the costs of the Conference;
4.

Decides that the Conference shall:

(a) Assess the progress made in the implementation of the objectives of the
Decade, including the Secretary-General’s Plan: Water Action Decade 2018–2028,
while reaffirming the internationally agreed water-related goals and targets, including
those contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
(b) Identify possible challenges and obstacles related to the achievement of
the objectives of the Decade, as well as opportunities and innovative ways and means
to support their implementation and acceleration of progress, in order to help to
achieve the internationally agreed water-related goals and targets, including those
contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
(c) Exchange views and develop actions and initiatives needed for
accelerating progress towards the achievement of the objectives during the second
half of the Decade;
(d) Support further action, initiatives and success, and enhance means of
implementation and partnerships as well as cooperation at all relevant levels,
including international cooperation, as appropriate, to accelerate the achievement of
the internationally agreed water-related goals and targets, including those contained
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including Sustainable Development
Goal 6, and promote the implementation of the objectives of the Decade, including
with regard to sustainable development and integrated management of water
resources, including through collaborative approaches;
(e) Share ongoing efforts, best practices and experience gained in the
implementation of the objectives of the Decade;
(f) Involve all relevant stakeholders, bringing together Governments, the
United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations, international financial
institutions, other interested international bodies, non -governmental organizations,
civil society organizations, academic institutions, the scientific community, the
private sector, philanthropic organizations and other actors to assess challenges and
__________________
11

4/23

Resolution 70/1.
20-17642

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

opportunities relating to, as well as support further action to implement, the objectives
of the Decade and the water-related goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development;
(g) Invite States and other relevant stakeholders to announce voluntary
commitments contributing to the implementation of the objectives of the Decade;
(h) Contribute to the follow-up and review process of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development by providing an input to the high-level political forum on
sustainable development, in accordance with resolutions 67/290 of 9 July 2013, 70/1,
and 70/299 of 29 July 2016, unless otherwise agreed in line with the aforementioned
resolutions;
5.
Also decides that the Conference shall elect from among the
representatives of participating States the following officers: two Presidents, one from
Tajikistan and one from the Kingdom of the Netherlands, and 13 Vice -Presidents, 12
one of whom shall be designated as Rapporteur-General;
6.
Further decides that the Conference shall comprise an opening and a
closing ceremony, six plenary meetings and five interactive dialogues in accordance
with annex II to the present resolution;
7.
Decides that interactive dialogues will be held in parallel with the plena ry
meetings in accordance with annex II to the present resolution;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a Secretary-General of the
Conference to serve as focal point within the Secretariat for providing support to the
organization of the Conference;
9.
Decides that the organizational arrangements for the interactive dialogues
will be as follows:
(a) The interactive dialogues shall be collaborative and multi-stakeholder in
nature, with due regard for gender and geographical balance;
(b) Proposals for themes of the interactive dialogues will be prepared in a
background note by the Secretary-General of the Conference, in consultation with
Member States, with the support of UN-Water and relevant United Nations entities;
(c) Each interactive dialogue will be presided over by two co-chairs, one from
a developing country and one from a developed country, to be appointed by the
Presidents of the Conference;
(d) The Secretary-General of the Conference will select a moderator and up
to four panellists for each of the interactive dialogues and will prepare concept papers
on each of the themes of the interactive dialogues;
(e) The panel discussions, facilitated by the moderator, will be followed by an
interactive debate among States and other relevant stak eholders;
(f) Summaries of the interactive dialogues should be submitted to the
Conference at its closing meeting;
10.

Encourages participation in the Conference at the highest possible level;

11. Recommends the provisional agenda set forth in annex I to the present
resolution for adoption by the Conference;
__________________
12

20-17642

Three from each of the following groups: African States; Asia-Pacific States; Eastern European
States; Latin American and Caribbean States; and Western European and other States. The election
of the Presidents will, however, have the effect of reducing by one the number of Vice -Presidents
allocated to the regions from which each of the Presidents is elected.
5/23

A/RES/75/212

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

12. Decides that the Conference shall be organized in accordance with the
organization of work set forth in annex II to the present resolution;
13. Recommends the provisional rules of procedure set forth in annex III to
the present resolution for adoption by the Conference, which are based on the
established practice of the General Assembly and its conferences;
14. Reaffirms its decision, in accordance with its resolution 73/226, that the
Conference shall be preceded by regional and global preparatory meetings, as
appropriate, and informed by existing water-related meetings at the regional and
global levels, and that all costs relating to the Confer ence and its preparation shall be
financed through voluntary contributions, and in this connection requests the
Secretary-General to coordinate the preparatory process and to invite all relevant
organizations of the United Nations system, including the reg ional commissions and
other relevant organizations, within their respective mandates, to provide support to
the review process and the Conference;
15. Reiterates its request to the President of the General Assembly, through
voluntary contributions, to convene in New York, in 2021, a one-day high-level
meeting to promote the implementation of the water-related Goals and targets of the
2030 Agenda, in support of the implementation of the Decade and the high -level
political forum on sustainable development;
16. Requests the President of the General Assembly to hold a one-day
preparatory meeting, by November 2022, at United Nations Headquarters in New
York, to finalize the themes of the interactive dialogues and other outstanding
organizational matters, ensuring the participation of all relevant stakeholders, with
interpretation services on an as-available basis;
17. Welcomes the generous offer of the Government of Tajikistan to convene
a high-level international conference in 2022 in Dushanbe to support an effective
preparation for the midterm comprehensive review;
18. Also welcomes the contribution from other existing water-related meetings
that may serve to provide input for the preparatory process for the Conference, and
further welcomes the generous offers of the Government of Portugal to host a highlevel symposium on water during the United Nations Ocean Conference, of the
Government of Germany to host a high-level conference on water, of the Government
of Japan to support the organization of the Asia-Pacific Water Summit in April 2022,
of the Government of Senegal to host the ninth World Water Forum from 21 to
26 March 2022, and of other Member States to organize meetings intended to feed
into the midterm comprehensive review;
19. Encourages Member States, relevant United Nations bodies, the
specialized agencies, the regional commissions and other organizations of the United
Nations system, as well as other relevant partners, including the private sector, to
continue to contribute to the review and implementation of the Decade, including
through capacity-building, in order to support the implementation of the 2030
Agenda;
20. Reiterates the critical importance of effective review of the implementation
of the Decade at the national, regional and international levels, as appropriate, and
encourages Member States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
international donors, the private sector, financial institutions, foundations and other
donors in a position to do so to support the preparations for the Conference through
voluntary contributions to a trust fund in support of preparations for the Conference
and to support the participation of representatives of developing countries, priority
being given to representatives of the least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States, including coverage of economy -class
6/23

20-17642

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

air tickets, daily subsistence allowances and terminal expenses, in the meetings of the
Conference and its preparatory meeting;
21. Decides that the Conference and its preparatory process shall be open to
all States Members of the United Nations and members of the specialized agencies;
22. Invites other relevant stakeholders, including organizations and bodies of
the United Nations, intergovernmental organizations, international financial
institutions, other interested international bodies and non -governmental organizations,
civil society organizations, academic institutions, the scientific community, the private
sector and philanthropic organizations, whose work is relevant to the Conference ,
accredited in accordance with the provisions set forth in annex II to the present
resolution, to participate as observers in the Conference and its preparatory meeting;
23. Decides that accreditation to the Conference and the preparatory meeting
shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth in annex II to the present
resolution;
24. Stresses the importance of the participation and full involvement of all
relevant stakeholders, including women, children, young people, older persons,
persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and local communities, in the
implementation of the Decade at all levels;
25. Invites the Secretary-General, with the support of UN-Water, to continue
taking appropriate steps, within existing resources, to support and orga nize the
activities of the Decade at the global, regional and country levels, taking into account
the work of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and other
relevant United Nations structures, and to support those Member States, which lack
capacity, at their request, in the implementation of the Decade and the 2030 Agenda;
26. Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General, with the support of
UN-Water, the specialized agencies, the regional commissions and other entities of
the United Nations system, to prepare a report for the seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly, to assess progress in the implementation of the first half of the
Decade, including the Secretary-General’s Plan: Water Action Decade 2018–2028,
and, taking into account best practices and lessons learned, to identify obstacles and
constraints encountered, actions and initiatives needed to overcome them during the
second half of the Decade and activities planned by Member States, the Secretary General and other relevant organizations of the United Nations system, as appropriate,
which will serve as an input to the high-level political forum on sustainable
development.

48th plenary meeting
21 December 2020

Annex I
Provisional agenda of the United Nations Conference on the
Midterm Comprehensive Review of the Implementation of the
Objectives of the International Decade for Action, “Water for
Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028
New York, 22 to 24 March 2023

20-17642

1.

Opening of the Conference.

2.

Election of the two Presidents.
7/23

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

3.

Adoption of the rules of procedure.

4.

Adoption of the agenda of the Conference.

5.

Election of officers other than the Presidents.

6.

Organization of work, including the establishment of subsidiary organs, and
other organizational matters.

7.

Credentials of representatives to the Conference:
(a)

Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee;

(b)

Report of the Credentials Committee.

8.

General debate.

9.

Interactive dialogues.

10.

Outcome of the Conference.

11.

Adoption of the report of the Conference.

12.

Closure of the Conference.

Annex II
Proposed organization of work of the United Nations Conference
on the Midterm Comprehensive Review of the Implementation of
the Objectives of the International Decade for Action, “Water for
Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028
New York, 22 to 24 March 2023
1.
The United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review of the
Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade for Action, “Water for
Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028 will be held in New York, from 22 to
24 March 2023.
I.

Organization of work

A.

Plenary meetings
2.
The Conference will consist of a total of six plenary meetings, to be held as
follows:
Wednesday, 22 March: from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Thursday, 23 March: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p. m.
Friday, 24 March: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 5 p.m.
3.

The plenary meetings will be devoted to statements.

4.
The list of speakers for the plenary meetings will b e established on a first-come
first-served basis, with the customary protocol that ensures that Heads of State or
Government speak first, followed by other heads of delegation. The European Union
will be included in the list of speakers. Detailed arrangeme nts will be communicated
in a timely manner through a note by the Secretariat.
5.
At the opening of the Conference, to take place during the first plenary meeting
to be held on Wednesday, 22 March, from 9 to 10 a.m., consideration will be given to
all procedural and organizational matters, including the adoption of the rules of
procedure and the agenda, the election of the two Presidents of the Conference, the
8/23

20-17642

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

election of officers, the establishment of subsidiary organs, as appropriate, the
appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee, arrangements for the
preparation of the report of the Conference and other matters. At the first plenary
meeting, statements will be made by the Presidents of the Conference, the Secretary General of the United Nations, the President of the General Assembly, the President
of the Economic and Social Council, the Secretary-General of the Conference and the
Chair of UN-Water.
6.
The plenary meetings will also hear statements, in accordance with the practices
of the General Assembly, from representatives of intergovernmental organizations,
international financial institutions, international bodies, the specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, as well as major groups and other stakeholders accredited to
the Conference as observers in accordance with the present annex.
7.
The final plenary meeting, to be held on the afternoon of Friday, 24 March, is
expected to conclude with, inter alia, reporting on the interactive dialogues, to be
followed by the adoption of the report of the Conference.
8.
The plenary meetings will run in parallel with the interactive dialogues, unless
otherwise specified in the present resolution.
B.

Interactive dialogues
9.
The Conference will include five interactive dialogues, to be held in parallel
with the plenary meetings, as follows:
Wednesday, 22 March: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Thursday, 23 March: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.
Friday, 24 March: from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
10. Summaries of the interactive dialogues should be submitted to the Conference
at its closing plenary meeting and included in the final report of the Conference.

C.

Main Committee
11. The Main Committee, established in accordance with the rules of proced ure of
the Conference, will meet, if necessary, in parallel with plenary meetings, except
during the opening and closing of the Conference, and will be responsible for
finalizing any outstanding matters.

II.

Credentials of representatives to the Conference: appointment of the members
of the Credentials Committee
12. The Credentials Committee will be appointed according to the rules of
procedure of the Conference.

III.

Accreditation: international organizations and other entities
13. Relevant intergovernmental organizations, international financial institutions
and international bodies that were accredited to the World Summit on Sustainable
Development may participate in the deliberations of the Conference and its
preparatory meeting, as appropriate, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the
Conference.
14. Interested intergovernmental organizations that were not accredited to the
Summit referred to in paragraph 13 above may apply to the General Assembly for
accreditation following the established accreditation procedure.

20-17642

9/23

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

IV.

Accreditation: non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders
15. The non-governmental organizations and major groups as identified in Agenda
21, 13 in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, as well as those
that were accredited to the Summit referred to in paragraph 13 above, shall register
in order to participate.
16. The President of the General Assembly shall also draw up lists of representatives
of other relevant non-governmental organizations, including civil society organizations,
academic institutions, the scientific community, the private sector and philanthropic
organizations whose work is relevant to the Conference, who ma y participate in the
Conference and the preparatory meeting as observers, taking into account the
principles of transparency and of equitable geographical representation, and shall
submit the proposed lists to Member States for their consideration on a non -objection
basis. The President of the General Assembly shall bring a list to the attention of the
General Assembly before the preparatory meeting and, in any case, no later than
September 2022, and, where applicable, shall bring another list to the attent ion of the
Assembly before the Conference and, in any case, no later than January 2023. 14
17. The provisions of paragraph 15 of General Assembly resolution 67/290 of 9 July
2013 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Conference and its preparatory process.

V.

Secretariat
18. The Secretary-General of the Conference will serve as focal point within the
Secretariat for providing support to the organization of the Conference, in cooperation
with the representatives of the two Presidents.

VI.

Documentation
19. In accordance with the practice followed at previous United Nations
conferences, the official documentation of the Conference will include documents
issued before, during and after the Conference.
20. In accordance with the practice followed at previous United Nations
conferences, it is recommended that the Conference adopt a report consisting of the
decisions of the Conference, a brief account of the proceedi ngs and a reportorial
account of the work of the Conference and the action taken at the plenary meetings.
21. Summaries of the plenary meetings and interactive dialogues and a list of
voluntary commitments announced at the Conference should also be includ ed in the
report of the Conference.

VII.

Organization of parallel meetings and other events of the Conference
22. Parallel meetings and other events, including those of major groups and other
stakeholders, will be held during the same hours as the plen ary meetings and
interactive dialogues, space permitting. Interpretation services will be provided for
such meetings, as available.

__________________

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex II.
14
The lists will include proposed as well as final names. The general basis of any objections, if
requested by one or more States Members of the United Nations or States members of the
specialized agencies, will be made known to the Office of the President of the General Assembly
and the requester.
13

10/23

20-17642

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

VIII.

A/RES/75/212

Side events
23. Side events, including briefings, seminars, workshops and panel discussions on
issues related to the implementation of the Decade, will be organized by participants
in the Conference. Guidelines for organizing such events and the calendar of those
events will be made available on the Conference website.

IX.

Media coverage
24. Press materials will be prepared by the Department of Global Communications
of the Secretariat for journalists covering the Conference. In addition, regular press
releases will be issued on the results of plenary meetings, interactive dialogues and
other events. All relevant documentation will be made available on the Conference
website.
25. The plenary meetings, the interactive dialogues and the press conferences will
be broadcast live to the media area. A programme of special media briefings and press
conferences will be announced.

Annex III
Provisional rules of procedure of the United Nations Conference
on the Midterm Comprehensive Review of the Implementation of
the Objectives of the International Decade for Action, “Water for
Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028
I.

Representation and credentials
Rule 1
Composition of delegations
The delegation of each State participating in the Conference and tha t of the
European Union shall consist of a head of delegation and such other representatives,
alternate representatives and advisers as may be required.
Rule 2
Alternates and advisers
The head of delegation may designate an alternate representative or an adviser
to act as a representative.
Rule 3
Submission of credentials
The credentials of representatives and the names of alternate representatives and
advisers shall be submitted to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, if
possible, not less than one week before the date fixed for the opening of the
Conference. The credentials shall be issued either by the Head of the State or
Government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs or, in the case of the European
Union, by the President of the European Commission.
Rule 4
Credentials Committee
A Credentials Committee of nine members shall be appointed at the beginning
of the Conference. Its composition shall be based on that of the Credentials
Committee of the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session. It shall examine
the credentials of representatives and report to the Conferenc e without delay.

20-17642

11/23

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

Rule 5
Provisional participation in the Conference
Pending a decision of the Conference on their credentials, representatives sh all
be entitled to participate provisionally in the Conference.
II.

Officers
Rule 6
Elections
The Conference shall elect from among the representatives of participating
States the following officers: two Presidents, one from Tajikistan and one fro m the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, 15 each of whom shall preside separately. The Conference
shall also elect 13 Vice-Presidents, one of whom shall be designated as RapporteurGeneral, as well as a chair for the Main Committee established in accordance with
rule 46. The officers shall be elected with a view to ensuring the representative
character of the General Committee. The Conference may also elect such other
officers as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions.
Rule 7
General powers of the presiding President
1.
The Presidents shall take turns in presiding at the plenary meetings of the
Conference. In addition to exercising the powers conferred upon her or him elsewhere
by these rules, the presiding President shall declare the opening and closing of each
meeting, put questions to the vote and announce decisions. The presiding Preside nt
shall rule on points of order and, subject to those rules, shall have complete control
over the proceedings and the maintenance of order thereat. The pr esiding President
may propose to the Conference the closure of the list of speakers, a limitation on the
time to be allowed to speakers and on the number of times each representative may
speak on a question, the adjournment or closure of the debate and the suspension or
adjournment of a meeting.
2.
The presiding President remains, in the exercise of her or his functions, under
the authority of the Conference.
Rule 8
Acting President
1.
If both Presidents are to be absent from a meeting or any part the reof, they may
designate one of the Vice-Presidents to preside.
2.
A Vice-President acting as President shall have the same powers and duties as
the President.
Rule 9
Replacement of a President or the Presidents
If either of the Presidents is unable to perform her or his functions, a new
President shall be elected. If both Presidents are unable to perform their functions,
new Presidents shall be elected.

__________________
15

12/23

Three from each of the following groups: African States; Asia -Pacific States; Eastern European
States; Latin American and Caribbean States; and Western European and other States. The
election of the two Presidents will, however, have the effect of reducing by one the number of
Vice-Presidents allocated to the regions from which each of the Presidents is elected.
20-17642

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

Rule 10
Voting rights of the presiding President
The presiding President, or a Vice-President acting as the presiding President,
shall not vote in the Conference, but may appoint another member of her or his
delegation to vote in her or his place.
III.

General Committee
Rule 11
Composition
The two Presidents, the Vice-Presidents, the Rapporteur-General and the Chair
of the Main Committee shall constitute the General Committee. One of the two
Presidents, as agreed between them, or, in their absence, one of the Vice -Presidents
designated by them, shall serve as Chair of the General Commi ttee. The Chair of the
Credentials Committee and other committees established by the Conf erence in
accordance with rule 48 may participate, without the right to vote, in the General
Committee.
Rule 12
Substitute members
If a President or a Vice-President of the Conference is to be absent during a
meeting of the General Committee, she or he may designate a member of her or his
delegation to sit and vote in the Committee. In case of absence, the Chair of the Main
Committee shall designate the Vice-Chair of that Committee as her or his substitute.
When serving on the General Committee, a Vice-Chair of the Main Committee shall
not have the right to vote if she or he is a member of the same delegation as another
member of the General Committee.
Rule 13
Functions
The General Committee shall assist both Presidents in the general conduct of
the business of the Conference and, subject to the decisions of the Conference, shall
ensure the coordination of the work of the Conference.

IV.

Secretariat of the Conference
Rule 14
Duties of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
1.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations or a designated representative shall
act in that capacity in all meetings of the Conference and its subsidiary organs.
2.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations or a designated representative shall
direct the staff required by the Conference.
Rule 15
Duties of the secretariat of the Conference
The secretariat of the Conference shall, in accordance with the present rule s:
(a)

Provide simultaneous interpretation of speeches made at meetings;

(b) Receive, translate, reproduce and circulate the documents of the
Conference;
(c)

20-17642

Publish and circulate the official documents of the Conference;

13/23

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

(d)

Prepare and circulate records of public meetings;

(e)

Make and arrange for the keeping of sound recordings of meetings;

(f) Arrange for the custody and preservation of the documents of the
Conference in the archives of the United Nations;
(g)

Generally perform all other work that the Conference may require.

Rule 16
Statements by the Secretariat
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, or any member of the Secretariat
designated for that purpose, may, at any time, make either oral or written statements
concerning any question under consideration.
V.

Opening of the Conference
Rule 17
Temporary President
The Secretary-General of the United Nations or, in his absence, any member of
the Secretariat designated by him for that purpose, shall open the first meeting of the
Conference and preside until the Conference has elected its Presidents.
Rule 18
Decisions concerning organization
The Conference shall, at its first meeting:
(a)

Adopt its rules of procedure;

(b)

Elect its officers and constitute its subsidiary organs;

(c) Adopt its agenda, the draft of which shall, until such adoption, be the
provisional agenda of the Conference;
(d)
VI.

Decide on the organization of its work.

Conduct of business
Rule 19
Quorum
The presiding President may declare a meeting open and permit the debate to
proceed when at least one third of the States participating in the Conference are
present. The presence of a majority of the States so participating shall be required for
any decision to be taken.
Rule 20
Speeches
1.
No representative may address the Conference without having previously
obtained the permission of the presiding President. Subject to rules 21, 22 and 25 to
27, the presiding President shall call upon speakers in the order in which they indicate
their desire to speak. The secretariat shall be in charge of drawing up a list of speakers.
2.
Debate shall be confined to the question before the Conference and the presiding
President may call a speaker to order if her or his remarks are not relevant to the
subject under discussion.
3.
The Conference may limit the time allowed to each speaker and the number of
times each participant may speak on any question. Permission to speak on a motion

14/23

20-17642

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

to set such limits shall be accorded to only two representatives in fa vour of and to
two opposing such limits, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote.
In any event, with the consent of the Conference, the presiding President shall limit
each intervention on procedural matters to five minutes. When the de bate is limited
and a speaker exceeds the allotted time, the presiding President shall call her or him
to order without delay.
Rule 21
Points of order
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may at any time raise a
point of order, which shall be immediately decided by the presiding President in
accordance with the present rules. A representative may appeal against the ruling of
the presiding President. The appeal shall be immediately put to the vote, and the
presiding President’s ruling shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the States
present and voting. A representative may not, in raising a point of order, speak on the
substance of the matter under discussion.
Rule 22
Precedence
The Chair or the Rapporteur of the Main Committee, or of other subsidiary
organs, may be accorded precedence for the purpose of explaining the conclusions
arrived at by the body concerned.
Rule 23
Closing of the list of speakers
During the course of a debate, the presiding President may a nnounce the list of
speakers and, with the consent of the Conference, declare the list closed.
Rule 24
Right of reply
1.
Notwithstanding rule 23, the presiding President shall accord the right of reply
to a representative of any State participating in the Conference or of the European
Union who requests it. Any other representative of a State may be granted the
opportunity to make a reply.
2.
The statements made under the present rule shall normally be made at the end
of the last meeting of the day, or at the conclusion of the consideration of the relevant
item if that is sooner.
3.
Representatives of a State or of the European Union may make no more than
two statements under the present rule at a given meeting on any item. The first shall
be limited to five minutes and the second to three minutes. Representatives shall, in
any event, attempt to be as brief as possible.
Rule 25
Adjournment of debate
A representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time
move the adjournment of the debate on the question under discussion. In addition to
the proposer of the motion, permission to speak on the motion shall be accorded to
only two representatives in favour and to two opposing the adjournment, after which
the motion shall, subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.

20-17642

15/23

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

Rule 26
Closure of debate
A representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time
move the closure of the debate on the question under discussion, whether or not any
other representative has signified her or his wish to speak. Permission to speak on the
motion shall be accorded to only two representatives opposing the closure, after
which the motion shall, subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.
Rule 27
Suspension or adjournment of the meeting
Subject to rule 38, a representative of any State participating in the Conference
may at any time move the suspension or the adjournment of the meeting. No
discussion on such motions shall be permitted and they shall, subje ct to rule 28, be
immediately put to the vote.
Rule 28
Order of motions
The motions indicated below shall have precedence in the following order over
all proposals or other motions before the meeting:
(a)

To suspend the meeting;

(b)

To adjourn the meeting;

(c)

To adjourn the debate on the question under discussion;

(d)

To close the debate on the question under discussion.

Rule 29
Submission of proposals and substantive amendments
Proposals and substantive amendments shall normally be subm itted in writing
to the Secretary-General or her or his designated representative, who shall circulate
copies to all delegations in the languages of the Conference. Unless the Conference
decides otherwise, substantive proposals shall not be discussed or pu t to a decision
unless copies have been circulated to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting. The presiding President may, however, permit the discussion and
consideration of amendments, even though those amendments have not been
circulated or have been circulated only the same day.
Rule 30
Withdrawal of proposals and motions
A proposal or a motion may be withdrawn by its sponsor at any time before a
decision on it has been taken, provided that it has not been amended. A proposa l or a
motion thus withdrawn may be reintroduced by any representative.
Rule 31
Decisions on competence
Subject to rule 28, any motion calling for a decision on the competence of the
Conference to adopt a proposal submitted to it shall be put to th e vote before a
decision is taken on the proposal in question.

16/23

20-17642

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

Rule 32
Reconsideration of proposals
When a proposal has been adopted or rejected, it may not be reconsidered unless
the Conference, by a two-thirds majority of the States present and voting, so decides.
Permission to speak on a motion to reconsider shall be accorded to only two speakers
opposing reconsideration, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote.
VII.

Decision-making
Rule 33
General agreement
The Conference shall make its best endeavour to ensure that the work of the
Conference is accomplished by consensus.
Rule 34
Voting rights
Each State participating in the Conference shall have one vote.
Rule 35
Majority required
1.
Subject to rule 33, decisions of the Conference on all matters of substance shall
be taken by a two-thirds majority of the States present and voting.
2.
Except as otherwise provided in the present rules, decisions of the Conference
on all matters of procedure shall be taken by a majority of the States present and
voting.
3.
If the question arises whether a matter is one of procedure or of substance, the
presiding President of the Conference shall rule on the question. An appeal against
that ruling shall be immediately put to the vote, and the presiding President’s ruling
shall stand unless overruled by a majority of the States present and voting.
4.

If a vote is equally divided, the proposal or motion shall be regarded as rejected.

Rule 36
Meaning of the phrase “States present and voting”
For the purpose of the present rules, the phrase “States present and voting”
means States casting an affirmative or negative vote. States which abstain from voting
shall be regarded as not voting.
Rule 37
Method of voting
1.
Except as provided in rule 44, the Conference may vote by show of hands,
except that a representative may request a roll call, which shall then be taken in the
English alphabetical order of the names of the States participating in the Conference,
beginning with the delegation whose name is drawn by lot by the presiding President.
The name of each State shall be called in all roll calls, and its representative shall
reply “yes”, “no” or “abstention”.
2.
When the Conference votes by mechanical means, a non-recorded vote shall
replace a vote by show of hands and a recorded vote shall replace a roll call. A
representative may request a recorded vote, which shall, unless a representative
requests otherwise, be taken without calling out the n ames of the States participating
in the Conference.
20-17642

17/23

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

3.
The vote of each State participating in a roll-call or a recorded vote shall be
inserted in any record of or report on the meeting.
Rule 38
Conduct during voting
After the presiding President has announced the commencement of voting, no
representative shall interrupt the voting, except on a point of order in connection with
the actual conduct of the voting.
Rule 39
Explanation of vote
1.
Representatives may make brief statements, consisting solely of explanations of
vote, before the voting has commenced or after the voting has been completed. The
presiding President may limit the time to be allowed for such explanations. The
representative of a State sponsoring a proposal or motion shall n ot speak in
explanation of vote thereon, except if it has been amended.
2.
When the same matter is considered successively in several organs of the
Conference, a State should, as far as possible, explain its vote only in one such organ,
unless its vote in one organ is different from that in another organ.
Rule 40
Division of proposals
A representative may move that parts of a proposal be decided on separately. If
a representative objects, the motion for division shall be voted upon. Permission to
speak on the motion shall be accorded to only two representatives in favour of and to
two opposing the division. If the motion is carried, those parts of the proposal that
are subsequently approved shall be put to the Conference for decision as a whole. If
all operative parts of the proposal have been rejected, the proposal shall be considered
to have been rejected as a whole.
Rule 41
Amendments
A proposal is considered an amendment to another proposal if it merely adds to,
deletes from or revises part of that proposal. Unless specified otherwise, the word
“proposal” in these rules shall be regarded as including amendments.
Rule 42
Order of voting on amendments
When an amendment is moved to a proposal, the amendment shall be vot ed on
first. When two or more amendments are moved to a proposal, the Conference shall
vote first on the amendment furthest removed in substance from the original proposal
and then on the amendment next furthest removed therefrom, and so on, until all the
amendments have been put to the vote. Where, however, the adoption of one
amendment necessarily implies the rejection of another amendment, the latter shall
not be put to the vote. If one or more amendments are adopted, the amended proposal
shall then be voted upon.
Rule 43
Order of voting on proposals
1.
If two or more proposals, other than amendments, relate to the same question,
they shall, unless the Conference decides otherwise, be voted on in the order in which
18/23

20-17642

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

they were submitted. The Conference may, after each vote on a proposal, decide
whether to vote on the next proposal.
2.
Revised proposals shall be voted on in the order in which the original proposals
were submitted, unless the revision substantially departs from the original proposal.
In that case, the original proposal shall be regarded as withdrawn and the revised
proposal shall be treated as a new proposal.
3.
A motion requiring that no decision be taken on a proposal shall be put to the
vote before a decision is taken on the proposal in question.
Rule 44
Elections
All elections shall be held by secret ballot unless, in the absence of any
objection, the Conference decides to proceed without taking a ballot when there is an
agreed candidate or slate of candidates.
Rule 45
Balloting
1.
When one or more elective places are to be filled at one time under the same
conditions, those candidates, in a number not exceeding the number of such places,
obtaining in the first ballot a majority of the votes cast and the largest number of votes
shall be elected.
2.
If the number of candidates obtaining such majority is less than the number of
places to be filled, additional ballots shall be held to fill the remaining places, the
voting being restricted to the candidates obtaining the largest number of votes in the
previous ballot, to a number not more than twice the places remaining to be filled.
VIII.

Subsidiary organs
Rule 46
Main Committee
The Conference may establish a Main Committee.
Rule 47
Representation on the Main Committee
Each State participating in the Conference and the European Union may be
represented by one representative on the Main Committee. They may assign to the
Committee such alternate representatives and advisers as may be required.
Rule 48
Other committees and working groups
1.
In addition to the Main Committee referred to above, the Conference may
establish such committees and working groups as it deems necessary for the
performance of its functions.
2.
Subject to the decision of the plenary of the Conference, the committees may
set up subcommittees and working groups.

20-17642

19/23

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

Rule 49
Members of committees, subcommittees and working groups
1.
The members of the committees and working groups of the Conference, referred
to in rule 48, paragraph 1, shall be appointed by the two Presidents, subject to the
approval of the Conference, unless the Conference decides otherwise.
2.
Members of the subcommittees and working groups of committees shall be
appointed by the Chair of the committee in question, subject to the approval of that
committee, unless the committee decides otherwise.
Rule 50
Officers
Except as otherwise provided in rule 6, each committee, subcommittee and
working group shall elect its own officers.
Rule 51
Quorum
1.
The Chair of the Main Committee may declare a meeting open and permit the
debate to proceed when at least one quarter of the States participating in the
Conference are present. The presence of a majority of the States so participating shall
be required for any decision to be taken.
2.
A majority of the members of the General Committee or the Credentials
Committee or of any committee, subcommittee or working group shall constitute a
quorum.
Rule 52
Officers, conduct of business and voting
The rules contained in sections II, VI (except rule 19) and VII above shall be
applicable, mutatis mutandis, to the proceedings of committees, subcommittees and
working groups, except that:
(a) The Chairs of the General Committee and the Credentials Comm ittee and
the Chairs of the committees, subcommittees and working groups may exercise the
right to vote, provided that they are representatives of participating States;
(b) Decisions of committees, subcommittees and working groups shall be
taken by a majority of the members present and voting, except that the reconsideration
of a proposal or an amendment shall require the majority established by rule 32.
IX.

Languages and records
Rule 53
Languages of the Conference
Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the languages
of the Conference.
Rule 54
Interpretation
1.
Speeches made in a language of the Conference shall be interpreted into the
other five languages.

20/23

20-17642

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

2.
A representative may speak in a language other than a language of the
Conference if the delegation concerned provides for interpretation into one of the
languages of the Conference.
Rule 55
Languages of official documents
Official documents of the Conference shall be made available in the languages
of the Conference.
Rule 56
Sound recordings of meetings
Sound recordings of the plenary meetings of the Conference, the interactive
dialogues and of the meetings of the Main Committee shall be made and kept in
accordance with the practice of the United Nations. Unless otherwise decided by the
Conference or the Main Committee, no such recordings shall be made of any of the
other meetings held during the Conference.
X.

Public and private meetings
General principles
Rule 57
The plenary meetings of the Conference and the meetings of any committee
shall be held in public unless the body concerned decides otherwise. All decisions
taken by the plenary of the Conference at a private meeting shall be announced at an
early public meeting of the plenary.
Rule 58
As a general rule, meetings of the General Committee, the Credentials
Committee, subcommittees or working groups shall be held in private.
Rule 59
Communiqués on private meetings
At the close of a private meeting, the presiding officer of the organ concerned
may issue a communiqué through the Secretary-General of the United Nations or a
designated representative.

XI.

Other participants and observers
Rule 60
Intergovernmental organizations and other entities16 having received a standing
invitation to participate as observers in the sessions and work of the
General Assembly
Representatives designated by intergovernmental organizations and other
entities having received a standing invitation to parti cipate as observers in the
sessions and work of the General Assembly have the right to participate as observers,
without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee
and, as appropriate, any other committee or working group.

__________________
16

20-17642

For the purpose of the present rules, the term “other entities” includes the International Committee
of the Red Cross, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, the
International Olympic Committee, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the Sovereign Order of
Malta.
21/23

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

Rule 61
Associate members of regional commissions 17
Representatives designated by the associate members of regional commissions
listed in the footnote below may participate as observers, without the right to vote, in
the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any
other committee or working group.
Rule 62
Representatives of the specialized agencies and related organizations 18
Representatives designated by the specialized agencies and related
organizations may participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the
deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other
committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 63
Representatives of other intergovernmental organizations and other
international bodies
Save where otherwise specifically provided with respect to the European Union
in these rules of procedure, representatives designated by other intergovernmental
organizations and other international bodies invited to the Conference may participate
as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the
Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other committee or working group on
questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 64
Representatives of interested United Nations organs
Representatives designated by interested organs of the United Nations may
participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the
Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other committee or working
group on questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 65
Representatives of non-governmental organizations 19
1.
Non-governmental organizations accredited to participate in the Conference
may designate representatives to attend public meetings of th e Conference and the
Main Committee as observers.
__________________

American Samoa, Anguilla, Aruba, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Curaçao, French Polynesia, Guam, Montserrat,
New Caledonia, Puerto Rico, Sint Maarten, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States
Virgin Islands.
18
For the purpose of the present rules, the term “related organizations” includes the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the International Criminal Court, the International Organization for
Migration, the International Seabed Authority, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,
the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization and the World Trade Organization.
19
Paragraph 23.3 of Agenda 21 provides that “Any policies, definitions or rules affecting access to
and participation by non-governmental organizations in the work of United Nations institutions or
agencies associated with the implementation of Agenda 21 must apply equally to all major groups”.
Agenda 21 defines major groups as comprising women, children and youth, indigenous people,
non-governmental organizations, local authorities, workers and their trade unions, business and
industry, the scientific and technological community and farmers. Therefore, based on Agenda 21,
rule 65 shall apply equally to non-governmental organizations and other major groups.
17

22/23

20-17642

United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028

A/RES/75/212

2.
Upon the invitation of the presiding officer of the Conference and subject to the
approval of the Conference, such observers may make oral statements on questions
in which they have special competence. If the number of requests to speak is too large,
the non-governmental organizations shall be requested to form themselves into
constituencies, such constituencies to speak through spokespersons.
Rule 66
Written statements
Written statements submitted by the designated representatives referred to in
rules 60 to 65 shall be circulated by the secretariat to all delegations in the quantities
and the languages in which the statements are made available to it at the site of the
Conference, provided that a statement submitted on behalf of a non-governmental
organization must be related to the work of the Conference and be on a subject in
which the organization has a special competence. Written statements shall not be
made available at United Nations expense and shall not be issued as official
documents.
XII.

Suspension and amendment of the rules of procedure
Rule 67
Method of suspension
Any of these rules may be suspended by the Conference provided that 24 hours’
notice of the proposal for the suspension has been given, which may be waived if no
representative objects. Any such suspension shall be limited to a specific and stated
purpose and to a period required to achieve that purpose.
Rule 68
Method of amendment
These rules of procedure may be amended by a decision of the Conference taken
by a two-thirds majority of the States present and voting, after the General Committee
has reported on the proposed amendment.

20-17642

23/23
