A/RES/77/71

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 December 2022

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 99 (r)
General and complete disarmament: the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 7 December 2022
[on the report of the First Committee (A/77/385, para. 110)]

77/71.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 76/232 of 24 December 2021, as well as all previous
resolutions on the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects,
including resolution 56/24 V of 24 December 2001,
Emphasizing the importance of the continued and full implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by the United Natio ns
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, 1
and recognizing its important contribution to international efforts on this matter,
Emphasizing also the importance of the continued and full implementation of
the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons (the International Tracing
Instrument),2
Recalling the commitment of States to the Programme of Action as the main
framework for measures within the activities of the international community to
prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all
its aspects,
Underlining the need for States to enhance their efforts to build national
capacity for the effective implementation of the Programme of Action and the
International Tracing Instrument,

__________________

Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
2 See decision 60/519 and A/60/88 and A/60/88/Corr. 2, annex.
1

22-28164 (E)

201222

*2228164*

A/RES/77/71

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

Mindful of the implementation of the outcomes adopted by the follow-up
meetings on the Programme of Action,
Welcoming the successful conclusion of the Eighth Biennial Meeting of States
to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held
in New York from 27 June to 1 July 2022, to consider t he full and effective
implementation of the Programme of Action, and the outcome document adopted at
the Meeting,3
Recognizing the need for the strengthened participation of women in decision making and implementation processes relating to the Programme of Action and the
International Tracing Instrument, and reaffirming the need for States to mainstream
gender dimensions into their implementation efforts,
Noting that web-based tools developed by the Secretariat, including its
searchable database and the Modular Small-arms-control Implementation
Compendium, and the tools developed by Member States could be used to assess
progress made in the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Reaffirming the acknowledgement, by the third United Nations Conference to
Review Progress Made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects (the third Review Conference) in its outcome document, 4 of the proposal on
the establishment of a dedicated fellowship training programme on small arms and
light weapons in order to strengthen technical knowledge and expertise in areas
relating to the implementation of the Programme of Action and the International
Tracing Instrument, in particular in developing countries, and the decision taken by
the Eighth Biennial Meeting of States in that regard, 5
Welcoming the series of open, informal consultations held by the Chairdesignate of the Eighth Biennial Meeting of States during the first part of 2022,
Noting that voluntary national reports on the implementation of the Programme
of Action can serve, inter alia, to provide a baseline for measuring progress in its
implementation, build confidence and promote transparency, provide a basis for
information exchange and action and serve to identify needs and opportunities for
international assistance and cooperation, including the matching of needs with
available resources and expertise,
Noting with satisfaction regional and subregional efforts being undertaken in
support of the implementation of the Programme of Action, and commending the
progress that has already been made in this regard, including the tackling of both
supply and demand factors that are relevant to addressing the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons,
Recognizing that sharing and applying best practices, on a voluntary basis, at
the regional, subregional and national levels support the full and effective
implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument
and should therefore be an ongoing effort, in order to address ongoing challenges
associated with the diversion of and illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
Reaffirming that international cooperation and assistance are an essential aspect
of the full and effective implementation of the Programme of Action and the
International Tracing Instrument,
__________________

A/CONF. 192/B MS/2022/1, annex.
A/CONF. 192/2018/RC/3, annex.
5 A/CONF. 192/B MS/2022/1, annex, para. 83.
3
4

2/7

22-28164

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

A/RES/77/71

Recognizing the efforts undertaken by civil society in the provision of assistance
to States for the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Recalling that Governments bear the primary responsibility for preventing,
combating and eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects, in accordance with the sovereignty of States and their relevant international
obligations,
Reiterating that illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons is a serious
problem that the international community should address urgently,
Highlighting new challenges and potential opportunities with regard to effective
marking, record-keeping and tracing resulting from developments in the
manufacturing, technology and design of small arms and light weapons, and bearing
in mind the different situations, capacities and priorities of States and regions,
Recognizing that the opportunities and challenges associated with these
developments in the manufacturing, technology and design of small arms and light
weapons, including polymer and modular weapons, and firearms produced using 3D
printing, must be addressed in a timely manner,
Recalling the recommendation of the Eighth Biennial Meeting of States that the
fourth Review Conference discuss the establishment of an open -ended technical
expert group, focusing on including, inter alia, realizing international cooperation in
a concrete manner, scope, objectives, participation and modalities of the group, to
develop agreed recommendations by consensus to ensure the full implementation of
the International Tracing Instrument and the Programme of Action in the light of
recent developments in small arms and light weapons manufacturing, technology and
design, in particular polymer and modular weapons, and firearms produced using 3D
printing,6
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 7 which contains
recommendations for enhancing international cooperation and assistance modalities
and procedures in the framework of the Programme of Action and the International
Tracing Instrument, based on views received from Member States, international and
regional organizations and other stakeholders, for consideration by Member States at
the Eighth Biennial Meeting of States,
Welcoming the inclusion of small arms and light weapons in the scope of the
Arms Trade Treaty,8
Acknowledging that effective national control systems for the transfer of
conventional arms contribute to the prevention and eradication of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects,
Recognizing, in this regard, that, in the outcome document of the Eighth
Biennial Meeting of States, States took note of the establishment pu rsuant to General
Assembly resolution 76/233 of an open-ended working group to elaborate a set of
political commitments as a new global framework that will address existing gaps in
through-life ammunition management,9
1.
Underlines the fact that the issue of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects requires concerted efforts at the national, regional and
international levels to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit manufacture, transfer
and circulation of small arms and light weapons, and that their uncontrolled spread in
__________________

Ibid., para. 75.
A/77/77.
8 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 3013, No. 52373.
9 A/CONF. 192/B MS/2022/1, annex, para. 19.
6
7

22-28164

3/7

A/RES/77/71

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

many regions of the world has a wide range of humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences and poses a serious threat to peace, reconciliation, safety, security,
stability and sustainable development at the individual, local, national, regional and
international levels;
2.
Recognizes the urgent need to maintain and enhance national controls, in
accordance with the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, including their diversion
to illicit trade, illegal armed groups, terrorists and other unauthorized recipients,
taking into account, inter alia, their adverse humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences for the affected States;
3.
Emphasizes the need for States to redouble national efforts to provide for
the safe, secure, comprehensive and effective management of stockpiles of small arms
and light weapons held by Governments to prevent, combat and eradicate the
diversion of those weapons;
4.
Calls upon all States to implement the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Mann er, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons (the International Tracing Instrument) by, inter alia, including in their
national reports the name and contact information of the national points of contact
and information on national marking practices used to ind icate country of
manufacture and/or country of import, as applicable;
5.
Encourages all relevant initiatives, including those of the United Nations,
other international organizations, regional and subregional organizations and civil
society, for the successful implementation of the Programme of Action, and calls upon
all Member States to contribute towards the continued implementation of the
Programme of Action at the national, regional and global levels;
6.
Encourages States to implement the recommendations contained in the
report of the Group of Governmental Experts established pursuant to resolution 60/81
of 8 December 2005 to consider further steps to enhance international cooperation in
preventing, combating and eradicating illicit brokering in small arms and light
weapons;10
7.
Reaffirms the outcome of the third United Nations Conference to Review
Progress Made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
held in New York from 18 to 29 June 2018 (the third Review Conference);
8.
Endorses the outcome of the Eighth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New
York from 27 June to 1 July 2022;
9.
Renews its decision, pursuant to the schedule of meetings for the period
from 2018 to 2024 agreed upon at the third Review Conference and recalled by the
Eighth Biennial Meeting of States, to convene the fourth United Nations Conference
to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects in 2024 for two weeks (20 meetings), to be preceded by a preparatory
committee meeting in early 2024 of five days (10 meetings);

__________________
10

4/7

See A/62/163 and A/62/163/Corr. 1.
22-28164

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

A/RES/77/71

10. Underlines the importance of the full and effective implementation of the
Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument for attaining Goal 16
and target 16.4 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; 11
11. Emphasizes the need for the equal, full and effective participation of
women in all decision-making and implementation processes relating to the
Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument;
12. Encourages States to take into account recent developments in small arms
and light weapons manufacturing, technology and design, in part icular polymer and
modular weapons, in the implementation of the Programme of Action and the
International Tracing Instrument and to strengthen normative frameworks, where
needed, and cooperation between law enforcement agencies so as to prevent
unauthorized recipients, including criminals and terrorists, from acquiring small arms
and light weapons;
13. Emphasizes that international cooperation and assistance remain essential
to the full and effective implementation of the Programme of Action and the
International Tracing Instrument, while being mindful of the need to ensure the
adequacy, accessibility, effectiveness and sustainability of international cooperation
and assistance measures, including, as appropriate, improved funding arrangements,
technology transfer and adequate training and support programmes, as well as strong
national ownership;
14. Also emphasizes the fact that initiatives by the international community
with respect to international cooperation and assistance remain essential and
complementary to national implementation efforts, as well as to those at the regional
and global levels;
15. Recognizes the necessity for interested States to develop effective
coordination mechanisms, where they do not exist, in order to match the needs of
States with existing resources to enhance the implementation of the Programme of
Action and to make international cooperation and assistance more effective, and in
this regard encourages States to make use, as appropriate, of the Programme of Action
Implementation Support System;
16. Encourages States to consider, among other mechanisms, the coherent
identification of needs, priorities, national plans and programmes that may require
international cooperation and assistance from States and regional and international
organizations in a position to do so;
17. Encourages States, with the assistance of the Secretariat, where
applicable, to develop options for enhancing the effectiveness of the existing
international assistance frameworks in support of the effective implementation of the
Programme of Action and the International Tracing Instrument, including by
establishing, within existing resources, a structured procedure within the Secretariat
to process requests for assistance submitted under the Programme of Action and the
International Tracing Instrument, for consideration and appropriate follow-up by
Member States at the fourth Review Conference; 12
18. Also encourages States, on a voluntary basis, to make increasing use of
their national reports as a tool for communicating assistance needs and information
on the resources and mechanisms available to address such needs, and encourages
States in a position to render such assistance to make use of those national reports;

__________________
11
12

22-28164

Resolution 70/1.
See A/CONF.192/BMS/2022/1, annex, para. 87.
5/7

A/RES/77/71

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

19. Encourages States, relevant international and regional organizations and
civil society with the capacity to do so to cooperate with and provide assistance to
other States, upon request, in the preparation of comprehensive national reports on
their implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing
Instrument;
20. Encourages States to reinforce, as necessary, cross-border cooperation at
the national, subregional and regional levels in addressing the common problem of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects, with full respect for
each State’s sovereignty over its own borders;
21. Also encourages States to take full advantage of the benefits of
cooperation with the United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament, the
World Customs Organization, the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in accordance with
their mandates and consistent with national priorities;
22. Encourages all efforts to build national capacity for the effective
implementation of the Programme of Action, including those highlighted in the
outcome document of the third Review Conference;
23. Decides to establish, within the regular budget of the United Nations, a
standing dedicated fellowship training programme on small arms and light weapons
in order to strengthen the technical and practical knowledge and expertise of
government officials directly responsible for the implementation of the Programme
of Action and the International Tracing Instrument, particularly in developing
countries, to be implemented annually starting in 2024 for a duration of four weeks
in-person in four regions, respectively, preceded by a preparatory self-paced online
course, with the participation of 15 fellows per region, and requests the Secretary General to operationalize this decision and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its eightieth session, and periodically thereafter for follow-up;13
24. Encourages States to submit, on a voluntary basis, national reports on their
implementation of the Programme of Action, notes that States will submit national
reports on their implementation of the International Tracing Instrument, encou rages
those States in a position to do so to use the reporting template made available by the
Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, and reaffirms the utility of
synchronizing such reports with biennial meetings of States and review conferences
as a means of increasing the submission rate and improving the utility of reports, as
well as contributing substantively to meeting discussions;
25. Encourages States in a position to do so to provide financial assistance,
through a voluntary sponsorship fund, that could be distributed, upon request, to
States otherwise unable to participate in meetings on the Programme of Action;
26. Welcomes the establishment of the Saving Lives Entity fund to ensure
sustained financing for coordinated, integrated small arms control measures in
countries most affected by the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, and
encourages States in a position to do so to make voluntary financial contributions to
the fund;
27. Encourages interested States and relevant international and regional
organizations in a position to do so to convene regional meetings to consider and
advance the implementation of the Programme of Action, as well as the International
Tracing Instrument, including in preparation for the meetings on th e Programme of
Action;
__________________
13

6/7

Ibid., para. 83.
22-28164

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects

A/RES/77/71

28. Encourages civil society and relevant organizations to strengthen their
cooperation and work with States at the respective national and regional levels to
achieve the implementation of the Programme of Action;
29. Reaffirms the importance of States undertaking to identify, where
applicable, groups and individuals engaged in the illegal manufacture, trade,
stockpiling, transfer, possession, as well as financing for acquisition, of illicit small
arms and light weapons, and take action under appropriate national law against such
groups and individuals; 14
30. Requests the Secretariat to prepare a comprehensive analysis, within
existing resources, of progress in the trends, challenges and opportunities related to
the implementation of the Programme of Action and the International Tracing
Instrument, including with regard to national frameworks, based on available credible
information, including information submitted and/or provided by Member States, for
presentation at the fourth Review Conference for consideration and appropriate
follow-up, prior to which the findings and recommendations of the analysis will be
shared with Member States in one or more informal meetings; 15
31. Also requests the Secretariat to report on support provided by the United
Nations system for the implementation of the Programme of Action and the
International Tracing Instrument, including experiences, best practices and lessons
learned regarding the efficient use of available resources, for presentation at
upcoming meetings on the Programme of Action and the International Tracing
Instrument;
32. Encourages Member States to discuss at the fourth Review Conference the
establishment of an open-ended technical expert group, focusing on including, inter
alia, realizing international cooperation in a concrete manner, scope, objectives,
participation and modalities of the group, to develop agreed recommendations by
consensus to ensure the full implementation of the International Tracing Instrument
and the Programme of Action in the light of recent developments in small arms and
light weapons manufacturing, technology and design, in particular polymer and
modular weapons, and firearms produced using 3D printing, and requests the
Secretariat, within existing resources, to prepare and circulate proposals for the
above-mentioned focus issues and any other necessary administrative arrangements
in a timely manner prior to the fourth Review Conference so as to facilitate its
discussion and to initiate discussions on the mandate of such a group during the
preparatory process leading up to the fourth Review Conference; 16
33. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
34. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-eighth session,
under the item entitled “General and complete disarmament”, the sub -item entitled
“The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects”.
46th plenary meeting
7 December 2022

__________________

Report of the United Nations Conference on Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001 (A/CONF. 192/15), chap. IV, para. 24, sect. II, para. 6.
15 See A/CONF.192/BMS/2022/1, annex, para. 60.
16 Ibid., para. 75.
14

22-28164

7/7
