UNITED NATIONS

TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th

MEETING: 20 DECEMBER 1967

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 13851Rev.2)

.. .,... ..... .,. .,..... ,..

Page

1

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Harold Holt, Prime Minister of Australia . . . . , . .
Tribute to the memory of Mr. Leon M’Ba, President of the Gabonese Republic . .
Tribute to the memory of Mr. V. I. Kozlov, Chairman of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic . , . : . . . . . . . .
Tribute to the memory of General Oscar D. Gestido, President of the Eastern
RepublicofUruguay
. ~. . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . .
. ..... ...... .. ..... .....

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
(S/8286)
. . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . v. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

. . . . . ..‘......

S/PV. 3385

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 20 December 1967, at 3 p.m.
&esident: Chief S. 0. ADEBO (Nigeria).

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Cyprus (S/8286)

&esent: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.

3. The PRESIDENT: Communications have been received
from the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey
requesting to be invited to participate, without vote, in the
Council’s discussion of this agenda item. Those communications are contained in documents S/8298, S/8299 and
S/8305. In accordance with the usual practice of the
Council, if I hear no objection I propose to invite those
three representatives to take their places at the Council
table in order to participate in the discussion.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 38WRev.2)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cyprus (S/8286).

At the invitation of the President, Mr S. Kyprianou
(@prusj,
Mr. 0. Eralp (Turkeyj and Mr. A, S. Bitsios
{Greece) took places at the Council table.

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Harold Holt,
Prime Minister of Australia

4. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention
of the Council to the communication dated 12 December
1967 [S/8293/ ’ from the Permanent Representative of
Turkey in which it is requested that Mr. Osrnan C)rek be
given an opportunity to be heard.

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Leon M’Ba,
President of the Gabonese Republic
Tribute to the memory of Mr. V. I. Kozlov, Chairman of
the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic

5. In this connexion, I should like to recall that on a
previous occasion-in February 1964 to be exact-the
representative of Turkey made a similar request to the
Council in respect of another Cypriot. On that occasion the
Council decided [109&h meeting] after some discussion,
to grant a hearing to the person concerned under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure, and he was so heard.
Again in August 1965 [1235th meeting/ an application was
made on behalf of the same person to be heard under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure, and again the
application was so granted.

Tribute to the memory of General Oscar D. Gestido,
President of the Eastern Republic of Uruguay
1. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Security Council
have learned with deepest regret of the tragic death last
Sunday of the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr. Harold Holt.
I feel that the Council would wish me to express the
condolences of all present here to the Australian delegation
and to ask it to be good enough to convey them to
Mrs. Holt and to the Government and people of Australia.

6. On the present occasion, I have had consultations with
members of the Council, It is my understanding that, in
view of the past precedents on the question of Cyprus to
which I have drawn attention, the Council is agreeable, on
the same basis as before, to hear Mr. brek, that is to say, to
hear him under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. In order to avoid any obscurity in the matter I shall
read out rule 39 :

2. In this connexion I also feel it incumbent on me as
President of the Council to express the sympathy that we
all feel on the loss in the course of the present month of His
Excellency Mr. Leon M’Ba, President of the Gabonese
Republic, of His Excellency Mr. Vasily Ivanovich Kozlov,
Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, and of His Excellency Mr. Oscar D. Gestido,’ President of the Eastern
Republic of Uruguay,

“The Security Council may invite members of the
Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers corn-

Adoption of the agenda
1 official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1967.

The agenda was adopted.
1

,

responsible people should be primarily concerned, Espe,$l.
ly it is not of any interest to the Security Council, The
Security Council is concerned, as indeed we are, with
removing the basic causes of this conflict, for it is reslhed
that as long as this is not accomplished peace cannot be
secure, and the objectives of the Council, wider and
specific, cannot be achieved.

petent for the purpose, to supply it with information or
to give other assistance in examining matters within its
competence.”
7. Unless I hear any objection, I shall take j’t that the
Council is prepared to give a hearing to Mr. Orek under
rule 39.

15. There are, in our view, certain basic elements that ij
must be borne in mind, some of which relate in the same ;
way to any similar situation, and some of which relateto 1
the particular case of Cyprus. One of the basic elements,
one of the basic foundations, one of the basic underlying
factors in the Cyprus situation, is that it must be accepted
that the problem cannot be solved through war.

It was so decided.

8. The PRESIDENT: I shall call upon Mr. &ek when his
time comes to address the Council.
9. The Security Council will now take up the examination
of the question in the light of the report on the United
Nations operations in Cyprus [S/8286] for the period 13
June to 8 December 1967 submitted by the SecretaryGeneral. The first speaker inscribed on the list of speakers is
the Foreign Minister of Cyprus. I now give him the floor.

16. It must also be accepted that talks or neaotiationq
cannot be conducted fruitfully under the threat of an
ultimatum or under the threat of invasion. This method
cannot be condoned. If this method is tolerated or allowed
by the Security Council, the responsibility for the grave
consequences thereof will have to be borne not a)oaeby
the country that employs it.

10. Mr. KYPRIANOU
(Cyprus): First of all I wish to
express my Government’s and my country’s deep appreciation for the continuous interest of the Security Council in
the Cyprus problem. It is not my intention at this stage to
make a long speech. I should merely like to make a
statement of position in the light of the report of the
Secretary-General and in the light of the present situation.

17. Another basic element in the situation is that it isthe
imperative duty of all of us to do our utmost for the
preservation and safeguarding of peace. That is a causetl\at
is not ours alone; it is the cause of all humanity.

11. It is the feeling, I believe, that the Security Council
has been convened today not merely for the purpose of
extending the stationing in Cyprus of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force-although this is the immediate objective-nor to examine conflicting arguments-that
is my
feeling-relating
to any specific incidents that have taken
place. It is my firm impression that all members of the
Council share the same deep concern and agree on the
urgent need for positive progress towards removing the
danger to peace and thus paving the way to a peaceful and
lasting solution.

18. We, for our part, are fully conscious of our respon.
sibilities, which we are prepared to discharge in the most
constructive way possible. If we all agree that this is to be
our starting-point, if we accept this genuinely and in good
faith, I am confident we can succeed.
19. It must also be borne in mind that in any conflictthe
cause of peace does not call for one-sided concessbls,
particularly on the part of the weaker party.
20. This brings me to the outcome of the recent crisis,or
to the issues relating to that outcome. The Greek Government and the Turkish Government have agreed to withdraw
from Cyprus troops in excess of their respective contingents, as a first step, along the lines of the appealmade
by the Secretary-General on 24 November 1967, addressed
to the Governments of Greece, Turkey and Cyprus
[S/8248/Add.5].
What is the meaning of this action? fls
meaning is that a quite considerable number of Creek
troops are withdrawing from Cyprus. And what is the
result? The result is a vacuum.

12. We have before us today two courses open. One is to
engage in an acrimonious and endless debate, full of
polemics, on the rights and wrongs relating to the recent
crisis or on other related issues. This would mean in a way
reopening the debate which took place in the Council on 24
and 25 November 1967 [1383rd meeting]. As a result of
that debate, the Council stated its views through the
expression of its consensus. It would not therefore serve, in
my view, any useful purpose to reopen the same debate.
13. The second course which is open to us is to start from
the conclusion of the previous debate and approach the
present situation in a constructive, objective and responsible manner, and try to reach conclusions as to how best
we can create the necessary peaceful conditions in which a
lasting and just solution could be arrived at. I am
determined, in so far as it depends on me, to follow the
second course.

21. It may be argued that the withdrawal of Creckforccs
from Cyprus along the lines agreed upon may be a
contribution to the cause of peace. I would be preparedto
agree with that if that action did not stop there, if that
decision and that action were not related to somethingelse
and were not complemented. The fact that there hasalso
been a need for an essential and effective guarantee%aiflsl
the possibility of external attack against Cyprus comesout
more imperatively now than ever before. NO one candeny
or question the right of the Greek Government to withdraw
its troops from Cyprus; but neither can anyone denyOur
anxiety regarding the vacuum that has been created.Ii is
therefore more imperative now than ever before that an

14. In assessing the outcome of the recent crisis, of which
the Council is well aware, much has been said and written
as to who came out of it victorious and who was defeated.
This may be of some value in terms of the internal politics
of each Government, but it is not the issue with which
2

affective guarantee be provided against the possibihty of an
external
attack upon Cyprus. This would indeed be a
contribution
to the cause of peace. We are aware of the fact
that a number of countries were not displeased with the
agreement for the withdrawal of Greek troops; but it is
essential that the same attitude be shown with regard to the
necessity for the guarantee,
22. Our position has been and still is as described in the
reply of the President of the Republic of Cyprus to the
relevant appeal of the Secretary-General We acknowledge
the agreement between Greece and Turkey to withdraw
their troops in excess of their contingents as a first step
along the lines of that appeal. Starting from that basis, we
take the view that it would be in the interest of peace if
tIlere were a complete withdrawal of Greek and Turkish
troops from Cyprus accompanied by a guarantee against
external attack.

29. Questions of an internal nature in Cyprus, questions of
an internal nature in relation to any country, would have
been properly regarded by the Government of that country
as internal and, therefore, would not constitute a subject
for discussion. However, we would be prepared to discuss
and consult on internal questions such as that of disarmament, as we have made quite clear; but we should not be
expected to discuss and consult on questions of an internal
nature unrelated to the other issues which are of vital
importance to us. We are ready to discuss, within the
framework of the United Nations, any constructive proposal, any objective proposal, if it is aimed at reducing
tensions and removing the causes of friction which in turn,
as we believe, would pave the way towards a peaceful
solution. We have proved this in the deliberations both in
this Council and in the General Assembly. We have proved
it in the course of the mediation efforts by the United
Nations Mediator who was appointed by the SecretaryGeneral on the basis of the Council’s resolution 186 (1964)
of 4 March 1964. And may I remind the Council that the
mediation efforts were not interrupted because of our
stand. We are ready to discuss in good faith and with
goodwill, but we refused in the past, and we refuse now, to
be committed to anything before discussion takes place. We
shall discuss everything, subject to the basic necessity of the
sovereignty of Cyprus and the sovereign rights of the
Government of Cyprus.

23. What is the reason for leaving in Cyprus a few Greek
troops and a few Turkish troops? Is it a legal problem?
Our position on the Treaty is well known in this Council
and I shall not repeat it unless it is necessary. But even if we
take the other line, that the two contingents have gone to
Cyprus on the basis of the Treaty, there still is nothing in
the Treaty which obliged Greece and Turkey to have troops
in Cyprus. Therefore, it is a question of willingness to make
a contribution to the cause of peace.
24. Having said what I had to say on the question of the
withdrawal of troops, as the matter stands at the moment, I
nlust emphasize that it’is, in our view, absolutely essential
that the withdrawal of non-Cypriot troops from Cyprus be
complete, if the cause of peace is to be served.
25.

could argue on that, but I accept if for argument’s sake. But
who can deny that there is also a fear felt by the majority
of the population of Cyprus against the possibility of
external danger and external attack? For anyone to
propose that we deal with one fear and leave the other aside
does not- with all due respect-contribute
to the cause of
peace. The cause of peace, as I said at the beginning, does
not call for one-sided concessions. This has always been so,
with every problem in history, but it is particularly true in
the caseof Cyprus.

We have been asked to disarm internally. We have been

asked to dismantle the National Guard. However, the idea
that the National Guard should be dismantled, with Greek

arld Turkish troops still remaining in Cyprus and with
Cyprus having no guarantee against external attack, would
be, in my humble submission, neither logical nor proper.

30. We realize that the general opinion is that this recent
crisis, unfortunate though it was, at least gave some impetus
to an effort to reach a solution of the Cyprus problem, and
it is the duty of statesmen, the duty of responsible people,
to try to make the best of a bad situation. We are ready to
go forward within the framework of the United Nations.

26.

But we would say this: in our effort, in our desire, in
earnest endeavour to contribute to the maximum
possible degree to the cause of peace and the removal of the
sources of conflict, we would be prepared to consider the
question
of complete internal disarmament if this were
accompanied by the complete withdrawal of non-Cypriot
troops
and by the necessary security against external
attack.
our

31. The question has been asked: why within the framework of the United Nations? Both for reasons of principle
as well as for reasons of realism. First of all, we are
dedicated to the United Nations and its principles. Second,
the Security Council is seized of the problem and it
maintains a peace-keeping force in Cyprus. Third, the
Security Council, when taking a decision on stationing a
peace-keeping force in Cyprus, also decided on the procedure to be followed to reach a solution to the problem.
Fourth, Cyprus is a small country and solutions to the
problems of small countries can and should be found within
the framework of the United Nations and its Charter.

27. It has been said, again, that if we disarm internally,
there
will be no possibility of internal conflict, and
therefore there will be no need for any external guarantee
because there will be no threat from outside. But even if
this is the construction which some place on the situation,
what
harm would there be, in their view, in having a
guarantee against external attack, a guarantee which would
make people in Cyprus feel safe?

32. In this context, having several times stated clearly the
position of my Government on the question of external
threat, on the question of the withdrawal of all non-Cypriot
troops, on the internal questions, and on the question of
our attitude concerning the procedure for reaching a

28. We have to tackle this vicious circle, otherwise we shall
not get anywhere. I can argue the question, but for
argument’s
sake I accept, that a large number of the
Turkish
minority in Cyprus fear the majority. I repeat, I
3

solution to the problem of Cyprus, I should like to make it
quite clear that, although in the past, for reasons which we
explained on the appropriate occasions, we did not raise
any objections, we shall not now consent to any new
bilateral effort between Greece and Turkey with regard to
the Cyprus problem.
33. We must emphasize that the Cyprus problem is not a
problem between Greece and Turkey; it is not a dispute
between Greece and Turkey. It is a problem that concerns
the people of Cyprus. This is the framework of our
position.
34. Depending on the development of the debates and on
the deliberations and the views expressed by the members
of this Council-which we are ready to hear with an open
mind-1 shall present any further opinions that I may have.
35. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
Turkey to make a statement.

of

36. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): This is perhaps the most
momentous meeting of the Security Council on the
question of Cyprus since the meetings in early March 1964
when the United Nations embarked on one of its most
spectacular efforts at peace-keeping. We meet in the
aftermath of a crisis which brought the parties involved to
the brink of a calamity which has been avoided for the
immediate future through a timely appeal of the SecretaryGeneral and the discreet but extremely valuable intercession of his Special Representative for the occasion, the
able Under-Secretary, Mr. Rolz-Bennett; through the untiring efforts of Governments which are friends of all the
parties and have the peace of the area at heart; through the
persistent and valuable efforts of Mr. Cyrus Vance, the
personal representative of President Johnson, and finally,
through the realistic and statesmanlike approach of two
neighbouring countries to a situation fraught with danger
for both of them.
37. What makes this meeting of the Security Council on
Cyprus crucial to the settlement of the problem is the fact
that it is the outcome of this session which will decide
whether, in the words of the Secretary-General, we shall
continue “from crisis to deeper crisis and from danger to
graver danger”, or whether the Council will face its
responsibilities and provide for the adoption of effective
measures for the maintenance of peace on the Island.
38. The events of the last six months, as well as the
bloody incidents of the last few weeks, have been thoroughly reported to the CounciI in the usually objective manner
in the reports of the Secretary-General, so that there is no
need for me to go into them again. My Government is
grateful to the Secretary-General, and to his able collaborators-the Commander of UNFICYP, General Martola, and
his Special Representative in Cyprus, Mr. Osorio-Tafall-for
all they have done in these troubled days in order to dispel
tensions on the Island. We also continue to appreciate the
contribution
to the cause of peace afforded by those
countries which provide troops and other facilities to
UNFICYP.
39. The reports of the Secretary-General, while they
convey accurate and factual accounts of the eventful days

in mid-November, do not of course contain any analysis of
the political background and motives behind the premeditated assault on the two Turkish villages in cyprus,
Nor perhaps is it proper that they should. But it would he
apprOpriate
for me once again to point to the root cf the
trouble, and for that reason I was glad when Foreign
Minister Kyprianou referred to the removal of the basic
causes of the conflict.
40. The recent violent eruption against the two villagesin
Cyprus is but a symptom of the real disease; it is but a link
in the chain of events which relentlessly pushes the Island
towards calamity. The real disease is the unshaken sad
unshakable determination that lies in the hearts of the
Greek-Cypriot ruling clique to bring about en&-the
annexation of the Island to Greece by any means, fair or
foul. It is a credit to the resourcefulness of the political
archbishop who rules the Greek part of Cyprus that he has
succeeded in convincing even the most discerning observers
of the proposition that he is merely paying lip-service to the
cause of enosis, while in fact he wishes to maintain the
independence of the island republic. Those countries and
statesmen who sincerely wish to see the Island remain
independent are too ready to believe that the desire for
enosis is on the wane. They either ignore, or find it
convenient to ignore, the solemn oath on the Holy Trinity
taken by Archbishop Makarios, a prince of the church, to
work for ever for enosis-an oath which wasrenewedin the
Saint Synod of the Greek Orthodox Church only two years
ago-to say nothing of the unanimous decision taken by the
Greek members of the Cyprus Parliament only last June to
pursue relentlessly the cause of enosis.
41. Such countries and statements, by lending themselves
to the international machinations of the Greek-Cypriot
Administration,
are, perhaps unwittingly, lending their
services to the reallzation of a cause which they abhor.
42. The attack on the two Turkish villages last month was
a well-calculated, premeditated step in the systematic
march towards enosis. 4f the recurrence of such actsis not
effectively prevented by the Council, the fanatical urge for
enosis will strike again and again with a view to wearingout
the resistance of the beleaguered but unsubmissive Turkish
citizens of the Republic.
43. It is entirely wrong to lay the blame for the attackon
Ayios Theodhoros or Kophinou on the impulsive action of
an impulsive general. The Greek-Cypriot Administration is
involved in it up to the hilt, as they, too, give their blessing
to the assault. The general in question has now left the
Island, but the Council should know that the causefor
which he strived, the struggle which has brought us to the
brink of calamity, has not gone with him. It is UP to the
Council to take measures to prevent the recurrence cf such
international crimes in the name of territorial aggrandlsea
ment .
44. Ever since the beginning of the recent crisis, my
Government has acted with the ultimate objective Of
bringing peace to the Island, and a peaceful settlement to
the problem of Cyprus. We had conceived this action in
three stages. The first was the obvious and immediate
necessity for the withdrawal from the Island of foreign

troops infiltrated over and above the Greek and Turkish
contingents which are stationed there under valid international treaties, and which shall remain there unless and
until a negotiated final settlement of the question may
stipulate otherwise. This first stage is now, happily, in the
process of realization.
45. The second stage must, of necessity, be that of
bringing genuine peaceful and normal conditions to the
Island, with the disarming and disbanding of illegal troops
mustered in violation of the Island’s Constitution in order
to subdue by force of arms the Turkish community, This
stage will necessarily involve, in our view, a more active role
for the UNFICYP. And the realization of this second stage
Will depend on the constructive directions which this
Council might wish to issue in its resolution.
46. The final stage will come when, under peaceful
conditions and without any attempts at the forcible
imposition of political views, the parties-all the parties,
including the Turkish community-will
proceed, either
under the institutions provided by the United Nations, or
otherwise, to negotiate for an agreed solution and a
peaceful Settlement,
47. This meeting of the Council will therefore be decisive
as to the realization of the second stage-namely, the
pacification of the Island.
48. The Council will have to face the bitter fact that, ever
since its creation in March 1964, the Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus, while it has been able to avert escalations into a
major holocaust and has worked assiduously for bringing
about normal conditions, has been unable to prevent major
military aggression by the Greek Cypriots every time the
spirit moved them to attack. It is sad but true that the
recent assault on the two villages, which cost the lives of
twenty-nine Turks, including women and children, could
have been averted had the UNFICYP had the necessary
authority at its disposal. How could it have been averted?
49. In the first place, at least the permanent members of
the Security Council will recal1 that, in the early days of its
deliberations on this subject, I submitted to the Council,
and I submit again, that the mandate of the UNFICYP, as
spelled out in the Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March
1964, gave it much more authority than it chose to
exercise. One obvious case in point was the illegal infiltration of foreign troops and heavy armaments into the Island.
Resolution 186 (1964), in calling upon “the communities
in Cyprus and their leaders to act with the utmost
restraint”, certainly did not intend one of those cornmunities to bring a foreign army of occupation onto its SOti
or to purchase from abroad weapons of mass destruction to
be used against the other community. Again, under its
mandate of “preventing a recurrence of fighting”, it seemed
to us, as I then submitted to the Council, that the
UNFICYP wasin duty bound to prevent the importation of
arms which were destined to be used in such fighting. The
explanation that those arms were imported for defence
against external attack has been exploded time and again
when such heavy weapons were used in each caseof Greek
Cypriot assault against the Turkish community, such as in
the most recent incidents, And, even in the latest incidents,

the UNFICYP was or must have been fully aware of the
large-scale military preparations of the Greek Cypriots
obviously about to be sent against the two Turkish villages,
but could not even inform the Cypriot-Turks of such
preparations so that they might have had immediate
recourse to the Security Council. Such information was
denied to them on the grounds that it would constitute the
divulging of military information of the Government of
Cyprus. Not only did UNFICYP not prevent the import of
murder weapons to the Island, but was even reluctant to
report it to the Security Council on the same grounds.
50. Such implementation of the mandate of the Peacekeeping Force stems from a strict interpretation of the
concept of sovereignty. As I have submitted to the Council
of previous occasions, one thing should be clear: If a
Government feels the need for a peace-keeping force on its
soil and invites such a force, that Government has thereby
voluntarily and inevitably limited its sovereignty to the
extent that it can no longer act in such a way as to make it
impossible for that force to keep the peace. When your
children are fighting with knives in your garden and you ask
a policeman to come in and stop the fight, you cannot ask
him not to use his stick or not to walk on your flower beds.
Such narrow concepts have brought us to the edge of a
holocaust time and again, and are certain to bring us there
again.
51. A grave responsibility lies on the shoulders of the
Greek Cypriot Administration, not only for its misdeeds of
the past but also for the policy which it may choose to
follow in the crucial months or even weeks ahead. If it
persists in its dogged march towards en&, if it continues
to plead sovereignty for criminal assault, if it continues to
attempt to tear up valid international treaties solemnly and
freely signed by its President and Vice-President in rhe
name of the people of Cyprus, to resort to violence in order
to impose its political concepts by force, and if it refuses to
proceed peacefully to disarm the illegal bands which may
again be used as an instrument of policy, we shall without a
doubt be faced again with another crisis, or other crises.
Such a crisis will be due not to anything which Turkey may
do but to the intransigence of the Greek Cypriot r&me
which has never, I repeat never, heeded the many calls of
this Council for moderation and restraint. On the other
hand, if the Greek Administration chooses the path of
peaceful solution and agreed settlement, as envisaged in
resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964, the functions of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus will be
clearly defined.
52. Here are some of the points which the Council might
wish to ponder with regard to the functions of the force:
(I) The force was never intended to be and never can be
an instrument of either of the parties locked in COITUIIU~~
strife in Cyprus, whether it calls itself the Government of
Cyprus or the Turkish community.
(2) The force should be instructed and allowed formally
to observe and report to the Secretary-General and thereby
to the Council any influx of arms into or from the Island. It
is inconceivable that it would be able to function effective-

1~ for Peace-keeping behind
built up on the Island.

a veil of secrecy as to arms

(3) The force should be in a position
to inform
the
COUnCil instantly Of any troop concentrations
obviously
poised for assault on the other community,
as in the case of
Ayios Theodhoros.
(4) The force should be called upon to observe and
supervise the disarming of all forces on the Island illegally
constituted after December 1963, in accordance with an
agreed time-table, and should take into custody the arms so
abandoned.
(5) The force should have complete
freedom of accessto all parts of the Island.

and unhindered

(G) The force should ensure the safety and freedoms
all citizens on all roads.

of

report of 8 December (S/8286).
Among
the questions
raised in this document, the most urgent is that which
concerns the extension of the mandate
of the United
Nations Emergency Force.
59. The Secretary-General notes that
the situation in
Cyprus remains precarious. He adds that the renewal of the
mandate of the Emergency Force is one obvious step
towards the maintenance of peace in Cyprus and recom.
mends that the mandate be extended for another period of
six or three months.
60. The Secretary-General has first-hand knowledge of tile
situation and has largely contributed
to preventing the
outbreak of armed conflict. On behalf of the Greek
Government I should like to thank him, as well as the
Under-Secretary, Mr. Rolz-Bennett,
whose contribution to
the solution of the crisis was greatly appreciated in Greece.

(7) It should be clearly understood that neither before
nor after the measures of disarmament
the force is not, l
repeat 11ot, intended to supplant the authority
of either the
Creek-Cypriot Government or the Turkich
community
in
areas under their respective control. It is intended not to
act as an interrlatiorlal
police force but to prevent
communal strife and to forestall the preparations
for
continued strife. After disarmament
each community
will
obviously continue to maintain
law and order in areas
under its control until such time as a peaceful settlement
is
negotiated and the Republic can return to constitutional
government with authority over the entire territory
of the
Republic.

61. Given the present situation in Cyprus, as described in
the Secretary-General’s report, and in view of the recom.
mendation which resulted from that situation, it is obvious
that the Greek Government
cannot but hope for the
continued presence of the Force on the Island. But the
Force is not an end in itself. It was sent to Cyprus to help
restore peace in the region and facilitate
the search for a
solution to the Cyprus problem.
62. Quite recently I had the opportunity
to tell the
Council of the Greek Government’s
efforts to that end.
Greece has deferred to the appeals made by the Secretary
General and has complied with the requests of the United
Nations. In so doing, it has in turn acquired the moral right
to call on the Security Council to fill the existing gap in the
Island’s defences against an attack from abroad; for we
must not harbour the illusion that the threat against Cyprus
will miraculously disappear through
the very fact of the
withdrawal of the Greek forces. That threat existed loag
before the presence of those forces on the Island and wasin
fact the very reason for their presence. Cyprus has been
iiving under the threat of invasion ever since 1963. That
was the date of the first offensive movement
of the Turkish
armed forces. Haunted by the constant
presence of the
Turkish fleet in its territorial waters and of Turkish aircraft
in its air space, Cyprus was bombarded
in August 1964,
and, in the absence of effective international
protection,
had been forthappealed to Greece. If such protection
coming, Cyprus would not have needed to turn to Greece
for help.

53. Those are in our view the minimum
functions which
the UNFICYP must be called upon to perform,
either
through an unequivocal clarification of its existing mandate
or under new and broader functions which may be assigned
to it, through agreement between the parties, with a clear
call from this Council and, as necessary, with the proferred
good offices of the Secretary-General.
54, A United Nations Peace-keeping force hamstrung
by
narrow concepts can do no more than maintain
a growingly
explosive starus quo, and may even prolong for ever a final
peaceful settlement, by giving a false sense of security.
55. I submit, that it is up to the Council at this crucial
session to face its responsibilities. If the Council chooses to
evade the issues and bring forth a resolution
which-as has,
alas, happened all too often in the past-the
parties may
interpret in their own tendentious way and which would
provide a licence for them to continue to strive by means of
their own choosing, then without a doubt the grounds for
new and graver crises will have been laid.

63. I leave it to the members of the Council to reflect
upon this and to lay the blame where it is due. What We are
asking from the Council at the moment is that it should not
repeat the errors of the past, that it should take the
necessary preventatik e measures today so that we shall net
need tomorrow to bemoan a fait accompli.

56, I urgently appeal to the Council to face the issues and
prepare the terrain not only for effective peace-keeping
but
for voIuntary peace-making, in good faith.

64. When the time comes, my delegation
will propose to
the
CounciI
the
measures
which
we
believe
should
be taken.
57. The PRESIDENT:
I call upon the representative
of
For
the
present,
I
shall
merely
draw
attention
to
the
serious
Greece.
. threat which continues to hang over Cyprus and Point out
the pat11 which the United Nations should follow, afkrtl~e
58. Mr. BI’I’SIOS (Greece) (translated
from French):
The
positive response Greece has given to this appeal.
it
the
Secretary-General’s
Security Council has before
6

65. The Secretary-General’s report contains certain elenlents which, with the assistance of the Council, might
encourage us to embark upon a constructive phase of
common effort, instead of undergoing a series of everrecurring crises, each one more acute and more dangerous
t.han the last. In Part VII of the report, under the heading
‘L’Observations”, the Secretary-General, drawing upon his
vvealth of experience of the complexities of the problem,
outlines three main ideas: (1) the expeditious withdrawal of
all Greek and Turkish forces in excess of their respective
contingents, and the ultimate withdrawal of all non-Cypriot
armed forces, other than those of the United Nations;
(2) the positive demilitarization of Cyprus under United
Iqations control and the devising of practical arrangements
to safeguard the internal security of the people of Cyprus;
(,3) positive steps in the search for a durable solution of the
Cyprus question. To that end, the good offices of the
!$ecretary-General are available to the parties and to the
Security Council.

fail to mention that practicaIly every sentence spoken by
the Turkish representative contained a threat that the crisis
atmosphere which we have just experienced would be
revived.
70. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Turkey to make a statement in right of reply.
71. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): I asked for the floor to reply as
qUiCklY as possible to a question which has been addressed
to me. My colleague from Greece asked whether I had a
solution to suggest to the problem of Cyprus, I submit that
this is not the place for us to go into the merits of the
question. We are now dealing with the possibilities of
pacification of the Island. There have been other places
where the merits of the question-the substance of the
problem-have been discussed, and I hope that there will be
other occasions when they will be discussed.
72. AS to the reference made by my colleague from
Greece to the talks which took place between the two
Governments, he is obviously much better informed about
the contents of those talks than I am. As far as I know, the
offer to annex the Island to Greece, in return for
considerations to be given to Turkey, was made by the
Greek Government. As far as I know, Turkey has always
insisted on the basis of the independence of the Island of
Cyprus.

66. Here we have a sufficiently .broad field of action to
enable positive steps to be taken in the right direction. It
should be the task of each one of us to work out
arrangements which would consolidate peace and security
in the region, taking into account the sovereign right of the
liepublic of Cyprus. Above all we need goodwill. Here I
should like to offer assurancesthat Greece, for its part, will
give positive support to such an effort. I should like to
express the hope that we all have the same objective at
lheart.

73. Now I have been chided for having cited a number of
things which I thought it would be useful for the Council to
consider: one to seven, namely. I have also been rebuked
for having taken the tone of “ultimatum” in negotiations.
As far as I understand it now, we are not in the middle of
negotiations; we are here as parties before the Council to
expose to the Council the way in which we think it should
handle the immediate crisis. And the points one to seven,
which I have submitted for the consideration of the
Council, were in our understanding a useful way of tackling
this problem. I did not intend to lay down conditions or
items to be negotiated between the parties.

67. I had formulated that hope on paper, and so I was
very disappointed just now upon hearing the Turkish
,representative’s statement; I was disappointed both by its
,tone and by its content. Mr. Eralp has gone back to the old
refrain which we are so accustomed to hearing on his lips,
that of enosis. He clings to that argument because it works
.in his favour. I have given my reply so many times since
1963 to 1964 that I shall now confine myself to asking him
a question in return: what does Turkey propose as a
solution to the problem? Mr. Eralp has never explained this
to the Council. Would it be what the Turkish leaders
proposed in the Thrace, namely, to abolish the State of
Cyprus and to divide the Island between Greece and
Turkey? I should like to have Mr. &alp’s answer.

74,., While I have the floor, if the Council will bear with me
another five minutes, I might as well refer to certain
statements made by Foreign Minister Kyprianou. Briefly,
he said that negotiations cannot be conducted fruitfully
under the threat of intervention. I wish to point out that it
is our view that negotiations can never be fruitfully
conducted under the threat of force. And that is why up to
now there has not been the possibility of conducting
fruitful negotiations because in the Island one of the
parties, the party mostly aggrieved and principally Concerned, has been under the constant threat of annihilation.

68. At this moment we may be entering upon a certain
phase in the consultations taking place under the aegis of
the Secretary-General: namely, the phase of discussing the
possible extension of the Force’s mandate. I think that,
before we enter into negotiations, we should be ready to
approach them with an open mind. A few moments ago
you heard Mr. Eralp’s staccato tones, giving the count;
before he reached ten the victim would surely fall to the
ground, and need fanning by Mr. Eralp in order to be
revived.

75. Reference was also made to the withdrawal of Turkish
and Greek troops from Cyprus as a first step. we also view
this as a first and constructive step, but a step in the
dfrection of the removal from the Island of all means of
violence, of all means of imposing the political will of one
party on the other-namely, the illegal forces constituted
after 1963. We certainly do not view it as a first step
towards helping one of the parties brush aside unilaterally
its treaty obligations.

69. This is not the spirit in which one should approach
negotiations, my dear colleague, because if we approach
them armed with such an ultimatum, they are instantly
doomed to failure. I hope that this will not be the case and
that when the time comes we shall all be able to approach
the question with a more open mind and see what is
possible and what is not. In conclusion, however, I cannot
7

76. Foreign Minister Kyprianou made it very clear that he
was asking for guarantees for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Cyprus. I have often made it
clear to the Council that the only danger directed against
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Cyprus comes not from Turkey but comes from the
relentless drive for enosis.This determination to relinquish
the inalienable sovereignty of the Republic by annexation
to Greece is still very strong in the ruling Greek Cypriot
clique. Although the phased withdrawal of the army of
occupation imported from Greece in order to realize this
ambition may have somewhat removed the prospects of
immediate eno~is, nevertheless, the so-called National
Guard of 14,000 men armed with heavy weapons and bent
upon breaking the will of the Turkish community still
stands as an instrument of enosis.

exercise of the right of reply, representatives wishing ta
exercise their rights of reply will postpone their requests
until we have exhausted the list of speakers for this
meeting.
83. Mr. KYPRIANOU
(Cyprus): I shall try to be very
brief. I shall continue to ignore certain matters which might
aggravate the climate in this Chamber and I shall not reply
to accusations the answers to which can easily be found In
the reports of the Secretary-General concerning recenl
events and the recent crisis.
84. When we spoke we used the expression “to discuss”;
the representative of Turkey spoke in terms of “it should”,
I think those two small words emphasize the apprcacll,
How do we approach the situation? We said that we would
be prepared to discuss the contents of the appeals of the
Secretary-General and other related issues and the issues
raised in his report, even issues including internal matters,
But the representative of Turkey said “this should be done
by UNFICYP”,
“this is how the mandate should be
enlarged”, “this is what the United Nations Force should
do”, and so on.

77. If Cyprus is today still independent it is not because
its Greek Government wishes it to be so, nor is it due to the
presence of a United Nations Peace-keeping Force. It is
only due to the determination of Turkey to prevent any
encroachment upon the independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus. The only guarantee for the independence
of Cyprus is the determination of Turkey to maintain its
solemn treaty obligation to safeguard the independence of
the Republic.

85. But what is most important is the relationship which
he discovered in the recent events in Cyprus with the
question of the political solution of the Cyprus problem.
He said that the attack against the two villages wasdue to
the idea of enosis.Then he went on to say that Turkey is
the country which carries the banner of the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus, while all
three of those noble principles have been violated in the
worst possible manner in his own speech from beginning to
end, as can be seen from a brief analysis of it. He said, “We
agree to remove the causes of conflict and friction io
Cyprus, but the two contingents”-and now he spoke also
on behalf of Greece-“shall remain in Cyprus”. Well, in the
appeal of the Secretary-General there is a call for their
removal.

78. There are guarantees, however, which the Council is
called upon to provide-and we call upon it to provide.
They are guarantees that the UNFICYP will function
effectively in order to see to it that such criminal action as
in the case of the recent incidents will not occur again, and
that the means of perpetrating such aggression shall be
denied to the party in question.
79. The question of the Greek and Turkish contingents on
the Island has been raised again in the context of the
ultimate withdrawal of all non-Cypriot forces from Cyprus.
Foreign Minister Kyprianou called for the withdrawal of
the Turkish contingent stationed in Cyprus in accordance
with the Treaty of Guarantee of 16 August 1960. If he
meant that, then obviously my Government cannot agree
with it in any context, Such a suggestion would strike at
the basis of the validity of solemn international covenants
which I am sure the Council has no intention of doing.

86. Let us not go into legalistic arguments about treaties.
If that is what he wants, we can do so. But is the causeof
peace less important than a doubtful legalistic argument,
the position on which, if one so wishes, can be reserved?
That is the issue on this particular point.

80. I doubt if any member of the Council maintains the
view that any organ of the United Nations has the authority
to override or declare invalid international rights and
obligations solemnly and freely negotiated and assumed.
This does not, of course, mean that the Treaty stipulations
cannot ever be renegotiated or altered, but this can only be
done in the context of new international arrangements
again freely negotiated and agreed to.

87.. Then we come to the question of enosis. It is net mY
intention to go into the substance of this matter, but it 1s
true that an answer is necessary to the question put by the
representative of Greece, I could add another question tc
that one. If Turkey says that it stands for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus,what 1s
its objection to having an international guarantee about
those things, and not Turkey’s guarantee? What is the
objection to having an international guarantee to exclude
the possibility of any outside intervention? He spoke of
the Treaty of Guarantee and said that the Turkish
contingent in Cyprus is there by virtue of that Treaty. Fint
of alI, it was not by virtue of that Treaty that the
contingent was in Cyprus, but it was by virtue of the Treaty
of Alliance, the purpose of which was to defend CYPflS
against outside attack. Now Cyprus does not want that
alliance. We do not want an alliance. We want a guarantee
by the international community, in the most effective 1

81. Quite apart from these valid legal considerations, we
frankly fail to see in what way the removal of a Turkish
contingent of 650 men, which has not fired a single shot in
the course of the last four troubled years, can advance the
cause of peaceful conditions in the Island.
82. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Cyprus has
asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply, and I shall
call on him to do so. But I hope that, following that
8

possible way, against an external threat. Even in the viewof
Turkey the issue is that Turkey is the protector of Cyprus,
but Cyprus does not want that. It is as simple as that. We
would like the protection of the United Nations and the
protection of the Security Council with respect to those
principles which the representative .of Turkey professesto
uphold in the caseof Cyprus.

94. Mr. GEEK: Mr. President,
I thank you and the
members of the Council for. affording me this opportunity
to speak before you and plead the views of the main
aggrieved party in the long drawn-out problem of Cyprus.
The party in question
is the Turkish community which has
been forced to put up a struggle for self-preservation and
survival in the face of organized armed attacks and other
methods of violence and economic warfare since 21
December 1963.

88. Throughout his speech the representative of Turkey
spoke in the following manner-I do not have the text of
his speech and I cannot quote his exact words, but this is
the impression that I formed-“If these things are not done
or if those things are done, then we shall have a new crisis.”
Are we here to precipitate a new crisis? Are we here to lay
the ground for a new crisis, or are we here to remove the
causesof the existing crisis?

95. In the course of the last four years, Turks in Cyprus
have been victimized, almost in every sphere of life, on
account of a policy of violence and use of force persistently
pursued by the Greek Cypriot leaders at home, while
abroad they have been engaged in a campaign of propaganda aimed at twisting the facts and shielding, behind
the generality of certain principles, their misdeeds and
wanton disregard of their obligations arising from the
treaties, the Charter of the United Nations and the
resolutions of this Council.

89. The representative of Turkey states: “These are our
points: internal disarmament, enlargement of the mandate
of the Force”-not external guarantees and no withdrawal
of the two contingents. We say that there should be internal
disarmament, but withdrawal of the contingents and
external guarantees.

96. Thanks to the impartial reporting of theinternational
press and the presence of the UNFICYP in Cyprus-despite
the adverse conditions imposed 011 them by the Greek
Cypriot regime-the whole world has come to realize the
true nature of the Cypriot problem in all its nakedness. The
recent events in Cyprus, which culminated from the almost
habitual tendency of the Greek Cypriot regime to resort to
use of armed force and violence, is a typical illustration of
the whole problem. For that reason, I shall not take up the
time of the members to go into the details of similar events
in the past which have been repeating themselves at regular
intervals since December 1963 with added ferocity and
impunity.

90. Is it intended to remove the fear, the doubtful
fear-and I insist on this “doubtful fear”-and I am quite
willing to debate it at length-of a section of the Turkish
minority, and then leave, remaining, the fear of Cyprus as a
whole and of the vast majority of its population concerning
the possibility of external attack? Is that a way to
contribute to peace?
91. And yet, we have said let us discuss everything, let us
make use of the good offices of the Secretary-General. All
of us have had the occasion more than once-and I am glad
to say that there is agreement on one point, to expressour
appreciation of the keen interest and objectivity of the
Secretary-General as well as of his collaborators both here
and in Cyprus. Let us make use of his good offices and
discuss all these matters. But let us not dictate terms in
advance.

97. Each time the perpetrators of these dastardly crimes
are led to believe or think that they can get away with
whatever they do and reap the benefits of their aggression.
Each time such a crisis is over, the Turks are left with more
dead, with more Turkish homes destroyed, with more
Turkish children and families left in agony and tears for
having lost their loved ones. On the other hand, the
aggressors having escaped any condemnation of censure,
they tend to advance further their position of fait accompli
emanating from the use of force and violence, and thus
become all the more uncompromising
in the matter of
finding an agreed settlement of the problem.

92. We have simply laid down the framework in which we
see the situation, the manner in which we see the issues
related to each other and the manner in which we think
they should be discussed. But I must admit that I never
expected that these tactics and this practice of negotiating
under threats and ultimata would have been brought from
the Mediterrean area into this Council. I never expected
that and I am surprised by it. We are ready to discuss
everything connected with the Cyprus problem within the
framework of the United Nations, and particularly with the
good offices of the Secretary-General, which we have
welcomed, without any pre-conditions and in a spirit open
to any ideas, in good faith and with good-will. But we
cannot be expected, in view of how small we are, to
negotiate under threats.

9X. This state of affairs and this sort of mentality is, in our
view, the main threat to the peace-keeping operations in
Cyprus, which tends to threaten peace on a bigger and all
the more ferocious scale. A cursory glance at the Greek
Cypriot papers, following the latest merciless attacks on the
villages of Ayios Theodhoros and Kophinou is enough to
Illustrate this point. In fact, all the Greek papers for 16
November 1967 presented outrageous acts of massacre,
pillage, arson and looting
committed
in these villages
against the Turks as a victory and carried large-scale
photographs demonstrating
some of the armed Greek
bandits that were engaged in action in a jubilant manner.
Some of these papers even criticized the withdrawal of the
Greek occupation force from these two villages upon the
warning of Turkey and attempted to blame this withdrawal
on the Greek Government,
while praising President

93. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the previous
decision of the Council, I shall now invite Mr. i)rek to take
his seat at the Council table in order to make a statement.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. iirek. took a place
at the Council table.
9

103. The main consideration for the ‘Turkish community
in agreeing to the present independent State of Cyprus was
the guarantee that it could live in peace and security free
from attacks or threats of attacks on the part of the Greek
community which had openly declared its intention to
unite Cyprus to Greece by force of arms, in relying on its
numerical strength. For this reason, certain arrangements
had to be devised to guarantee not only the safety and
security of the Turkish community, which was the weaker
party to the dispute and which needed such guarantees in
view of the open policy of hostility by the Greek Cypriots,
but guarantees had also to be devised for the protection cf
the independence and sovereignty of Cyprus, which wss
equally endangered by the policy of annexing Cyprus to
Greece,

Makarios who, according to these papers, refused to order
immediate withdrawal. On the other hand, some prominent
members of the Greek Cypriot leadership were heard by
diplomatic circles to say, in a jubilant manner, that this
manner of action is the correct way of dealing with the
Cyprus problem.
99. This mentality, in our humble submission, is the very
essence of the Cyprus problem and, as such, it not 0111~
endangers the peace, both in and around Cyprus, but it is
an audacious challenge to the efforts of the Security
Council to find a peaceful solution to the problem. It has
also been a very real and direct threat to the security 01’ life
and property of the Turkish Community in Cyprus for the
last four years, as demonstrated anew in the very recent
crisis in the Island. Unless effective steps are taken to
remove this threat and create conditions of genuine peace
in Cyprus, all our efforts will be wasted.

104. Hence, special treaties had to be agreed upon by all
the parties concerned, including the two communities in
Cyprus, and the Constitution of the Republic had to take
cognizance .of these realities. As I have already stated, the
main reality taken ilLto consideration was the fact that an
account of the claim of CnOSiS in the past by the Greeks in
Cyprus and their declared intention to go ahead with it, 1
strong sense of community, which brings with it a tacit
agreement that “the issues which divide men are of less
importance than the issues which unite them”, wasserious
ly lacking in Cyprus.

100. Our experience of the past shows that in the very
near future we may find ourselves in exactly the same
position we were in in the middle of November 1967,
unless these effective measures are carried out and
practised.
101. In order not to be misunderstood, I would seek the
Council’s indulgence to expand on this point in more detail,
because I believe that in trying to solve a problem, one has
to take into consideration the true facts of any given
situation in all its nakedness, whether one likes them or
not, or whether they appeal to one’$ utopian instincts or
outlook, or not. First and foremost, it must be understood
that Cyprus is a small place inhabitated by Greeks and
Turks who are the extension of the two nations over this
Island. The main point dividing the people of Cyprus for
the last century or so has been the age-old ambition of the
Kingdom of Greece to add Cyprus to its owri territory and
thus expand its borders to the “shores of north Africa” or
to “materialize the dreams of Alexander the Great”, as it
was claimed by the then Prime Minister, Mr. Papandreou.

105. So a system had to be devised whereby the issues
dividing the members of the two communities would
reciprocally be restricted and compromised in the hope
that, in the long run, the main devisive issue-that is,
enosis-would be abandoned and thus the way would be
paved for co-operation in mutual trust and goodwill for the
creation of a sense of nationhood among the members of
the two communities.
106. But these necessary concepts underlying the Constitution were nipped in the bud by the Greeks, who, no
sooner had the Republic assumed its independent status,
began to clamor for enosis.Thus, the required atmosphere
of mutual trust and goodwill was jeopardized by the dark
clouds of enosishanging over the blue skies of Cyprus, and
the Constitution, which was the product of very long
negotiations and very stiff diplomatic activities both within
and outside the United Nations, was not given a chanceto
succeed because of the Greek demands.

102. Turks, for their part, have all along opposed this idea,
having in mind the fate of the Turkish communities which
had the misfortune of falling under Greek rule, such as the
Turks who lived in the Island of Crete and the Dodecanese
Islands, which are now extinct in the case of Crete and on
the way to extinction in the caseof the Dodecanese Islands.
This division in outlook, added to the natural division of
the two communities, in the spheres of social, cultural,
linguistic and religious affaiis, led to strife and even open
violence. This strife and violence waslinked to the degree
of agitation for emu’s created since the end of the British
‘colonial rkgime, and to the armed attempts of a faction of
the Greek Cypriot community to impose erzosis-which is
the colonial rule of Greece-on Cyprus, and also to the
refusal of the Turkish community to agree to be colonized
in this way by Greece. The situation in the Island developed
into an inter-communal civil war, which nearly dragged
both Greece and Turkey into an armed conflict. Fortunately, reason then prevailed over passion and statesmanship over selfish ambitions, and a minimum basis for the
coexistence of the two communities was found by the
mutual agreement of all parties concerned.

107. Soon after independence, it transpired that the Creek
leaders had in fact agreed to disagree with the Treaties and
the Constitution, and that their sole aim wasto misusethe
independent status of Cyprus and its membership in tl~
United Nations as an instrument for bringing aboutenosif,
During the first years of independence the Greek leaders
tried to force their will on the Turkish community through
political pressure and non-implementation of the Co&it*
tion. When they failed in this, they unleashed their
pre-planned, organized armed attack against the Turks in a
most ferocious manner on 21 December 1963. General
Karayannis, who, as a mercenary officer from Greece
headed the Greek-Cypriot armed forces in their attacks
against the Turks, wrote, this in his memoirs: “When tl~
Turks objected to the imendment of the Constituticn~ ,
10

Archbishop Makarios put his plans into effect and the
Creek attacks began in December 1963”.
108. The ensuing four years have been for the Turks in
CYP~S years of death, destruction, fear and terror, of
deprivation of all means of livelihood, of misery, and, at
times, even of condemnation to starvation. Thanks to the
impartial reporting of the United Nations field officers in
Cyprus and to several reports by the Secretary-General to
this Council, the world has come to know the manifold
brutalities committed against the Turks in Cyprus, so I need
not go into the details of all this at this stage. What is
significant to note is that when the Greek leaders in Cyprus
decided to resort to the use of force and violence, in
complicity with th.e Greek Government, in order to
materialize their sinister objective which is aimed at the
dissolution of the independence of Cyprus, they had to
take care of two things: first, to prepare a ruse for the
inhuman treatment of the Turkish community, for the
purpose of robbing them of their constitutional rights; and
second, to render inoperative the Treaty of Guarantee and
Alliance, which provides against such developments. In
order to achieve these two objectives, all the governmental
machinery, ports, airports and other government resources,
were taken over by force of arms and the Turks were
presented to the world as rebels, while a false alarm was
raised in the international arena accusing Turkey of
endangering or threatening the territorial integrity of
Cyprus.
109. Behind this window-dressing, however, enosiswas
sought to be imposed on a fait accompli basis, and despite
the fact that the Security Council was seized of the
problem of settling the dispute by peaceful means and that
a peace-keeping force was stationed in Cyprus. Both the
Greeks and the Greek Cypriots embarked on the preparation of a huge military force in Cyprus, under the very eyes
of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force, thus placing the
Greek-Cypriot-controlled areas of Cyprus under the virtual
military occupation of Greece. Hand in hand with these
military actiyities which turned Cyprus into an arms
arsenal, the Greek-Cypriot leaders embarked upon a series
of faits acconzplisaimed at consolidating their position and
usurping all powers of the State as a “Government” of
Cyprus, with a view to relying on the term “the Government of Cyprus”, occurring in the Security Council resolution 186 (1964), and rendering the UNFICYP an arm of the
Greek administration in its effort to subjugate or eliminate
the Turks, under the flimsy excuse of law enforcement.
110. With this end in view, no sooner had the UNFICYl’
become operational in Cyprus than the Greek leaders
started tearing up the pages of the Constitution one after
another, in a most surreptitious and cunning way SO that
they could not be faced with much resistance in the
international sphere. Those sinister ambitions of the leaders
of. the Greek community became apparent even before the
UNFICYP had become operational in Cyprus.

serious of those attacks took place in Ktima, despite their
earlier undertakings given to the United Nations Observer,
General Gyani, that they would observe the cease-fire.
Similar attacks took place in the Tylliria area and Ghaziveran. AS an impartial observer writing in the f&&more Sun
on 10 March 1964 explained, “The fighting in Ktima
appeared to be an effort to show that the Greek Cypriots
were running the show on the Island”.
112. UNFICYP became operational only after the Turkish
community raised its voice and after Turkey warned that it
could not be expected to sit and watch while the Turk&h
community in Cyprus was being eliminated.
113. A close analysis of the present situation, to which I
shall presently turn, will reveal that we are back at the same
point where we started nearly four years ago, and that
those who have no regard for the maintenance of peace and
no appreciation for the genuine efforts of the United
Nations authorities, as well as those of friendly nations, are
out to create obstacles to the materialization in practice, on
the field, of genuine conditions of peace by resorting to the
same hypothetical arguments, the same political jargon and
the same wild accusations. The inescapable conclusion to be
drawn from this attitude is that the Greek side in Cyprus is
not yet prepared to renounce its well-known attempts to
solve the problem of Cyprus by the use of arms.
114. That is why, though I may have sounded rather
pessimistic, I had to say a few minutes ago that within a
very short time we might find ourselves faced with the same
crisis again. I entirely agree with the view that the current
events in Cyprus cannot be viewed in isolation. The first
attacks against the Turks in Ayios Theodhoros took place
in April 1964 as a diversionary operation when a large
detachment of Greek-Cypriot forces moved into the area, as
reported in the Secretary-General’s report [S/5679,
para. 13je2 That attack came as a diversionary move when
the Turks were attacked in the Kyrenia Mountains, which
made the then UNFICYP Commander, General Gyani,
state, on 28 April 1964 in an official communiqut?that the
attacks at the Kyrenia range were a complete surprise to
UNFICYP. From that time on, General Grivas had his eye
on this area and he looked for an excuse to occupy it by
force. In January 1967, all of a sudden and under the
pretext that a name-plate on the road had been changed, he
sent a battalion of National Guardsmen, headed by Greek
army officers, into the area and occupied high-vantage
positions around the village of Kophinou, threatening the
lives and property of the Turkish inhabitants thereof in a
most menacing manner. This point is borne out in the
Secretary-General’s
report, document S/7969, paragraph 6O.s
115. The Turkish leadership, being aware of the impending plans of action, had to bring the matter to the notice of
the Security Council under document S/77134 of 28
January 1967, through the Vice-President of the Republic
of Cyprus.
2 fijd., Nineteenth Year, Supplement
for April, May and June
1964.
3 Ibid., Twenty-second Year, Supplement for April, May and Jlim
1967.
4 Ibid,, Supplement for January, February and March 1967.

111. It is worth noting here that soon after resolution
IX6 (1964) was adopted, the Greek Cypriot leaders, declaring that they were the sole government in Cyprus and under
the pretext of enforcing law and order, started a campaign
of armed attacks against Turks all over Cyprus. The most
11

116. The efforts of UNFICYP to have the aggressive Greek
forces withdrawn from the area achieved no positive results
and the tension in the area continued to escalate. This point
is again borne out by the report of the Secretary-General
(S/7969), paragraph 60 of which reads as follows:

by some type of organization. The purpose appears
obvious: to maintain tension in an area which is one of
the most troublesome in the Island.”
122. That the organization referred to by the Secretary.
General was the National Guard came to light during the
subsequent events when they attacked Kophinou and,
before withdrawing, placed a number of other booby traps
to kill more Turks in such places as a telephone apparatus
in certain homes and even under the dead bodies of Turks,
Fortunately, these were discovered in time by United
Nations personnel.

,“A further underlying source of tension in the area is
the continued presence of the National Guard force.
UNFICYP
remains convinced that had the National
Guard force been withdrawn when this was suggested by
UNFICYP, the United Nations Force’s task of restoring
tranquillity
to the area and ensuring freedom of movement on the highways would have been greatly facilitated.”

123. Meanwhile, heavy arms and war materials, including
new shipments of armoured vehicles, continued to pour in
through Boghaz in complete defiance of the resolutions of
the Security Council and the warnings of the SecretaryGeneral, up to the first week in November-according to
paragraphs 26, 28 and 3 1 of the Secretary-General’s report.
The repeated remarks of the Secretary-General that the
influx of arms and other military-type equipment into
Cyprus is a cause for concern to UNFICYP with regard to
the discharge of its mandate fell on deaf ears, and no one
dared to ask these gentlemen who, in times of crisis, posed
as angels of peace, what their purpose was in continuing to
turn Cyprus into an arms depot. The feeble excuse that this
preparation was in defence of the territorial integrity of
Cyprus against invasion cannot be accepted by men of good
faith who know too well that Turkey has never sought to
intervene in Cyprus except on occasions when UNFICYP
was rendered inoperative and the Turkish community was
on the verge of being completely annihilated by the Greek
and Greek-Cypriot forces.

117. In April 1967 the same forces attacked, without
provocation, the Turkish village of Mari in the same area,
with heavy weapons and armoured cars for about four
hours. It was hardly possible for UNFICYP to persuade the
Greeks to cease fire because UNFICYP was not allowed in
the Mari area.
118. Soon after the Mari incident, the National Guard
surrounded the Turkish sector Larnaca on 12-13 May 1967
from Artemis Avenue and began to build up new fortifications in a most threatening manner at a distance of about
twenty feet from the Turkish houses. All efforts to remove
the Greek and Greek Cypriot troops from these newly
aggressive positions failed, as is borne out in paragraphs 68,
69 and 72 of document S/7969 and in the latest report,
document S/8286, paragraph 53. On the contrary, the
National Guard continued to consolidate its newly threatening positions in defiance of the efforts of the United
Nations.

124. Hand in hand with this accelerated military activity,
which indicated an imminent breach of the tenuous peace
in Cyprus, agitation for enosis took on a more palpable
nature.

119. In August, a spree of booby-traps and booby-trap
attacks was organized against Turks by the Greek terrorists
in the same area, between the villages of Alaminos and
Lefka. In one such attack five Turks were brutally
murdered-one
man, two youths and two children aged
five and seven respectively, Another boy of eleven was
seriously wounded and blinded.

125. On 26 June 1967 the Greek members of the House
of Representatives unanimously adopted a resolution, with
the participation of AKEL members that “they would not
suspend the struggle which is being conducted with the
support of all Greeks until this struggle ends in success
through the union of the whole and undivided Cyprus with
the motherland without any intermediary stage”.

120. On 19 August a civilian car driven by two Turks was
mined and the driver lost his left leg while his passenger was
seriously injured in the eyes and lost one of them. While
these outrageous attacks were being investigated another
booby trap was found 200 yards away under the bucket of
a water well by its Turkish owner when he lifted the bucket
to take up some water. Fortunately, he escaped certain
death by throwing himself to the graund.
121, The Secretary-General’s report on this question
verifies our contention that these attacks were organized
with a view to worsening the situation in the area; and in
this connexion paragraph 70 of document S/8286 reads as
follows:
“ * . . UNFICYP therefore maintains, although it has not
been possible to discover the perpetrators, that these were
well-planned attacks originated by people who had access
to efficient and sophisticated mechanisms. Such criminal
actions would not be possible if the terrorists who
committed them were not supported or at least covered
12

126. Turkish leadership’s protests against this new violation of the sovereignty of the Republic was brought to this
Council’s notice by the Vice-President of the Republic on
3 July (S/8028).5 It is stated in this document that “In
view of this resolution of the Greek members of the House
of Representatives”-which was contrary to the resolution
186 (1964) as well as to the Charter of the United Nations
itself-“the consensus of opinion among Turkish Cypriot5 is
that it would be futile to expect that Greeks will ever agree
to a peaceful and agreed settlement of the Cyrpus prob.
lem”.
127, On 11 July 1967, the same Greek members of the
House of Representatives purported to pass a law authorizing the recruitment into the so-called National Guard of
5 Ibid,, Supplement for July, August and September 1967,

officers and men from Greece, who were not citizens of the
Republic. The obvious implication of this legislation wasto
integrate the Greek occupation force in Cyprus with the
National Guard, whose declared objective was to unite
C:Yprus with Greece by the use of force and whose
members, as stated by the Secretary-General in paragraphs
14 and 19 of document S/7969, were swearing an oath of
allegiance to the King of Greece and not to any Cypriot
authority.

the visit to Cyprus of some prominent members of the
Greek junta and Greek spiritual leaders from Greece.
133. Colonel G. Papadopoulos, who was the holder of the
portofolio to the Prime Minister’s Office, on his visit to the
sovereign Republic of Cyprus on 12 August 1967, stated,
inter alia, categorically and in most provocative and
threatening language: “It is enosis that all of us are
demanding, and it is for enosis that we are fighting and will
continue to fight, because enosis alone is the only, first, and
historically acceptable solution.”

128. What is significant is that this purported legislation,
which undermines the sovereignty of the Repuhhc of
Cyprus, was adopted in Cyprus a day after this Council
ul~anhously adopted resolution 239 (1967) on 10 July
condemning any State participating in sending mercenaries-that is, paid soldiers-to any country. And that country
in. question was the Congo. Is there any difference between
the paid Greek troops in Cyprus who are, as we have seen,
engaged in armed attacks against the Turks under the
banner of the National Guard, and the paid soldiers in the
C’ongo?

134. May I ask against whom Colonel Papadopoulos
threatened to continue to fight? Is it not evident that that
grave threat, coming from the mouth of a person occupying
a most responsible position in Greece, was directed against
the Turkish community in Cyprus? And what about the
obligations of Greece under the Treaties and the Charter
and the resolutions of the Security Council? Or are we to
understand that Colonel Papadopoulos was threatening to
fight the Republic of Cyprus? If that was the case, where
were our Greek colleagues to raise a hue and cry against
that actual, physical intervention into the affairs of
Cyprus?

129. On the following day-that is, 12 July-my colleague
Mr. Kyprianou declared to the newspaper Democratia,
published in London, that:

135. Then came Archbishop Hieronymos, the head of the
Greek Church in Greece, who, on 21 September, officially
stated the following:

‘The Cypriot people’s struggle has always been aimed
at enosis of Cyprus with Greece. Enosis wasthe object of
the struggle against British colonialism. Enosis is the aim
of the struggle today.”

“Today, when with God’s blessing I have stepped for
the first time on the sacred soil of our heroic big island, I
confirm that only one national unity exists, only one
glory, only one historic continuation: the glorified and
eternal Greece.”

130. Mr. Papadopoulos, Greek-Cypriot Minister of Labour,
expanded
further on that revealing statement of
Mr. Kyprianou in a statement published as an official
document of the Greek-Cypriot Public Information Office.
I quote:

136. Those outrageous claims that Cyprus had already
become part of Greece culminated in the preparation of a
new plan of action.

“Freedom for us means only the integration of this
southern outpost of Hellenism with the national entityunion of Cyprus with Greece. For Cyprus is too small and
too insignificant to develop outside the national framework, historical tradition, and national civilization as a
national awareness of its own-three fundamental and
indispensable elements of nationhood. Away from
Greece, we shall always be, if we ever survive as a State,
‘nationless’-a country, maybe, but never a nation or a
part of a national entity. Our smallness does not allow us
to be a country without belonging to a nation. Bigger
countries may perhaps survive as only a ‘country’, not
‘nation’, but Cyprus cannot.”

137. The visit to Cyprus of the then Deputy Premier of
Greece, General Spandidakis, was made in October 1967 in
order to work out the details of that new plan of action to
resort anew to the use of force and violence against the
Turkish community. After those heinous pIans had been
prepared-of which we have reliable information in our
hands-this is what General Spandidakis, the then Deputy
Premier of Greece, declared in Nicosia on 21 October 1967:
“Mother Greece looks forward only to the moment
when her daughter, Cyprus, will throw herself into her
arms-that is to say, the moment of enosis. And indeed
there can be no solution other than this. This is the
inevitable, the historical evolution of events. It is there
that developments will lead.”

131. That statement is very revealing indeed. 1 invite
representatives to judge for themselves whether any of the
a.bove statements is compatible with the false concern and
anxiety which have been concocted by the Greek-Cypriot
representatives here in this Council over the need to protect
the national sovereignty of Cyprus-which, in their own
rvords, is nothing but the national sovereignty of Greece
itself-and their sinister attempts to curtail the Peacekeeping efforts behind the ostensibly impenetrable doctrine
of national sovereignty when it so suits them in furtherance
of their policy of violence.

138. In this statement, though General Spandidakis hinted
of new developments in the direction of enosis, he was very
careful-as well he should be, being a member of the junta
which toppled democracy in Greece-not to reveal the
nature of that new development. But soon after General
Spandidakis left Cyprus, Mr. Tasos Papadopoulos, the
Greek-Cypriot Minister of Labour, revealed the new plan of
action of the Greek-Cypriot Administration, which was
prepared in conjunction with the Greek junta and which

132. These intensive political moves for en& reached
their climax in August, September and October 1967 with
13

was termed the so-called “iron fist” policy. This is what
Mr. Papadopoulos stated in Nicosia on 27 October 1967. I
quote from the official press release of the Greek-Cypriot
Public Information Office of that date:

142. All of these things emanate from the fallacious idea
that the Treaties which gave birth to the independence of
Cyprus, the resolutions of this Council, as well as the
obligations of the Government of every Member State
arising from the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, can be trampled
upon, under the pretext of adhering to certain principles,
such as sovereignty, while in practice acting in complete
disregard of that sovereignty.

“And there can be no freedom for Cyprus outside the
boundaries of Greece. . . . Freedom and Enosis is and will
remain our main pursuit . . . . The tactics, the methodisation of the struggle may vary and differ according to
circumstances, but the ultimate goal, enosis, shall remain
unchanged. . . . The struggle of Cyprus will be won in
Cyprus. The existence of State authority and the complete control of the State by the Greeks of Cyprus
becomes the most precious means in our hands. . . . In
this new phase of the struggle it is not enough to endure
and wait. We must prevail. We must prevail by co-ordination of political and military action, by co-ordination of
political appeasement and military strength, by wellconsidered and simultaneous peace campaigns and military power. And we shall prevail . . .I’.

143. There is authority for saying as some eminent jurists
have said, that in the modern world fundamental human
rights of peoples cannot be shrouded behind the ostensibly
impenetrable cloak of sovereignty, despite those numerous
provisions incorporated in the Charter of the United
Nations which recognize that the treatment of even a single
individual cannot be and is no longer a matter solely of
domestic concern. In the very special circumstances of
Cyprusthat is the more so, because the Turkish community
of Cyprus has its own undeniable existence and identity
both juridically and in actual fact, and has enjoyed that
juridical status for four centuries. That being so, the
Turkish community has a vested interest and share in the
sovereignty of Cyprus and has been trying to defend it at
great cost to life and property for the last four years.
Therefore, the demand of the Greek Cypriot leaders to be
recognized as the sole arbiters of the question of the
sovereignty of Cyprus, when they are on record as saying
that their interest in that sovereignty is none other than to
misuse it as a tool for dissolving the State and forcing the
Turks to abandon their vested rights, and at the same time
the Greek Cypriot attempt to seek the assistance of this
august body in order to carry out that sinister plan, can no
longer be tolerated if we have the interests of peace at
heart. It is about time to remind the Greek Cypriot Ieadcrs
that they cannot eat their cake and have it. The principles
of justice and morality demand that no one should be
allowed to take advantage of his own wrongs, and that he
who comes to equity must come with clean hands. That is
exactly what the Greek Cypriots have not been doing, ever
since the beginning of the troubles.

139. This co-ordinated plan of action, based on the
military might of the Greek Cypriots, intended to be put
into operation as a new phase, was publicly confirmed by
General Grivas in his statement in Limassol on 30 October
1967, when he said: “If enosis is denied to them, then the
Greeks will conquer it with their swords.”
140. As it turned out, however, the process of conquering
enosis, as usual, wasinitiated by Grivas with the conquering
of Kophinou and Ayios Theodhoros, where he once again
unleashed in a most ferocious manner the racial fanaticism
of his Greek-Cypriot compatriots against innocent civilians-women, children and elderly people included-in the
village of Kophinou. In the course of that occupation he
used the armoured cars newly sent from Greece by General
Spandidakis and all sorts of heavy weapons, such as
twenty-five field guns, two tanks, 105 and 81 mm mortars,
all sorts of heavy machine-guns and other war materiel
which the Greek Cypriot leaders had obtained by hoodwinking certain quarters in pretending that those weapons
were intended to be used exclusively against what were
imaginary threats from outside, despite timely warnings by
the Turkish Cypriot leadership, as well as by the Secretary
General in his reports to this Council.

144. As an aftermath of the brutal attacks on the two
Turkish villages in Cyprus on 15 November we have gone
through a new series of crises. They were temporarily
averted as a result of strenuous efforts on the part of the
Secretary-General and his distinguished representative,
Mr. Rolz-Bennett, as well as the Secretary-General of
NATO and the President of the United States and his
special representative.

141. The official policy statement of the present GreekCypriot regime in Cyprus, expressed from the mouth of a
Greek Cypriot minister and through the official information media to which I have just referred, explains a number
of things clearly related to the problems facing us in
Cyprus. First and foremost, it explains, beyond the shadow
of any doubt, the fact that the Greek Cypriot leaders are
trying, with some success,to outsmart the whole world by
defying all the principles of humanity in their actions, and
yet to appear from their words to be the most ardent
defenders of those very principles so that they can go on
with the process of eliminating the Turkish community.
Second, it explains why the Cyprus problem has been
dragging on for the last four years while the Turkish
community has been victimized all the time. Third, it
explains why the appeal of the Secretary-General of
3 December [see S/8248/Add. 61 had to be made, and why
we are here today.

145. In our view, the final averting of the crisis will
depend to a great extent on the decision of this Council,
because we believe that peace cannot be established simply
by the cessation of the actual shooting. For the preservation of genuine peace, conditions of peace must be
established in Cyprus.
146. For the last four years, members of the Turkish
community have been forced to live in conditions worse
than those of war. For that reason, we applaud the interest
and efforts exerted to preserve the peace in Cyprus, from
whatever quarter they may come. But it must be appreciated that sacrifices by one party alone are not enough for
the preservation of a durable peace.
14

'147. Recent events proved, before the very eyes of the
YJnitcd Nations personnel in Cyprus, who were also
attacked and disarmed by the Greeks, that the need for the
protection of the Turkish community is ever more necessary in order to preserve genuine peace. For that reason we
welcomed the agreement and the decision of the Greek
Government to withdraw its illegal troops of occupation
from our soil, as a first step in the right direction. In the
!same spirit we welcomed the Secretary-General’s appeal of
:3 December 1967 as a long awaited step in the right
(direction. However, as I have already explained and as has
Ibeen explained by the Vice-President in his message
[S/82Y#] 6 the matter does not end there and should not be
;allowed to end there.

Cypriot striking force, the National Guard, are decisive
factors for the success of the United Nations in its
peace-keeping mission.
153. So fdr, although UNFICYP has been able, though
only to a certain degree, to keep the inner ring between the
parties, the flow of arms, troops and war materials has
continued, since the outer ring has not been kept, particularly in the case of armaments, with the result that now, as
we have seen in the Kophinou affair, when the Greek
Cypriot rdgime decides to launch an attack it is in a
position to over-run the United Nations posts as well, at
any given moment, and endanger peace.
154. In our view-and I have to put this acrossbecause I
do not think Mr. Kyprianou is representing the views of the
Turkish community-to
prevent a recurrence of fighting,
first and forcmost UNFICYP must be in a position to
reduce the tools of fighting. If UNFICW is not empowered
to stop the flow of arms into Cyprus and supervise the
disarmament of unconstitutional forces, such as the National Guard which is the main threat to peace in Cyprus,
the mere withdrawal of Greek troops from Cyprus will
mean nothing as long as the mercenary officers from Greece
in the National Guard are allowed to continue to endanger
peace.

148. The vicious circle into which all efforts for the
preservation of peace have been drawn by the Greek
Cypriot leadership must be broken. That can be done by
agreeing to the appeal of the Secretary-General without
trying to put the cart before the horse-that is, without
trying to get concessions, on the validity of the treaties
which gave birth to the Republic and its present Constitution and without seeking to predetermine the issue from
the position of a fail nccompli brought about by the use of
force and by disregarding the constitutional rights of the
Turks.
149. We are encouraged by the statement of the representative of the Soviet Union on 24 November, to the effect
that the Soviet Government had made a statement to the
Government of Greece in which it expressed its categorical
protest against the lawlessnessand arbitrary rule which was
being carried on in Greece, and against the flouting of the
elementary principles of humanity and the flagrant violation of universally acknowledged standards enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights /1383rcZ meeting,

155. The danger to peace is confirmed in paragraphs 29,
30, 31, 46, 49, 53 and 59 of the Secretary-General’s report
[S/8286/. Paragraph 49 is most illuminating, and I shall
quote it.
“UNFICYP
is especially concerned over the large
number of inland fortifications being constructed by the
National Guard, which for the past year has not limited
itself as it used to do to the strengthening of coastal
defences, but has turned its attention to the interior of
the island.”

para. 801.

1SO. We earnestly hope, and we beseech this Council, that
the same concern may be forthcoming from all members in
the case of Cyprus, so that those who try to put themselves
above the highest law of the land may be deterred from
pressing further with their irresponsible actions, so that
UNFICYP may be given a chance to be effective and so that
normal conditions of peace and security of life and
property of the Turkish community may be taken care of,
at least until such time as an agreed settlement can be
reached, in an atmosphere of peace and calm, between the
interested parties.

A careful scrutiny of the report will show that these are
places such as the Turkish quarter of Limassol, the Turkish
quarter of Larnaca, the village of Tembfos and AmbeIikou.
156. Secondly, the well-known method of the GreekCypriot rCgime in Cyprus to try and trade the political
rights of Turks with their basic right to live and survive as
decent human beings has to be brought to an end.
157. It is revelant to note that all these economic and
other restrictions imposed on the Turkish community,
which include restrictions on such vital items as water
pipes, firewood, straw and many other necessities of life
and all building materials, are applied as a punitive
discriminatory measure without the force of any law but on
the force of arms with the sole object of compelling the
Turkish community to abandon the defence of its basic
rights.

151. On the question of the preservation of peace and
calm in Cyprus it is our humble submission that practical
arrangements could be made, having in mind always past
experiences and causes of tension in Cyprus, and empowering UNFICYP to act in time, effectively, before tension has
led to a recurrence of fighting, without hurting the
principles of anyone.

158. The argument that the Greek-Cypriot regime is
justified in applying these measures becausethey fear that
the Turkish refugees may build permanent dwellings in the
areas where they are now, cannot be accepted. Under the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights as well as the
Constitution of the Republic, it is one of the basic rights of

152. Among those practical measures the questions of
preventing the inflow of arms and heavy war material-as is
very rightly pointed out by the Secretary-General-and the
disbanding of the illegal and unconstitutional
Greek
6 Ibid., Supplement for October, November and December 1967.

15

every individual to decide his place of residence or abode,
and this very basic right of the individual should not be
allowed to be subjected to any punitive restrictions or
Political bargaining. People settle where they feel secure. It
is Only the human instinct of people faced wjth a common
danger that makes them stick together, It is up to those
Who force those people to abandon their homes through
fear and terrorism to let the United Nations re-establish
conditions of security in these areas if they really want the
refugees to return to their habitations. What happened to
Kophinou and Ayios Theodoros is certainly not an inducement to the Turkish refugees to return to the Greek
dominated areas. More so, when one considers the fact that
whenever there is a crisis, the Greek-Cypriots threaten to
cut the throats of all Turks in Cyprus if Turkey attempts to
take counter measures against the Greek forces of aggression. This abominable threat was made in August 1964; it
has been repeated during the recent crisis.

a request to the District Office (Nicosia) for
clearance to supply to Kokkina some asbestos piping
needed for the irrigation of a small vegetable plot was
first submitted in the spring of 1967, in the hope that
clearance would be granted in time for the piping to be
used for irrigation that summer, but clearance wasnot
granted until October 1967, when irrigation was no
longer needed. Still more serious are the almost invariably
long delays in considering applications for clearance for
small quantities of building materials needed for repairs
to the few permanent dwellings in Kokkina. Such delays
cannot even be explained by the Government’s policy of
preventing the entry into refugee areas of materials which
could be used for building permanent accommodation,
for the quantities involved are so small that it is evident
that the materials are required only for emergency
repairs. Nevertheless, even though it was accompanied by
an UNFICYP Medical Officer’s report stating that defective roofing in Kokkina was a hazard to the refugees’
health, and notwithstanding the diagnosis of two casesof
tuberculosis among the inhabitants, a request for clearance for some tiles to repair the faulty roofs of existing
houses has not yet been approved by the District Office
(Nicosia) in spite of the fact that winter is drawing
nearer.” [Ibid., para. 128.1
“

*

159.

So far, UNFICYI’,
apart from not being able, as
events proved, to stop major attacks against Turks,
had been only an onlooker to the outrageous and most
humiliating
searches and other harassments of Turkish
civilians-women
and children alike-on check points when
the Turks at times had been forced to wait for hours under
the scorching sun and while Turks were abducted, arbitrarily arrested or maltreated under false or trumped-up
charges, It is our hope that UNFICYP
would feel so
empowered as to prevent such inhuman and arbitrary
treatment of Turks on the roads. It is true that from time
to time we heard unilateral declarations by the GreekCypriot leaders in the form of a peace offensive that those
restrictions should be relaxed. But in our view, to leave the
matter merely to the declaration of one side to remove
those inhuman restrictions as it suits them, turning the
screw on and off according to the political climate, is
tantamount to accepting the fallacious argument that they
are entitled as of right to apply those restrictions whenever
they so decide, thereby agreeing to permit these inhuman
measures to be exploited as a political lever of oppression
endangerrng peace which, as we have seen in the past, may
become deadlier than conventional arms.
recent

.

.

163. Under what standard of humanity or moral decency
can such treatment be justified or tolerated. The fact
should not be lost sight of that if the Turkish community
has tolerated all this, it is because it has the interest of
peace at heart and on no other account. So, I submit that it
would be very wrong, if not inhuman, to expect them to go
on tolerating such conditions indefinitely under the thin
veil of hypothetical arguments which, as I have endeavoured to show, have become an inadmissible vicious circle.
164. The instances I just mentioned are by no means
exhaustive, but I had to mention them in order to give an
idea of what can be done in the form of practical measures
to render the efforts of the United Nations more effective
for the preservation of peace and calm in Cyprus.
16s. As to the question of the final settlement of the
problem it is our considered opinion that the degree of
co-operation of the parties in actual practice, in carrying
out the suggestions of the Secretary-General for establishing
peace and calm in Cyprus, will be a vital factor in
determining whether they are for settling this problem, as
directed by this Council, by peaceful means or by the use
of arms. We are glad to see that Turkey and Greece have
already agreed to those proposals. What is important for US,
as the Turkish community, is to be saved from the
victimization, oppression and actual armed attacks which
we have been forced to put up with for the last four years,

160. To give an example, I should like to refer to the
letter dated IS September 1964 from Archbishop iMakarios
to the Secretary-General, Though it was professed in that
letter that economic blockades and other inhuman measures would be withdrawn, yet it is evident from the reports
of the Secretary-General submitted to this Council since
that time, that most of those restrictions continue to be
applied up to the present time.
161. 1 can give hundreds and thousands of such instances
which have been the daily ordeal to which the members of
the Turkish community have been and are being subjected.
But it should be sufficient to mention here that even tar for
the necessary repair of the Kyrenia road which is mostly
used by the members of the Greek community as well as
tmlt of UNFICVP, and which because of its lack of repair
over the past four years presents a danger to the safety of
its users, has consistently been denied to us.

166. Mere utterances of goodwill and peaceful intentions
are not enough; this is obvious from the past record of
events. The armed threat levelled against the Turkish
community must be speedily and effectively removed. If
the Greek Cypriot leadership has no intention of imposing
an armed settlement on the Turks, this is the golden
opportunity for them to lay down their arms, to respect the
constitutional rights of Turks and to prepare the ground for
an agreed, not an imposed, settlement. On this score 1 am

162. The following passage from the Secretary-General’s
latest report suffices to illustrate the situation:
16

c

sure they will find the Turks co-operative. The Turkish
community, however, cannot go along with the proposition
that it has to forego its vested rights as a condition
precedent to the silencing or the removal of the threat of
the Greek guns or in exchange for their bread and butter.
The removal of these threats is the main role of the United
Nations at this juncture. An agreement on the final solution
within
the framework of paragraph 7 of resolution
186 (1964) of this Council can only be achieved if the
Turkish community is free to exercise its will in an
atmiosphere of peace and security and if the leaders of the
Greek community were to respond positively to the call of
this Council as embodied in paragraph 3 of the said
resolution.
167. It is my earnest hope that, taking all these points into
con,sideration, as well as the appeal of the Secretary-General
of 13December 1967, the Council will give the necessary
guidance to all the parties as well as to the SecretaryGeneral SO that the present precarious situation may be
averted and settled and so that efforts for the finding of a
final solution can be started in a peaceful atmosphere.
Mr. &ek

withdrew.

168’. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): It is not my
inte:ntion to keep the Council this evening, but I think it
might be well, before we disperse, to speak not about the
main issues before us or the problems which have to be
settled in the Island of Cyprus, but about our duty here in
the Security Council. I believe that it would be right that
we should remind ourselves, if that were necessary, of the
pre,ssing urgency under which we work.
169. Within five or six days the existing mandate of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus will expire. Those of US
who supply forces to make up the United Nations Force
muist reach our decisions within a day or two at the most.
And indeed, so great is the urgency that I hope we can
continue in this Council to reach a conclusion. I believe
that we should make every effort to do so if not tonight,
then by tomorrow. If that is not done, then there will be a
dangerous delay running up to the time-limit which we have
to keep in mind.
170. My second point is that, as we all know, following
the Secretary-General’s report none of us has been idle.
Intensive consultations have been proceeding day by day
since that report was presented. And you, Sir, as our
President, have, as we would have expected, given us a lead
in those consultations. Many members of this Council, even
in the crowded days of the end of the session of the
General Assembly, have been devoting their minds to the
course which should now be set by this Council.
171. The results of those consultations are not Yet
available. But I would be bold enough to go on to say that
the consultations which have been taking place, I believe,
have already indicated a very wide measure of agreement in
this Council as to what should be done. I believe that there
is :no doubt in the minds of any of us that it is eSSentia1
that, without any delay, the existing mandate of the United
Nations Force should be extended in time.

172. We have closely considered the period, and I believe
that there is a general feeling that the period should be one
of three months. If we were to extend it for a full period of
six months, it might well give the impression that we are
returning to the unsatisfactory and uneasy situation that we
had before. None of us would wish to give that impression.
But all of us at the same time recognize that it is necessary
to have an adequate period for all these difficult and
dangerous problems which have been brought to our notice
today to be dealt with in a new spirit of determination.
Therefore, that is the first purpose on which I believe there
is already general agreement.
173. The second purpose on which I believe we are all
agreed and on which we should not delay a decision is that
we should take up the suggestions which have been put to
us by the Secretary-General, I believe that all the members
of the Council would join with me in paying respect to the
Secretary-General for the role that he has played throughout the recent crisis. Indeed the crisis could not have been
dealt with effectively without the Secretary-General’s intervention. Those of us who believe in the United Nations are
glad to see that yet again the United Nations is essential in
order to prevent conflict. I think that the Secretary-General
acted wisely and with a good senseof timing in the actions
he took. And all of us would wish to pay our respects to
the part which Mr. Rolz-Bennett played by going to the
area and taking part in the urgent efforts to prevent a
conflict from taking place. I believe that there is no
disagreement on this second purpose. I have discovered no
disagreement on the desire to act on the Secretary-General’s
offer of his good offices to find the right way forward.
174. Certainly we are not going to discover the final
solution to the problems which excite such intense feelings
and such intense disagreement, to which we have had
reference in the speeches made today. We are not going to
find a solution here and now, today or tomorrow. What we
can do and what I am sure we shall do, and I believe that
we must do it with the utmost dispatch, is to find the right
course which can enable us to prevent the recurrence of
such crises in the future and to get US to move in the
direction of the permanent settlement which has been so
long postponed.
175. Often we have met in this Council and agreed to
renew the mandate of the Force. All of us have felt every
time that we did so that it waswholly inadequate merely to
renew the mandate of the Force and to take no step
towards a reduction of the tension and an advancetowards
some settlement.
176. Therefore, I believe that there is wide agreement
amongst us on the twin purposes: renewal of the Force for
the period of three months and the acceptance of the offer
of good offices which the Secretary-General has put before
us.
177. It may indeed be that the serious crisis through
which we have come may, when we look back on it in
future years, be the occasion for causing this Council not to
be Content merely with keeping the peace, but to make a

determined effort to set a course which can make peace for
the future.

10.30 a.m. tomorrow. If I hear no objection, it will be SO
decided.

178. The PRESIDEfiT: In the light of consultations which
I have carried out, I gather that members are agreeable to
our adjourning the debate at this point and resuming it at

It wasso decided.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m

18
Litho in U.N.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

35735-February

1971-6
