V.

plementing the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development programme of Solomon Islands;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep the
question of assistance for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Solomon lslands under constant review and apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1987, of the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/194.

147

Resolutions adopted on the reports of tbe Second Committee

7. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate
measures, in collaboration with the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, to mobilize the
technical, financial and material assistance required for
the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of
El Salvador;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the
question of assistance for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of El Salvador under review, and to inform the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of
1987, on the progress made in the implementation of the
present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

Assistance to El Salvador

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 41/2 of 14 October 1986
concerning emergency assistance to El Salvador,
Recalling its resolution 3440 (XXX) of 9 December
1975 on assistance in cases of natural disaster and other
disaster situations, resolution 36/225 of 17 December
1981 on strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
system to respond to natural disasters, and resolution
37/144 of 17 December 1982 on the Office ofthe United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
Noting with satisfaction the support that Member States,
the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system have given to the efforts of the
Government of El Salvador to render immediate assistance to the population affected by the natural disaster,
Bearing in mind that, in recent years, the economy of El
Salvador has been adversely affected by various events and
natural disasters, such as the earthquake of 10 October
1986,
Considering that, despite the efforts of the Government
and people of El Salvador, the country's economic situation has not returned to normal,
Deeply concerned that El Salvador is experiencing serious economic difficulties directly affecting its development
efforts,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding immediate assistance to El Salvador;
2. Also expresses its appreciation to the States and organizations that have provided assistance to El Salvador;
3. Urges ali Governments to continue contributing to
the reconstruction and development of El Salvador
through bilateral and multilateral channels;
4. Appeals to ali States and appropriate organizations
ofthe United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the World Bank, to continue and
to increase their assistance in response to the
humanitarian, reconstruction and development needs of
El Salvador through existing mechanisms;
5. Invites regional and interregional organizations, as
well as non-governmental humanitarian organizations, urgently to consider the establishment of programmes of assistance to El Salvador and to implement them as soon as
possible;
6. Invites States and organizations concerned to examine the possibility of extending to El Salvador special assistance appropriate to its needs:

41/195.

Assistance to Uganda

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions and its decision
40/453 of 17 December 1985 on assistance to Uganda,
Recognizing that the Government of Uganda, which
carne to power in January 1986, is facing the arduous tasks
of rehabilitation and reconstruction following years of
conftict that have resulted in tragic loss of life, ravaging of
the country's socio-economic infrastructure and uprooting of large segments of its population,
Taking into account the Emergency Relief and Rehabilitation Programme launched by the Govemment in February 1986 and the interim macro-economic measures announced in July 1986,
Noting that a special programme of economic assistance
has been formulated covering short-term emergency and
rehabilitation needs, including restoration of services such
as health, water and sanitation, education, housing and
roads, and rehabilitation of the agriculture and livestock
sectors, as well as productive industrial enterprises,
Recognizing that Uganda is not only land-locked, but
also one of the least developed and most seriously affected
countries,
Noting the appeals made by the Secretary-General for
assistance to Uganda,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-Generai, 53
presenting a special programme of economic assistance for
intemational funding, 54
Reaffirming the urgent need for further intemational action to assist the Government ofUganda in its continuing
efforts for national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development,
Encouraged that the economic policies of the Govemment of Uganda and the support assistance provided by
the donor countries and international organizations have
airead y produced positive signs of economic recovery,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for
Uganda;
2. Also expresses its appreciation to those States and organizations that have provided assistance to Uganda;
3. Endorses the assessment and recommendations contained in the appendix to the report of the SecretaryGeneral;

53 A/41/593.
54

lbid .. annex, se~t V

148

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

4. Invites the international community, the United Nations system and donor countries and organizations, to
make available more resources to implement the country's
Emergency Relief and Rehabilitation Programme, the interim macro-economic measures and the special programme of economic assistance;
5. Urgently renews its appeal to ali Member States, the
specialized agencies and other organizations ofthe United
Nations system and international economic and financia)
institutions to contribute generously, through bilateral
and multilateral channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs of Uganda and to its emergency and rehabilitation requirements;
6. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes ofthe United Nations system to maintain and increase in so far as possible their current and future programmes of assistance to Uganda and to report
periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps they
have taken and the resources they have made available to
help that country;
7. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Food Programme, the International Fund for Agricultura) Development, the International Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization ofthe United
Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization,
the World Bank and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to bring to the attention oftheir governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of
Uganda and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his humanitarian assistance programmes in Uganda, in particular the task of repatriation
and resettlement, which involves the return of refugees
and displaced persons to their former habitat and the
emergency provision to them of, inter alia, food, medicine,
clothing and shelter;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 41/192 of 8
December 1986:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Uganda;
(b) To keep the situation in Uganda under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and the international financia) institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1987, of the current status of the special programme of economic assistance for Uganda;
(e) To report on the implementation of the present
resolution to the General Assembly at its forty-second sess10n.
100th p/enary meeting
8 December 1986

41/196.

Assistance for the reconstruction and development of Lebanon

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/146 of 20 December 1978,
34/135 of 14 Dc<.:ember 1979, 35/S'i nf 5 December 1980.

36/205 of 17 December 1981, 37/163 of 17 December
1982, 38/220 of20 December 1983, 39/197 of 17 December 1984 and 40/229 of 17 December 1985,
Recalling a/so Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/15 of 29 April 1980, 1985/56 of 25 July 1985 and
1986/46 of 22 July 1986, and decisions 1983/112 of
17 May 1983 and 1984/174 of 26 July 1984,
Noting with deep concern the continuing heavy loss of
life and the additional destruction of property, which have
caused further extensive damage to the economic and social structure of Lebanon,
Noting with concern the serious economic situation in
Lebanon,
We/coming the determined efforts ofthe Government of
Lebanon in undertaking its reconstruction and rehabilitation programme,
Reaffirming the urgent need for further international action to assist the Government ofLebanon in its continuing
efforts for reconstruction and development,
Considering that filling the vacant post of United Nations Co-ordinator of Assistance for the Reconstruction
and Development of Lebanon would facilitate the normal
operations of international assistance to Lebanon,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-GeneraI 55 and
of the statement made on 22 October 1986 by the UnderSecretary-General for Political and General Assembly Affairs, 56
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for bis report and for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to Lebanon;
2. Commends the Under-Secretary-General for Political and General Assembly Affairs for his co-ordination of
system-wide assistance for Lebanon;
3. Commends Jurther the efforts undertaken by the
Government of Lebanon in the implementation of the initial phase of reconstruction of the country, despite ad verse
circumstances, and of the steps it has taken to remedy the
economic situation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 41 / 192 of 8
December 1986, to continue and intensify his efforts to
mobilize all possible assistance within the United Nations
system to help the Government of Lebanon in its reconstruction and development efforts;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to consider the urgen!
need to nominate a United Nations Co-ordinator of Assistance for the Reconstruction and Development of Lebanon and the implementation of his functions therein;
6. Requests the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to intensify their programmes of
assistance and to expand them in response to the needs of
Lebanon, and to take the necessary steps to ensure that
their offices at Beirut are adequately staffed at the senior
level;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution.

100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

55 A/41/679.
56 Official Record., uf the General A.,sembl_v. Forty-first Sessio11, Seco11d
Committ<'l', 19th meetmg.
