UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

.

RECORDS
UN LB!@
L RV
e

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

1785’”

MEETING:

MAY “1 1. El3

27 JULY 1974

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1785/Rev. 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
((I) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Secretary-General to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1334);
(h) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1335);
(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Greece
to the Unired Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1348) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1785
:

-.
4

I,
‘.I

.
4

.’

’

.

,._

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Slrpplements of the OfJicicrl Recork of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions trnd
Decisions of the Security Cotmcil. The new system, which has been apphed
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.
:.

/”

._

.;_.’
/

::

-’

T,-

:,.

.,
:

I

.
:

.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday, 27 July 1974, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Javier PEREZ de CUELLAR

(Peru).

India and Mauritius to participate
without the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet
Socialist
Republics,
United
Kingdom
of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic -of
Cameroon and United States of America.

At the invitation
of the President.
Mr. Rossides
(Cyprus),
Mr. Okay “(Turkey)
and Mr. Carayannis
(Greece) took places at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT.
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In view of the limited number of places available at
the Council ,table, I propose to invite the representatives of Yugoslavia, Romania, India and Mauritius
to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber, on the- usual understanding
that they will be invited to come to the Council table
when it is their turn to address the Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1785/Rev.l)

1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

The situation in Cvorus:

(II) Letter dated 16’July 1974 from the Secretary-.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Kikic!
( Yugoslavia).
Mr.
Datcu
(Romania).
Mr. Jaipal
(India) and Mr. Ramphul
(Mauritius)
took the places
reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.
‘.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):

General to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1334);
(6) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1335);
(c’) Letter dated 2O.July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1348)
The meeting

was called

to order

I call on the Secretary-General.
4. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President,
as you will have seen from the reports on developments
in .Cyprus there have been a series of breaches af
the cease-fire. I have received complaints from the
parties to the conflict in this regard. The question of
interposing the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
between the Turkish forces
and the Cypriot National Guard in order to stabilize
the cease-fire has also been raised.

at 3.30 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

in the discussion

n’(1.r adopted.

The Situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1334);
(6) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressedto the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1335);
(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11348)

5. You will remember that the mandate of UNFICYP
was written in the context of preventing a recurrence
of fighting between the two communities in Cyprus.
It did not envisage the interposition of UNFICYP
between the armed forces of another Member State
and the armed forces of Cyprus.
6. I have instructed my representative in Geneva,
Mr. Guyer, to discuss with the three Foreign Ministers
in the negotiations the best way in which UNFICYP
can actively assist in limiting further hostilities and
cease-fire violations. Obviously, any plan involving the
interposition of UNFICYP would require the complete
co-operation of both sides. As will be seen from my
reports to the Council, I and my colleagues at
Headquarters, my representatives in Cyprus and our
Force have done whatever we could to limit the

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
j&n
Spanish):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [!779th-1781st
meetings],
I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives
of Cyprus, Turkey, Greece, Yugoslavia, Romania,
1

fighting, to assist the civilian population on all sides
and to make the ceage-fire hold: What is needed now
is an agreement on how to stabilize the cease-fire
throughout the island so that the negotiations can
make progress.
7. In this connexion I feel that I should briefly report
to the Council the information
I have received
concerning the negotiations in Geneva. I understand
that intensive efforts are going on to find a basis for
working towards a settlement and that the conference
has made some progress. At the present time a working
group is meeting to reconcile the views of the three
parties. We all hope that these negotiations will achieve
the goals set in Security Council resolution 353.( 1974).
8. The PRESIDENT
(interpret&on
from Sprmish):
I call now on the representative of Cyprus.
9. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): We have before us a
situation that has arisen from the fact that the
negotiations envisaged under paiagraph 5 of resolution’ 353 (1974) are now being held in Geneva.
Therefore, partly because of those negotiations, the
Council meeting was postponed from yesterday until
today to see what progress was achieved. In this
respect I want to make clear certain aspects related
to how the Council acts in respect of those negotiations
in Geneva.
IO. The Council has adopted a resolution wliich
contains seven operative paragraphs. The first four
of those paragraphs are purely and simply pronouncements of the Council, whose responsibility is not at
all affected by the fact of the holding of the conference
in Geneva. Of course, as long as the Geneva negotiations go along with the spirit and the tenor of the
Council resolution, all well and good. But if we see
that the situation deteriorates and does not improve
in any sense, and we have very grave .violations of
.the cease-fire, to which I shall refer presently, the
Council does not abdicate its responsibility
to act
immediately in order to save the situation and to protect
international
peace and security.. The ‘Geneva
negotiations are based, of course, on agreenient. But
the Geneva negotiations cannot exercise the authority
of the Council to protect international
peace or to
protect Cyprus, a small country, a Member State of
the United Nations.
Il.
Therefore we b.elieve that, as the Council has
decided in paragraph 7 to keep the situation in Cyprus
under constant review,‘it is certainly pertinent that
the Council should become aware-aware offlciallyof the situation in Cyprus which has evolved since
its last meeting, at which there was a more emphatic
demand for respect of the cease-fire.
12. That is the purpose for which we wanted this’
meeting-becausti
the situation is becoming very
grave. I’ will not waste -the time of the Council in
speaking about the gravity.of the situation. for’it is

stated in all the newspapers, and particularly
today’s issue of The New York Times.

in

13. What is the picture that has been unfolding so
far in its stark reality? It is this. A small country,
a State Member of the United Nations, has been
invaded by air and sea. It possesses no air force,
no navy, no anti-aircraft defences. It has been invaded
with overwhelming force in an aggression against its
territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty.
Its open cities are-1 will not use any adjectivebombed repeatedly in a fury of destruction. Hospitals,
institutions, and everything else are brought down in
ruins-not
military targets at all. In Famagusta, a
seaside place, over f300 million worth of property
has been completely destroyed-and
I leave aside the
loss of life, which has not yet been ascertained
exactly, although we know it is very heavy.
14:’ Now this not only continues but is becoming
aggravated, in spite of the cease-fire. The first ceasefire which we had after 20 July was to come into effect
on 22 July. It was violated by an attack on the
Trakhonas and St. Hilarion area by land, air and sea,
in addition to attacks on the airport and bombing.
On 23 July the villages of Aglangia, Yerolakkos,
Ayios ,Vasilios, Katrovil,
Exo Metochi, Tymbou
airport and Nicosia airport were strafed by Turkish
jets, after the cease-fire. On the same day the Cypriot
contingents in Pyles, Trakhonas and Tsatsos were
attacked. .Qn the same day Turkish infantry units
attacked Dhikomo, Kaimakli and Trakhonas, villages
round Nicosia.
15. Then we had the Security Council resolution
demanding an immediate observance of the ceasefire, and on 25 July Turkish forces attacked Kaimakli,
Ayios Yeoryios, Mia Milea, Kautsovendis, Omorphita,
the central prisons, Yerolakkos and so on. On the
same day they also attacked Malia. The purpose of
all these attacks was to alter the situation that existed
at the time of the cease-fire and enlarge the area
occupied by Turkey on the coast of Kyrenia,
broadening it to 30 miles, and to broaden also the
cdriidor to Nicosia and at the same time encircle
and threaten Nicosia itself.
16. We heard on 25 July that the Turkish troops
were trying to encircle Nicosia in order to occupy it.
17. On 25 July the Turkish forces warned the
inhabitants of the village of Ayios Ermolaos, all ’
Greek, to abandon the village within 48 hours, saying
that otherwise it would be bombed and destroyed
completely. It would be understandable that under
conditions of war people would be asked not to offer
resistance and told that if they did not offer resistance I
they would not be fired upon; but asking them to
abandon their houses and their property and
completely’evacuate
their village in order that it might
be occupied by. the Turkish troops is completely

outside the concept of any kind of war. But that
village was occupied on 26 July.

23. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtion
from Sptrnish):
I now call on the representative of Greece.

18. I will not continue to elaborate on the various
places that have been occupied, because the SecretaryGeneral has a map on which one can see the extent
of the violations.

24. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): Mr. President,
members of the Council and other fellow representatives, I feel like a new-comer among you, who rushed
from the plane to the Secretary-General .with his
credentials in hand, and immediately
thereafter had
to attend this meeting. This is certainly not the usual
practice in the United Nations. I have to address myself
to you without even knowing you. It is a disadvantage
and I ask your indulgence.

19. There has been no violation
by Cyprus at all.

of .the cease-fire

20. Now, with regard to supplies of war tntrt&iel by
Turkey, according to reports we have there has been
a constant flow of heavy tanks and military personnel
-two days ago 15 tanks and 1,200 men had arrivedfor the purpose of intensifying the war and continuing
the aggression. The resolution calls not only,fora ceasefire but for an immediate end to foreign military
intervention and the withdrawal of foreign troops from
Cyprus other than those provided for in the Treaty
of Guarantee. Therefore these actions have been
directly contrary to the spirit and purpose of the
resolution. Consideration by the Security Council of
the violations of the cease-tire will not interfere with
the work of the Geneva conference. On the contrary,
it will assist and strengthen the Geneva conference
in its efforts to reach a just solution in accordance
with the resolution adopted by the Council.

25. I shall be very brief. I came directly from Athens
and I am more aware of what happened there-and
quite a lot happened there-than
of your deliberations
here.
26. Greece and Turkey have been on the edge of war.
War was averted because a cease-fire was accepted.
We are.now confronted with four days of continuous
violations. I shall not enter into details. Today, news
reports and other editorials leave no doubt as to who is
doing the violating. I should only like to submit to
the representative of Turkey that .if his Government
was not prepared to honour the cease-fire it should
not have accepted it.
27. We are all aware of the Geneva talks and I believe
that everyone around this table wishes them success.
But they will not succeed without an implementation
of the cease-fire. I firmly believe that the best we can
do here is to help the talks in Geneva, and the best
way to help them is to help in the implementation
of
the cease-fire. This we can do, not by ignoring
violations -but by stating the facts and pointing to the
responsibilities.

21. If the Geneva conference is to act independently
of the Council resolution and to arrive at any solution
it pleases, then one could say, “Please do ‘not have
a Council meeting, so as not to inject concepts that
the Geneva conference may not wish to have.”
However, that conference has to abide by the Council
resolution. So long as this resolution is not respected,
the prospects fur progress in Geneva are very dim.
Therefore I believe that a meeting of the Council
in the sense of strengthening the cease-fire and
strengthening the provisions of the resolution providing
for the withdrawal of outside forces and protecting
the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence
of Cyprus is a necessary action ‘by the Council in
conformity with its resolution.

28. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Sptmish):
I now call on the representative of Turkey.
29. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): Yesterday we waited for
hours for Mr. Rossides to make up his mind-then
to
change his mind, then to make up his mind againabout this meeting. So whatever I have to say is based
on writings of yesterday, superseded by what has
happened since. I shall try, as’ is my custom-and
I
see that today at least it seems to be the trend-to be
as brief as possible.

22. Another reason why the Council has to be
apprised of the situation is that there is already the
involvement of the United Nations in Cyprus with the
presence of the United Nations Force in the island.
As the Secretary-General
very pertinently pointed
out, it is necessary for the United Nations Force to
be able to act effectively on the island, and this can
be done only if the Council closely follows the situation
and decides at the proper moment to do what should
be done in order to strengthen the United Nations
‘, Force in Cyprus and in that way to save the situation
on the island and protect international
peace and
security. It was in this sense that we wished to
have this meeting, hoping that something would be
done here to help the work of the conference in
accordance with the provisions and the tenor of
resolution 353 (1974).

30. The hours we spent yesterday would have been
much more usefully spent if we had tried to take stock
of the situation brought about by years of a
megalomaniac policy’on the part of certain leaders.
Now those same leaders seem to have thought it
useful to have a-meeting today. I hope that everyone
who has a say in the matter was in agreement as
far as Mr. Rossides’s call was ‘concerned. I do not
know who gives him instructions to call for these
meetings-whether
they come from those who are in
charge or those who were in charge.
3

31. Members of the Cpuncil will recall that the,
Secretary-General, in his oral report to the Security
Council at, its l78lst meeting on 20 July, had given
an account of the efforts of the Turkish community
to prevent the spread of hostilities into the area of
intercommunal
conflict.
The
Secretary-General
informed the ‘Council that
.,,
“At 0745 hours there was a telephone call from
Mr. Dimitriou” -who then was Foreign Minister“who said he was speaking on behalf of the Council ”
of Ministers and the National Guard and asked
UNFICYP
to inform the Turkish side that the’
National Guard could not be responsible for any
attacks on civilian Turks in various parts ‘of the
island unless Turkish bombing and attacks on
Cyprus ceased.” [178/st rwetitrg, ptwtr. 24.1
32. I will be recalled also that in various statements
and communiques we have disclosed that the’Turkish
armed forces were ordered not to open fire unless fired
upon, and not to atttack civilian targets. We all
know that the Turkish forces have encountered great
resistance from the Greek military forces and that
Turkish Cypriot civilians were also attacked locally
by the Greek National Guard all over the island.

35. The 1,750 Turkish Cypriots who surrendered to
the Greek National Guard in Limassol have been
gathered in a stadium and are being treated in a
rather inhuman manner. They are the largest of the
groups of Turkish Cypriots undergoing the same type
of treatment, but there are many more and I understand that we now have a document which is being
processed for presentation to the Council-reluctantly,
of course, but as a reply to the many documents which
have .already been circulated on the same subject of
what is happening in Cyprus to indicate the violations
of the cease-fire since 22 July by the Greek forces,
and the pillaging of the properties of the Turkish
Cypriots by the Greek Cypriots.
36. I ‘did not ask for this meeting, and I do not like
this kind of meeting, but I found myself forced to
attend. Even when what has been happening outside
this chamber gives hope for certain progress, when
all the news seems to be.tending to be better, we are
still asked to come here and voice our recriminations.
I do not like it, but I have to do it.
37. Many, times in ‘the Council Mr. Rossides has
said that the Turks-meaning
the Turkish Cypriot
administration-were
the ones who were forcibly
separating the Turkish Cypriots from their bosom
friends, the Greeks in Cyprus, as a result of the
threats they use against them enjoining them not to
have communications with these Greek Cypriots who
like them so much,

33. Now one thing we all know is that there are
Greek forces on the island. We knew-although
.it was
never officially known-that
there were quite a
number of Greek troops on the island. And the Turkish
operation has proved how far we were, even in our
wildest imagination,
from knowing the reality. The
38. Now, is it not interesting to note that not a single
military resistance offered by the Greeks is evidence
Turk-I
emphasize, not a single Turk-ever
has
of the fact repeatedly stated by Turkish representaswitched his allegiance in the past ten to fifteen
tives for over a decade, here in this very chamber,
years of the history of the Republic of Cyprus? Not
that the Greek armed forces had in fact occupied the
one has served in the ranks of the Greeks. On the
island long ago-at times in co-operation, at times in
other hand, what we see on the other side is a bitter,
defiance, of the Greek Cypriots, but always in open
bloody intermittent feud leading to gang-style murders
violation of their solemn undertaking spelled out in,
and culminating
recently, after the coup, in the
international treaties.
‘.’
occupation .,of the seat of power by the .most
34. The members of the Council must realize that it
unbelievable, unthinkable type of so-called leaders,
is not a mere thousand Greek officers .that Turkey ’ whose shame we all felt-so much so that this very
has’ been fighting for the past week or 10 ‘days.
body of the United Nations refused to agree to.
Furthermore.
the Greeks have done everything
recognize them. I believe that the Turkish action had
possible to spread the hostilities into civilian areas
the effect of giving legality-if
not total legality, at
and to create intercommunal hostilities, relyi,ng on the’
least decency-to
the seat of the Greek Cypriot
numerical superiority of the Greek Cypriots. -I have
,administration in Cyprus.
drawn attention to those acts in my letters contained
in various’ documents, I have .addressed to the.’ 39. dew. reverting to the situation on the .island
Secretary-Get&al.
Since then it has become public.
,with regard to the cease-fire, the next words of the
knowledge how the Turkish Cypriots are being treated;.
text I had prepared concern a situation now in the
how their defenceless villages are being attacked;
past, yet I shall read them.
and especially how their properties
are ‘being
systematically plundered ,and- how ~lhe villages are
40. On many occasions I have said that there will
being wiped out. And ,at one of the Council’s,previous
‘not be g cease-fire unless the attacks against Turkish
meetings I explained what this meant in terms of ,1 Cypriots are stopped. In Cyprus, given the geographlong-term strategy-how
the villages which have not
ical situation, which is peculiar in that Turkish
been’ wiped out are being denied supplies of food ‘, Cypriots live all over the island-and
God knows
and water. ‘The methods employed included’ also the , ?how many times that has been used as the basis of
taking of.tourists.as hostages; besides the Turks, and . political explanations of certain attitudes on the part
this .has‘been widely reported in the ‘world ._
press. 9
,of the Greek Cypriot administration-it
is possible
4

,,..
c

.

:

.-

‘

-.

/

&.,..
,-

only to speak about an island-wide cease-fire, and if
the firing does not cease in other parts of the island
there is no unilateral obligation for Turkey to cease
tire in the area it controls.

this-&oment, probably the most important one-three
of thi Member States which have a special *interest .I
in Cyprus and whose role there is recognized by
international treaties are trying, in good faith, to find a :
solution to the problem. I find this to be the, worst
possible moment for Mr. Rossides; or those from whom
he gets instructions, to ask for a meeting of the Council
and a discussion +hich can only make more difficult
the finding of a solution in Geneva. I hope that in
Geneva none of the. representatives of the three countries principally concerned will be much affected
by what is said here and that they will continue in a
more defused atmosphere to discuss the problem and
try to find a solution to it.
1

41. As indicated, those last words were written
before the news, which makes us all very happy, that
nothing has occurred in the past 24 hours or more.
The reason for this attitude of the Turkish ‘Government was and is that the Turkish Government just
cannot abandon the members
of the Turkish
community in Cyprus, which are threatened not only
by the Greek National
Guard but also by the
communities in which they live-those
communities
which, it is said, cherish the presence of the Turkish
Cyfiriots among them.

46. Discussions are taking place in Geneva right now.
I talked with my Foreign Minister just before coming
here. Progress has been reported; hope has been
expressed. I shall therefore end by saying what 1 said
at the very beginning: I do not see what purpose can
be served by this meeting of the Council today. But
I happen to know why it is taking place and I fully
understand why the members of the Council agreed
to the convening of the meeting.

42. The firing ceases when it ceases all over the
island, and I am happy to say that, at least from this
angle, the situation now seems much improved..
43. One thing I should like to mention again, because
it needs to be stressed, is that Turkey, whose action
is now the object of so much criticism on the part
of Mr. Rossides, has always had this military might
-which has not developed over the past fortnightor at least the edge over Cyprus of which there are
some complaints in this chamber. But it will be
remembered that it has refrained from using it in the
hope, which has in the past proved vain, of seeing
the Greek Cypriots accept the voice of reason.

47. The PRESIDENT
(interpretdonfrwrn
Spmish):
I now invite the representative of India to take a place
at the Council iable and to make a statement.
48. Mr. JAIPAL
(India): Since 1 spoke last the
situation has materially changed, and my delegation
feels obliged therefore to make our position clear.

44. I hate to take a Cassandra-like attitude-which
is
not generally pleasing-but
how often have I myself
and my predecessors had to speak here about the
necessity of recognizing the basic elements of the
over-all Cyprus settlement,
which we mistakenly
thought had taken place in the early 196Os? At that
time we thought we had created a Republic that was
independent and soverefgc, wh6se territorial integrity
was total, which was based on the existence of two
communities
wishing to live together with equal
participation in the future of the island and, of course,
in its present also; two communities which would be
equal partners and share in the prosperity, in the
defence, in the political aspirations and in the policy
of that istand. And we have been striving to obtain,
that. We have many, many times come almost to the
brink of war with our Greek allies, and each time a
last-moment solution was folind, hopes were reborn,
and on the basis of those hop& intercommunal
talks
took place and were broken off on the merest pretext
whenever a Turk had the audacity to claim equality
with his Greek partners in Cyprus. That was
reason’ enough to stop the talks. And yet it went on
and on and on. And the Turkish action took place
only when, finally, as is recbgnized by everyone around
this table, there was not a shred of legalitv left on
the island.

49. As a non-aligned country, we are naturally
interested and concerned about the future of nonaligned Cyprus. The situation in Cyprus today must, in
our opinion,
clearly be contained,
defused and
normalized as quickly as possible, primarily ‘in the
interests of the people of Cyprus, who are the principal
‘.
sufferers.
50. .The original sin of one foreign military intervention in ,‘the internal affairs of Cyprus has been
compounded by another foreign military intervention.
As a consequence, the threat to international peace
and ,security has -increased and the independence and
integrity of Cyprus are imperilled. Perhaps the Security
Count+ might have acted sooner than it.did; perhaps
it should act again if the situation Shows.no signs of
steady improvement. But iri all faiiness to the Council
it m+t be,said that today the essential ingredients for
a peaceful settlement are present and it is worth while
mentioning them.
51. Sin& the,adoption ‘of resolution 353 (1974), the
National Guard of Cyprus Bias submitted itself to civil
authority. The military &gime in Greece, too, has
handed over power to Cibilitin leadership. Thus, the
two original causes of the’crisis have been removed. It’
now remains for the third element to react positively
to the changed situation, eecausethe original provocation is no longer present. It is ndw,’ therefore, for

45. And today in Geneva, in one of the most important
forums in’which this question is being discussed-at
5

*

the Council to help this process. Its resolution provides
the initial machinery for this purpose, that is, the
Geneva talks between the three guarantor Powers
under the Treaty of Guarantee. Those three Powers
are committed to the maintenance of the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus and,
indeed, they have recently reaftirmed this commitment. The Geneva talks therefore provide an
opportunity for them collectively to fulfil this commitment and to discharge their treaty responsibilities.
They have thus assumed an obligation to initiate the
steps towards the first goal, which is the restoration
of peace.

present situation, and the position of the United
Nations Force should not be jeopardized by any party.
On the contrary, its position and mandate should be
strengthened so as to enable it to cope ,with the new
dimensions of its peace mission, as so rightly pointed
out by the Secretary-General.
57. We trust that the parties directly involved in
Cyprus will recognize the imperatives of peace and
conduct themselves in speech and in action in a
manner that is conducive to the return of peace to the
people of Cyprus.
58. .Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (tr~rnsl~~tion from Russirrn): A week ago,
on 20 July, the Security Council adopted resolution 353
(1974), which called upon all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Cyprus. It also demanded an immediate end to foreign
military intervention in the Republic of Cyprus and
requested the withdrawal without delay from the
Republic of Cyprus of foreign military personnel.

52. We hope that the three Powers will find it
possible to restore peace quickly in Cyprus, for not
only is it their collective responsibility to do so under
the Treaty of Guarantee: it is also the responsibility
of the Security Council to do so. For the present,
the Security Council has vested in them-these
three Powers-this
particular responsibility in terms
of resolution 353 (1974). The Geneva talks must
therefore be given a fair chance; they cannot be
allowed to fail in their task; indeed, they should be
helped by the Council to succeed. For our interpretation is that the three Powers are acting for us on a
mandate from the Council. We are ‘therefore glad to
hear from our Secretary-General that the Geneva talks
are beginning to show some signs of promise.

59. It should also be recalled that on 23 July, in
resolution 354 (1974), the Council reaffirmed the basic
provisions of resolution 353 (1974). The Soviet delegation, which from the very outset has insisted that the
Council should take prompt and decisive measures
to put an end to foreign military intervention in the
affairs of the Republic of Cyprus, supported both these
resolutions which, as is well known, were adopted
unanimously. During all the recent meetings we have
repeatedly stressed that resolution 353 (1974) must be
implemented in all its parts and provisions, as that
is the only way to put an end to foreign intervention
in the internal affairs of the Republic of Cyprus and
to allow the people of Cyprus, both Turkish and
Greek Cypriots, to settle their own affairs and decide
their own future independently, without interference
from outside.

53. The best way in which we can help them at
present is by avoiding any recriminations here in this
Council, because that will only serve to add fuel to
the tires in Cyprus. The revnnchistes
and the hotheads
have to be kept under control. It is a very complicated
and deep-rooted situation that we are dealing with in
Cyprus, one in which, unfortunately,
ethnic groups
have come to rely on external guarantors for their
security. This sort of dependence on external
authorities is unhealthy at the best of times and it
will take some time for it to wither away.

60. Soviet and world public opinion are deeply
concerned at the continuing foreing intervention in the
affairs of the sovereign State of Cyprus. Speaking
recently at the celebrations on the occasion of the
thirtieth anniversary of the Polish People’s Republic,
the General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid
Ilyich Brezhnev, stated:

54. It is interesting that Turkey in its 300-year -rule
over Cyprus did not find it necessary to divide the
island to protect one community
from the other.
Great Britain also ruled the island as one colony and
not two. Greece too is committed to the territorial
integrity of Cyprus.
55. It is a dangerous concept to sanction external
intervention in an independent State on grounds of
ethnic or religious afftnities. The future of Cyprus,
its constitutional
arrangements and so forth are, in
our opinion, for the people of Cyprus themselves to
determine,
in conditions of peace, freedom and
democracy. Any other solution, however well-meant,
would be unrealistic and would not endure unless it
had the full support of the. entire population of
Cyprus. The three Powers in Geneva will no doubt
bear in mind that very fundamental consideration.

“The Soviet .Union, the socialist countries and
all peace-loving States resolutely demand an end to
outside military intervention in the internal affairs
of Cyprus and the restoration of the status of the
Republic as an independent, sovereign State, as it
existed before the Greek aggression.”
‘61. Unfortunately we note that resolutions 353 (1974)
and 354 (1974) are not being implemented.
That is
shown by the facts, including those facts that we have
‘heard today. Foreign personnel has not been recalled
from Cyprus. Despite the decisions of the Council,

56. Lastly, the presence of the,United Nations-Force
in Cyprus ‘is an important and positive factor in the
6

outside intervention has not ceased. The legitimate
constitutional Government of the Republic has been
deprived of the possibility of discharging its functions.
The President has also been deprived of the
possibility of exercising his functions as the lawful
head of State. It is obvious that if all the provisions
of resolution 353 (1974) had been implemented,
we
shouid not today have had to draw the Council’s
attention once again to what is now happening in
Cyprus.

Further, I wish to say again that we want to support
the work of the Geneva conference through due
implementation
of the Security Council resolution.
That is the one very important aspect which I believe
is in the mind of every member of the Council. We
feel that this is not helped by allowing the violations
of the cease-fire to go unnoticed and unremedied.
We consider it a duty to bring them to the knowledge
of the Council. I understand the position of the
representative of Turkey; it is understandable that he
does not want the Council to take note of this situation
of violations. But the essential interest of the United
Nations as an international organization, and of the
world community, is that the Council resolutions be
respected and that in this case the Council resolutions
for a cease-fire be implemented, particularly as so much
danger is involved. And these resolutions are not
implemented if the Council takes an attitude that might
perhaps be interpreted as indifference to these violations. I must say again that any territory occupied
through violation of the cease-fire should be returned
by the violator on the basis of the cease-tire line-in
this case, that of 22 July-in
accordance with the
Secretary-General’s
appeal. That is implicit in the
essence of a resolution for a cease-fire. To deprive
the resolution of this essential element, particularly
after repeated violations of the resolution, may be
taken as a mark of indifference to the implementation
of Security Council resolutions in general. If the
Council thinks that its resolutions need not necessarily
be implemented, it might just as well not adopt them.

62. It is the opinion of the Soviet delegation that, in
view of the situation which has developed, the Council
must compel all the parties concerned to implement
its decisions on Cyprus fully, unconditionally
and
without delay. It is the duty of the Council under the
Charter not only to take decisions to deal with any
given situation but also to adopt concrete ~measures
to ensure that those decisions are carried out and
implemented. If the Council does not do that, it is not
doing its duty. It also goes without saying that in such
a case the responsibility must be borne by those States
which are acting in a way that is contrary to the
decisions taken by the Council. At previous meetings
of the Council, we stressed that because of the delaying
tactics employed by certain members, the adoption of
effective measures that might contribute
to the
solution of the crisis along the correct lines was being
postponed. That has inevitably led to the further
aggravation of the situation in the country. Yesterday,
too, we saw how attempts were being made to prevent
the Council from taking measures to implement the
decisions it had adopted. Time will not stand still
and we must take all measures to ensure that the
parties concerned implement
the decisions of the
Council fully and without any delay.

66. But I confidently hope that the Council will see
to it that its resotution‘i’s implemented. It is true that
today we had a quiet day: but we have had quiet
days before. There was a quiet day on 24 July,
presumably because it was the day after the Council’s
imperative demand for a cease-fire. Yet on 25 July the
fighting started again’. Today it may be quiet, but we
do not know what will happen tomorrow or the day
after tomorrow. Therefore, action is needed.

63. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtion
front Spuni.&):
I call on the representative of Cyprus to exercise
his right of reply.
64. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I wish to say only a
few words. First, I ,do not think it at all necessary to
make any reply to the repetition by the representative
of Turkey of unsubstantiated charges and allegations,
for which there is no particle of evidence and of
which no mention is made in any of the numerous
reports of the Secretary-General
and of UNFICYP,
who are closely following the situation and would have
known about and reported any such cases. Nor has
there been any mention of these cases in -any .of the
numerous newspaper reports, which are fuhof charges
about Turkey’s aggressive war on Cyprus but contain
not a word about any ill-treatment
of the Turkish
Cypriot community by the Greek Cypriot people. Had
there been any such treatment, it would have been
noted by press correspondents. It is therefore not
necessary to deal with statements such as those made
by the representative of Turkey; it would be a waste
of time.

67. What I ask is ,.that the Security Council take
in hand its responsibilities
in the situation and, in
accordance with its resolution, follow developments
and take appropriate and effective action. That, we
believe, is imperative. The situation ‘has to be kept
under review so that action may be taken to save a
small country, a State ,Member of the United Nations,
so direly threatened in its ,existence, so direly
threatened in its independence, its sovereignty and,
above all, its territorial integrity.
68. Mr. JANKGWITSCH
(Austria): The Council
has now been seized .for nearly two weeks of the
new and extremely dangerous crisis which has erupted
in the eastern Mediterranean, in the Republic ofcyprus
specifically. The Council, in its deliberations and in
the long and intensive consultations .which have been
conducted among its members, has closely followed
and has been, I thinkwe can>honestly say, inday-to-day
contact with the evolution of the situation, ‘and has

65. I wish to thank the representatives of the Soviet
.Union and India for their constructive statements.
7

made every effort to contribute, at every stage and
in the manner which seemed both appropriate and
effective, to a solution or at least, at particular
moments, to a scaling down of tension.

and statesmanship of all involved in the negotiations
in Geneva, and we express hope for their final success.
76. It is our sincere hope, further, that whatever
success can be achieved at the conference table will
find prompt reflection in the island of Cyprus and
will contribute to an immediate lessening of tension
in the area itself, for which all members of the
Council continue to feel grave concern.

69. It was in line with these efforts, in which you,
Mr. President, have guided us so ably, and in which
the Secretary-General
has given us such valuable
assistance, that we were able to adopt the resolution of
20 July setting out the main principles. which, in the
Council’s view, must apply in the present situation.

77. The dimensions, the complexities and the intricacies of the problem before us have become more
than obvious during the past two weeks. We are fully
aware that there is no quick and no easy solution
of the problems,
whose magnitude
and whose
duration surpass those of many others. We are aware,
therefore, that further efforts of the Council may be
needed to help on the way towards a settlement. The
role of the Organization in the establishment of peace
in Cyprus is a long and, I believe, a meritorious
one. Full use should be made therefore of the
possibilities our Organization can offer in the present
circumstances.
This is particularly
true of the
contribution of UNFICYP,
whose role-and authority
have been strengthened by resolution 353 (1974) and
whose effectiveness has. been increased by the
measures taken by the Secretary-General a few days
ago in consultation with troop-contributing
countries.
We hope that, on the basis of agreements between
and with the parties, this role can be further expanded
for the benefit of all of Cyprus.

70. Subsequent action by the Council-the
adoption
of resolution 354 (1974), our private -meeting last
Wednesday, the consultations held yesterday and the
meeting today-has all been undertaken with the same
objective in mind: to help towards the reestablishment
of peace and constitutional
Government
in the
Republic of Cyprus.
.’
‘.
71. My delegation has taken an active ‘part in the
work of the Council, and we have not hesitated to take
the floor several times in order to express and
re-express the guiding principles which are of such
fundamental importance.
72. The first and foremost of these principles is the
maintenance, and indeed the strengthening, of a State
Member of the United Nations-the
strengthening of
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus. The Council has strongly
and unanimously
endorsed this principle, and we
believe that all the other objectives the Council has
defined in its resolutions must be placed in this broad
over-all context.

78. The ultimate success of all other efforts being
conducted will ‘depend, however, on the degree to
which they respond to the wishes, to the aspirations
and to the hopes of the people immediately concerned
-the people of Cyprus. When in 1960 the people of
Cyprus acceded to independence and joined the
United Nations, it was certainly in the hope that the
new Republic would be ‘the master of its destiny. It
is therefore, in our belief, the ultimate task of the
Council; according to the spirit and the tetter of the.
Charter, to restore to the people of Cyprus as quickly
as we can the independence, sovereignty and freedom
from foreign interference which they deserve, as do
all other Member States of the United Nations.

73. In order to achieve this .objective, the strict
observance of the cease-fire, demanded by the Council
and accepted by all parties is of the utmost importance.
Efforts for ,peace can hardly succeed as long as fighting
or military movements continue, as long as the delicate
new structures which begin to emerge on the Island
appear to be threatened.
,_
74. The Councit has furthermore urged the immediate
start of political efforts to solve the crisis, and has
therefore called for a meeting of the Powers parties
to the London and Zurich ‘agreements. It is to be
noted with satisfaction that these meetings have started
and that the parties to the conference have attempted
to lay the basis for future negotiations. We believe
that those efforts deserve our full support, as they
provide the indispensable basis to arrive at the goals
the Council has spelled out for a peaceful settlement
of the conflict.

79. In the days and weeks to come, the utmost
restraint and extreme caution on the part of all
concerned will remain commands of the hour, as will
common determination and patience. We also believe,
however, that statesmanship should not be without
compassion for the suffering of a people, and restraint
and extreme eaution are not the same as indifference.
80. It ‘is in this spirit that my delegation will
continue to co-operate in al1 further efforts to bring
about a speedy and a peaceful solutionof the grave
problem before us.

75. This development is all the more gratifying as
the difftculties and problems to be solved durint the
first days of these negotiations were enormous and
sometimes I seemed insurmountable.
It is fitting,
therefore.

to pay a tribute

the patience,

81. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): I think that
there is a general feeling around this table ‘that the

perseverence

8

-‘I,

.i

.._

.

.
*.

.

\

i:-

.,

*-‘ .‘:.

talks that are at present going on. in I;ieneva should
be given a fair wind and a chance to see whether
or not they will succeed. I will therefore say very
little about the allegations made by the representative
of Cyprus, or about the answers and the counterallegations made by the representative .of Turkey.
With great respect to them, I do not feel that it is
perhaps entirely appropriate that we should spend a lot
of time this afternoon engaged in an inquest over
something which is not yet a corpse. At this moment
talks are continuing in Geneva which we hope will
be successful. I really should like to make two
observations upon them.

88. I take this opportunity to recall that since the
very inception of this debate on Cyprus my delegation
has constantly urged all Member States to respect
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Cyprus and, in so doing it has remained loyal
to the fundamental principles of our country. But
in the view of my delegation, all the parties concerned,
all of them Member States of the United Nations,
are requested to be realistic in order to enable the
Council to pursue its task and, thus, to.give the Geneva
conference the possibility of providing us, through the
intermediary of the Secretary-General,
with a result
which we hope will be positive.

82. First -oi all, there is today more ground for
modified optimism about the result of those talks than
there was yesterday. Some progress,, I think, has
been made in ,the course of the last 24 hours, and
we hope that progress will continue to be made in
the course of the rest of today and possibly tomorrow
as well.

89. I take this opportunity to reiterate my delegation’s
thanks to the Secretary-General. Since we meet several
times a week, he ‘certainly must not be able to
get much sleep. We urge him to keep government
informed of the situation and of the efforts made
by his Special Representatives in the field. We’hope
that this meeting will promote an atmosphere of
mutual understanding between the parties, although
it is quite normal that they should have recalled what
we already knew. But if we want to achieve a solution,
the Council must be assisted to the full by all Member
States, and we must avoid as much as possible
exacerbating the situation and adding fuel to the tire
at this stage.

83. Secondly, .I would merely observe that those
talks were specifically sanctioned and indeed called
for in Security Council resolution 353 (1974). We
were very grateful last week that the Soviet Union
found itself able to support that’ resolution so that it
was adopted unanimously. Having called for the talks,
I hope the Council will feel- that. they should now
be given a fair chance.
, ‘1

90.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpret&ion
French):
The French delegation. has already
expressed its views with regard to the events in
Cyprus on several occasions during the discussions
which have taken place for almost two weeks.
At present, in accordance with the treaties and with
resolution 353 (1974), a conference of the three
guarantor Powers is being held in Geneva in order to
find suitable solutions to the numerous problems that
have arisen. As long as that conference continues its
work and as long as hope for an agreement has not
been abandoned, the Council. can only express the
wish that the situation in Cyprus itself will not be
changed in a unilateral manner, to the detriment of
one or the other of the two communities which make
up the population of the island. In that connexion
my delegation has learned with real concern of the
clear .violations of the cease-tire which have been
reported to this Council in the past few days.

from

84.

Mr.

of Cameroon)
would
have preferred not to speak at this stage, but we are
compelled to recall, like the preceding speakers, that
in unanimously adopting resolutions 353 (1974) and
354 (1974), the Council was doing its utmost to try
to find a solution to the very grave situation on Cyprus.

(interpretdon

NJINR

from

(United

French):

Republic

My delegation

85.. The responsibility of the three guarantor Powers
is well, known to all States Members of the United
Nations, including those Members who were not
fortunate enough to know of it at the time.
86. Hence, in calling upon those three Powers in
its resolution 353 (1974) to. act within the framework
of their responsibilities,
the Security Council, in the
opinion of my delegation, was merely pursuing its
efforts to find a solution to the grave situation on
Cyprus.

91. My delegation has also on several occasions
expressed its sympathy for the unfortunate populations of Cyprus, which have for the past two weeks
been the innocent victims of the recent events. We
hope that peace and harmony will soon be restored
to the island and that the Republic of Cyprus will
soon have once again well-balanced
institutions
working in a legitimate framework in accordance
with the treaties and with resolution 353 (1974).

87. I stated at the outset that I did not intend to
prolong the debate, but yesterday we had to wait
quite a long time before learning that our meeting
would be held today. This’ was because, in the view
of my delegation, an effort was being made to give
the Geneva conference its chance to take action and
to do something, for indeed this conference was
requested by the Council and, as we -all know, the
results of that conference are part of the efforts
made by the Council to reach a solution acceptable
to all parties as far as possible.

92. I should not want to conclude this brief statement
without once again expressing .;?o the SecretaryGeneral our great appreciation for the tireless efforts
9

he has made “for the past two weeks to .avoid the
dangers of conflict, to put an end to the fighting and
to alleviate the suffering of the people concerned. Of
course I wish also to ‘pay .a tribute also to -the
representative of the Secretary-Genera! in Cyprus, to
the Force Commander and all the contingents of that
Force, who have been subjected to exceptional
tension in circumstances which were not at all those
that had been foreseen and who have carried out
their mission admirably.

than we are at this moment-So I woutd urge that we
take account of the fact that the fighting has stopped
in Cyprus. The authorized parties-those
whom this
Council in its resolution called on to seek a solution to
the problem-are,
if I am not mistaken, meeting at
this exact hour, and may be making progress. Let us
go forward from this cessation of fighting to find the
political solution to a crisis which affects us all.
97. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (tmnskrtion front Russim):
Some of the changes in the situation in Cyprus are
certainly not by any means such as to leave us calm
and tranquil. Even those statements that we have
heard today in the Security Council show that basically
very little has yet been done to ensure the unconditional
implementation
of the decisions adopted earlier by the
Council-resolutions
353 (1974) and 354 (1974).

93. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America): I
shall be very brief. I merely wish to call the atttention
of the Council to two recent reports that have just
been handed to me which I think have importance
in the situation. One is a dispatch from Nicosia from
the Associated Press:
“Turkish troops halted their advance in the Greek
Cypriot areas of Cyprus Saturday, and Cypriot
Foreign Minister Dimis Dimitriou declared, ‘Things
are looking better’.”
The other dispatch is a Reuters dispatch,
Nicosia:

98. For that very reason, our delegation would like
to stress at this meeting of the Council that the
immediate implementation
of resolution 353 (1974),
in all its parts and provisions-we
should like to
stress particularly, in all its parts and provisions-is
absolutely essential and important. We should like to
note that its basic provisions relating to respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Cyprus and to ending foreign military intervention
in the island, and tinally, to the withdrawal of foreign
military personnel present there, must definitely
remain the focus of attention for members of the
Security Council.

also from

“The Turkish forces were reported by a United
Nations spokesman here today to have stopped
their advance, after pushing out from territory they
captured early in their landings in Cyprus a week
ago. After yesterday’s flare-up, there were no.
reports of further fighting on the island.”

99. The selective emphasis which certain members
of the Council place on only one. paragraph of this
resolution-however
important that paragraph might
be4oes
not give us the right to disregard the main
provisions of this resolution. We also see the particular
importance
of those provisions of the Security
Council resolution which I mentioned because, as the
representative of Cyprus, Mr. Rossides, noted, there
exists a threat to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Cyprus. We cannot ignore
the statement of the representative of Cyprus. For
that very reason, th,e immediate implementation
of the
Council resolution in a!! its parts and provisions is
an urgent and important task at the present time.

I submit that this is important information and most
hopeful information. I think a cessation of the fighting
-long
as it may have taken to arrive at it-is
something we can all welcome. We a!1 know that
the situation continues to be extremely fragile, and
I would hope that in this Council we could show
sufficient restraint not again to stir up a situation
which is susceptible to very easy ignition.
94. UNFICYP
is on the job in Cyprus. It has been
carrying out a thoroughly professional operation in an
atmosphere of great uncertainty and great danger, and
I have every confidence that it will continue to play
a major role in peace-making in Cyprus.
95. The news trom Geneva, again, is hopeful.
Progress has been made today. I submit that that is
the reality of today, rather than the debates which
took place yesterday or the day before about events
which have happened in the past.

100. The implementation
of the resolutions con:
cerned would undoubtedly make it possible to change
the situation on the island and would create the
conditions in which the people of Cyprus-both
communities in Cyprus, Greek and Turkish-could
freely decide their future without outside interference.

%. The roots of the Cyprus crisis go back many,
many years- in fact, centuries. We could trade charges
here; we could go through what one of our colleagues
earlier described as a “ritual
of recrimination*‘,
and I suspect we could go on for several weeks and
be no closer to an agreement between the disputants

101. We support the idea that Cyprus as a State
should remain independent, sovereign and keep its
territorial integrity, and, together with all peace-loving
forces, we express our solidarity with the people of
Cyprus and call for help and assistance to them in
their noble struggle for the future of their country.
IO

.’

102. The PRESIDENT (interpretajion
from SpanI call bn the representative of Turkey,
‘.
103. Mr. OLCAY &key): In response to the tacit
appeal implicit in all the speechesmade this afternoon
and the more explicit appeal of the. representative

ish):

of the United Kingdom and of the representative of
the United States, and *in delayed response to an
earlier appeal of the representative of Australia, I
shall not answer Mr. Rossides.
.:
The meeting rose crt 5.05 p.m.

,’

/

-.

.

;

i

‘,
:

_I

_!

I

-.

.

I1

‘_

.

HOWX'O OUTAJN U'NM'ED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United
tlmu&ut
Section.

Nat$m
publicatione
may be obtained
the wotid. Coneult
your book&m
New York or Geneva.

COMMEN$SE Plt~ClJltni

from bookstores
end d@iiutom
or write to: United
Natione.
Wee

LES PUBLICiTIONS DES NATIONS UNIEfi

yes public&cms
des Nations
U&s
sent en venb dags lea libmiriee
et lee agencee
d@&&ee
du made
entier. Infonuez-voue
auprh de votre libraire
ou adressesvoue
It : Natione Uniee. Gection dee ventm, New York ou Gepeve.

COMO CONSECIJIU PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

f..ea public&arpa
de la.s Nacionea Unidae
estAn en venta en liirerfae
y caeae diet&
hi&uam
en today parks
de1 mundo. Con&to
a eu librero o dirfjaee
a: Nacionee
Uokiae. Secci6n de Veutae. Nueva York o Ginebra.

00300

74-82OOI-April1983-2,200
