S/PV.7734

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7734th meeting

Friday, 8 July 2016, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. De la Calle García
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Special report of the Secretary-General on the strategic review of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (S/2016/565)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-21025 (E)
*1621025*

S/PV.7734

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.

the required configuration and capacity to fulfil its tasks
in a post-transitional environment, while incorporating
peacebuilding objectives.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Special report of the Secretary-General on
the strategic review of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic
(S/2016/565)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Central African Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and His Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale,
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Morocco.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/565, which contains the special
report of the Secretary-General on the strategic review
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
At this meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by Mr. Ladsous, Mr. Hilale and His
Excellency Mr. Volodymyr Yelchenko, Permanent
Representative of Ukraine, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I shall introduce
the special report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic (S/2016/565),
which is based largely on the recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
elaborated in close cooperation with the authorities of
the Central African Republic and partners. The report
presents recommendations regarding capacity, as the
Council has requested, such that the Mission will have
2/8

08/07/2016

As the Council recalls, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) was
established in April 2014 at a time of great difficulties
in the country. We must acknowledge that considerable
progress has been made since then, particularly with the
support of the Economic Community of Central African
States, countries of the region and the deployment of
international forces, including MINUSCA.
Earlier this year, after nearly two years of political
transition, voters in the Central African Republic
took to the ballot box in a peaceful and democratic
environment. As I stated at the time, the Central
African Republic provided a good example in a region
of the world where few elections take place without a
predetermined outcome, preparations are sometimes
chaotic and the outcome is contested. However, in
the Central African Republic elections took place in a
perfectly proper manner and those who lost conceded
defeat. It was therefore an exemplary election process
and that must be highlighted. The election of President
Faustin Archange Touadera — who is often called a man
of the people — and the creation of a new Government
launched a period of heightened expectations of lasting
and positive change.
While we acknowledge the gains achieved during
the positive transition, the strategic review that has been
undertaken confirms that the Central African Republic
still faces many serious challenges. The security
situation remains fragile and, despite everything, can
be reversed. State capacity is very low and sometimes
non-existent. Many areas of the country are affected by
persistent division, exclusion and marginalization. The
people continue to suffer a very low level of economic
development. There is almost no access to basic services
and there are no representative, professional or inclusive
security services to ensure minimally acceptable
conditions. Moreover, armed groups maintain control
over vast areas of the national territory and pose a
significant threat to civilians. Their capacity to stire
unrest and impede economic development and freedom
of movement remains very much a reality.
Against that background, the strategic review
makes a number of recommendations. The absolute
priority, as always, is the protection of civilians and
16-21025

08/07/2016

The situation in the Central African Republic

facilitating the creation of a secure environment to
ensure both the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
under proper conditions. These remain MINUSCA’s
absolute priorities.
In parallel and to prevent a relapse into conflict,
the review recommends that the strategic goal for
the coming two to three years be to support the
sustainable reduction of the presence of armed groups.
By focusing on that objective and prioritizing the
activities necessary to achieve that goal, it is clear that
MINUSCA could contribute to creating a more secure
environment for civilians; assisting in the development
of Government structures that are responsive to public
opinion and able to deliver the basic services the people
expect; and creating an inclusive political environment
favourable to the protection of human rights, efforts to
combat impunity and the expansion of the rule of law,
with a view to strengthening reconciliation and social
and economic development.
It is this need for visibility that has prompted the
Secretary-General to recommend that the Security
Council extend MINUSCA’s mandate by 18 months at
the authorized level, with no change in terms of military
and police personnel.
The report presents a flexible, three-pronged
approach to implement the strategic objective, in the
context of the process under consideration and in line
with requirements. The Mission will focus as a priority
on addressing the presence of armed groups through
a comprehensive approach, supporting the ongoing
dialogue with the armed groups that has been initiated
by President Touadera, based on his established
agenda, and taking specific steps in support of the
national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme, the programme to
reduce intercommunal violence, and the coordination
of international support for security sector reform.
Special importance will be attached to cooperation
with the European Union training mission that is
currently being put together to train the armed forces
of the Central African Republic. Moreover, we must
actively participate in the reform and training of the
police and gendarmerie, in full compliance with the
United Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy.
Furthermore, the strategic review recommends
and President Touadera requests the continuation of
the urgent temporary measures mandate, which the

S/PV.7734

country’s current situation clearly requires. We must
pursue the operationalization of the Special Criminal
Court. Many people have been arrested and imprisonned,
but it is important now that they be tried. I believe that
will send the best message to the people of the Central
African Republic that the issue of impunity, which has
been a persistent source of the resurgence of crises over
the years, is finally settled. Enough is enough — it is
over. There will be no more impunity. That is one of
the strongest message that the international community
can send to the troublemakers. Furthermore, we will
obviously continue to deploy additional capabilities
and new technologies within the framework of existing
resources and military personnel, and to strenthgen
the military component to facilitate greater flexibility
and mobility.
MINUSCA cannot carry do all this by itself. What
we do is to support the efforts of the Government
and in partnership with our Central African friends,
as well as with the principal actors in the region and
the world. That is where we will have to exercise
our best judgement in discerning the comparative
advantages offered by all involved. That is critical. In
that context, I welcome the efforts of the Government
of the Central African Republic to develop with us
what I have called a compact or framework of mutual
accountability, which should be endorsed by the
national and international partners as a platform for the
coordination of international efforts on the basis of a
set of mutually agreed priorities that will continue to
be developed so as to advance the humanitarian agenda
and reconstruction, in view of the international donors
and investors conference, which will be a crucial event,
to take place in Brussels in November.
In the context of recent events, unfortunately, over
the past several weeks there have been indications
of less than positive developments. For example, on
19 June, six Central African police officers were
detained for six days by a local self-defence group in
РК5/ Bangui. There have been concerning reports of
renewed efforts to unite ex-Séléka elements under the
leadership of Nourredine Adam. Ali Darassa has been
active in Bambari. Seasonal transhumance movements
have provoked friction and clashes. In short, I shall not
go into detail, but a number of people have been killed
and some 35,000 people displaced in recent days. In
fact, the leaders whose names I have mentioned are
trying to test the Central African Government and the

16-210253/8

S/PV.7734

The situation in the Central African Republic

United Nations, and it is therefore now more important
than ever to show that we are proactive and will react.
Alarmingly, there have been reports of the abusive
treatment of Muslims in the capital. In Berbérati and
elsewhere, people have been prevented from returning
to their homes by the anti-Balaka, and the humanitarian
situation remains worrisome. Of a population of a
little less than 5 million, a large part continues to be
affected by the consequences of the conflict and a lack
of access to social services. Half of the population is
in a situation of relative food insecurity and in need of
humanitarian assistance to survive. I recall that 20 per
cent of the population is displaced and that two-thirds
of the total population of the country have no access to
basic medical care.
All of this creates a complex situation. In May, a
total of 26 security incidents affected the operations
of governmental and non-governmental organizations,
which is a very clear warning. On 24 June, a Senegalese
policeman was killed in circumstances on which we are
trying to shed all possible light. It was unacceptable. I
personally gave instructions to MINUSCA, in liaison
with the Central African Government, to find out what
happened, who is responsible and to make arrests if
necessary. All of this is regrettable and worrisome.
We must not paint too bleak a picture, but we are
nevertheless reminded that the situation in the Central
African Republic remains fragile. Outstanding progress
has been made over the past two years, but we must not
risk having those gains reversed. It is therefore more
important than ever that the authorities remain firmly
committed to inclusive and transparent governance and
to addressing the root causes of the crisis.
I believe that there are also positive signs. The
President has assembled his Cabinet by including
representatives from each of the prefectures of the
country. He has also extended a hand to the armed
groups, but that hand must be grasped and the gesture
must be reciprocated. I believe that the President very
clearly intends to break with the past. Once again,
inclusivity and reconciliation are very important. We
must recognize that there is no quick fix. The problems
are too profound for that to be realistic, given the
fleeting nature of the attention that the international
community focused on the Central African Republic in
the past. Intense attention lasted for a relatively brief
period, and then we moved on to other things.
4/8

08/07/2016

I believe that it would be a serious mistake to repeat
that. We must make it clear to the current leadership
that our efforts must be aimed at continuity and longterm results. As I have said on several occasions in
Bangui, MINUSCA must be the final United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the country. We do not have
the luxury of making a mistake. We must maintain
our commitment, ensure that it works, and avoid any
reason to return as we have done repeatedly in the
past, after three, five or seven years. That would be
a collective and catastrophic failure and the loss of a
major opportunity for the Central African people, who
are in need of a solution. Once again, I believe that
long-term commitment to maintaining political resolve
is absolutely essential.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hilale.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin my statement by congratulating Japan on
its ascension to the presidency of the Security Council
and by thanking you, Sir, for your invitation. For
me, it is always a pleasure and honour to address the
Security Council on behalf of the of the Peacebuilding
Commission in my capacity as Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration.
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, for
his exhaustive briefing on the situation in the Central
African Republic following the recent successful
strategic review of the Mission’s mandate, and take
this opportunity to pay special tribute to him for his
tireless efforts and high-level of cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission. We believe that the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2016/565) is comprehensive
and take note of the proposed recommendations.
At the national level, less than six months after
the presidential election the country is on the road to
recovery and a wave of hope is spreading alongside that
movement throughout the country. The President enjoys
strong popular support, which needs to be maintained
through international community support. Despite the
many challenges that remain in the face of today’s new
political reality, we must recognize and emphasize
that there are also new, unprecedent opportunities in
the Central African Republic that we must build upon.
An inclusive and transparent political process will be
one of the main aspects needed to ensure that the entire
16-21025

08/07/2016

The situation in the Central African Republic

population is committed to facilitating the rebuilding of
the social contract.
At the regional level, the Central African Republic’s
neighbours, which played a key role during the transition
period, continue to play an important role in several
areas, including migratory movements and the fight
against the illicit trafficking that affects the region.
In this regard, the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa is well placed to coordinate efforts in
the region. We encourage the neighbours of the Central
African Republic and other countries of the region to
continue to offer their full support to the new authorities
through positive and constructive involvement.
Beyond the region, it is important to note the
various initiatives undertaken by such partners as the
United Nations system, through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic and the Central
African Republic country-specific configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, the World Bank, the
European Union and several other bilateral partners.
Based on the road map I outlined in my last briefing to
the Security Council on this subject (see S/PV.7671), the
Peacebuilding Commission will continue to focus on
the consistency and coordination of the aforementioned
actions, and we will continue to advocate for increased
support from the international community.
I would like to turn now to what we see as key
peacebuilding aspects that need to be addressed as
a priority in the coming months. First, the security
situation remains extremely volatile, and, as
Mr. Ladsous mentioned, recent events in many parts
of the country, coupled with the risk of worsening
violence, are a reminder that the country is still not free
from the possibility of relapse. Accordingly, the success
of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration process and the regional security system
will be key to a return to stability. We welcome the
efforts made to address the security situation and
prevent armed groups from challenging the country’s
democratization process. The President of the Republic
has made a clear commitment to making the process
a priority of his Government, and the international
community’s commitment will be needed to get there.
Secondly, the lack of national capacity is often
cited as one of the major challenges to the country’s
development. We appeal to all Member States — be
they in the region, on the African continent or in other

S/PV.7734

parts of the world — to consider paying particular
attention to the Central African Republic by providing
opportunities through training or in the context of
triangular or South-South cooperation programmes.
Although the needs are urgent in many areas, it is never
too late to start investing in capacity-building.
Thirdly, as we have stated on many occasions, there
can be no peace without reconciliation and there can
be no reconciliation without credible mechanisms for
fighting impunity. I am very pleased that Mr. Ladsous
also stressed this point, as it is fundamental to the
political process. In this context, the capacity of the
national judicial system and the establishment of the
Special Criminal Court are of paramount importance.
The creation of the Court is fraught with multiple
challenges, including with respect to funding and
the issue of protecting judges, witnesses and victims.
However, the establishment of the Special Court is not
only necessary for prosecuting cases of violent crime,
but will also have a beneficial, catalysing effect on the
country’s judicial system. We urge the new authorities
to accelerate the ongoing bureaucratic process towards
ensuring a rapid implementation of this important
mechanism. Strengthening the national capacity of the
judiciary is of the utmost importance.
Fourthly,
an
assessment,
recovery
and
peacebuilding mission comprised of representatives of
the United Nations, the European Union and the World
Bank recently visited the Central African Republic at
the same time as the strategic review mission that was
in the country. The fact that these two missions were
in the field concurrently and were able to coordinate
some of their activities is a good example of the kind of
coherence that is necessary for our common approach
to addressing the pressing needs of the country.
Furthermore, we welcome the creation of an
interministerial commission to develop a mutual
accountability framework that would ensure national
ownership of the process and provide both the
international community and the Government with
higher visibility. As stated in the Secretary-General’s
report before us today,
“It is essential that the framework of mutual
accountability and the national recovery and
peacebuilding plan be part of an integrated and
coherent package underpinned by a suitable
and unified follow-up architecture adapted to

16-210255/8

S/PV.7734

The situation in the Central African Republic

the realities of the Central African Republic”
(S/2016/565, para. 64).
In this regard, we should heed the lessons learned
from previous experience to ensure the commission’s
success. The country-specific configuration will work
closely with key stakeholders to achieve this end. In
the current context, we welcome the assessment of the
budgetary forecasts regarding the various streams of
funding to meet humanitarian, development, security
and recovery needs, keeping in mind the importance
of proper sequencing to the peacebuilding priorities of
the country.
Fifthly, unfortunately, the humanitarian situation
remains disastrous, with no signs of improvement.
The annual humanitarian appeal has been consistently
underfunded, reaching only about 15.4 per cent in
2016, according to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. In this regard as well, the
international community can and must do more — much
more. In addition, the number of refugees and internally
displaced people remains very high. We must not forget
that the international community has a responsibility
towards refugees who have fled their countries due to
the severity of a crisis. We must work harder to provide
them with an environment conducive to their return,
which is imperative.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to ask all States Members of the United Nations to
increase their support for the Central African Republic.
I can never say it enough — the country is at a critical
point in its history and will need our continued support
to ensure a return to stability. The situation in Central
African Republic is suffering as a result of a chronic
passivity of the donor community, as 90 per cent of the
aid comes from a handful of partners. We urgently need
to expand the donor base, taking into account the fact
that different types of support would be helpful.
With a legitimate Government to lead the country,
and a Government that has a clear vision of the task
assigned to it as set forth in the State policy document
approved by the Parliament on 7 June, we have before
us an opportunity to provide the population of the
Central African Republic with the support it deserves
and expects.
The President: I thank Mr. Hilale for his briefing.
I give the floor to Mr. Yelchenko.
6/8

08/07/2016

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I have the honour of
briefing the Security Council today in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic. In my statement, I intend to reflect on my
role as Chair, which I have played since January 2016,
and in so doing to highlight the work of the Committee
and the Panel of Experts since the start of the year.
There have been a number of developments in the
Central African Republic that have had a direct impact
on the work of the 2127 Committee, in particular
the second round of presidential elections, new
parliamentary elections that took place on 14 February,
and run-off elections that took place on 31 March. The
new Parliament, the election of President Touadera and
the formation of a new Cabinet by the new President
have heralded the start of a new chapter that holds great
promise for the future of the Central African Republic.
It was against that backdrop that I visited the
Central African Republic from 24 to 27 May. The
timing of the visit was opportune, as it provided a
welcome opportunity to engage with the newly elected
and appointed authorities. I was accompanied by the
French representative to the Committee, and members
of the Panel of Experts also joined me in many of my
meetings in Bangui and during the field trip to Bambari.
During our discussions with the authorities, we
stressed that the Security Council continued to accord
a great deal of importance to the situation in the Central
African Republic. Our visit also served to reinforce
the message that the Committee should be viewed as a
partner of the Central African Republic, since we shared
the same goal of promoting peace and security in the
country and curbing the activities of spoilers. The need
for strengthened collaboration among the authorities
of the Central African Republic, the Committee and
the Panel of Experts was therefore a central theme that
resonated during the visit.
I also felt that the exchange of views with the local
authorities during the field trip to Bambari, including
with representatives of civil society such as the Akpe
community of internally displaced persons, helped
enrich my understanding of the situation on the ground
and provided me with an opportunity to witness at firsthand the issues that the country faces. I would also like
to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the
Secretariat and to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
16-21025

08/07/2016

The situation in the Central African Republic

Republic (MINUSCA), which provided me with full
support in preparing and conducting the visit.
Following my visit, on 13 June I briefed the members
of the Committee on the trip. Among the conclusions
set out in the visit report concerning the way forward,
I cited the need to encourage the United Nations Mine
Action Service (UNMAS) to continue efforts to ensure
safe storage of weapons and ammunition in the entire
country. I also asked the Secretariat to request MINUSCA
Public Information Service to read out the text of the
Committee’s press releases on United Nations Radio,
particularly as they related to sanctions designations. I
encouraged Member States to contribute to the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine
Action and to earmark their contributions for weapons
and ammunition management in the Central African
Republic. I also set out a number of recommendations
involving the dispatch of letters and a note verbale, the
majority of which were agreed upon by the Committee
and dispatched during the third week of June.
The visit also provided me with a timely
opportunity to engage with the new Government on
the nature and purpose of the sanctions measures,
namely, the arms embargo, the travel ban and the assets
freeze. Concerning the arms embargo, the Council may
recall that, under the chairmanship of my predecessor,
the Committee had been in continuous contact with
the Central African Republic transitional authorities
and regional States concerning the purpose and
implementation of the embargo, and had in particular
provided information on the relevant exemptions
procedures.
I reiterated similar information to the members of
the new Government with whom we met. I emphasized
in particular that the embargo was intended to protect
the people of the Central African Republic from armed
groups determined to bring weapons and ammunition
into the country. I further encouraged dialogue and
discussions between the Government, the Panel and the
Secretariat concerning the drafting and submission of
embargo exemption requests to the Committee.
Along those lines, let me also note that the Committee
has been actively working with the Panel of Experts
and other stakeholders on the embargo. On 3 February,
the Panel briefed the Committee on a progress update
it had submitted in January. Among other things, the
Panel touched upon the increased number of attacks by
armed groups, especially the Lord’s Resistance Army,

S/PV.7734

which had been responsible for attacking and abducting
civilians. The Panel further highlighted that security
continued to be a major concern and a challenge, with
armed groups controlling large areas of the country and
continuing to operate illegal administrations that taxed
and racketeered the population.
On 9 March, the Committee held a discussion via
video teleconference with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, as well as UNMAS. Special
Representative Onanga Anyanga informed members
that the activities of armed groups continued to be a
cause of concern in the country. He further noted that
MINUSCA forces and police had reported having
seized or recovered significant numbers of assault
rifles, hand-made weapons and ammunition of various
calibres, from armed groups and/or armed civilians.
The Special Representative also reported that
the Mission had continued to receive information on
suspected arms smuggling into the Central African
Republic, especially reports of the trafficking of small
arms, ammunition and military uniforms. MINUSCA
had also interceded in attempts to smuggle, via road,
ammunition destined for armed groups in the country.
UNMAS further informed the members that, while
significant efforts were being made to destroy weapons
and tons of unserviceable ammunition, the country was
still in need of adequate safe storage sites for weapons
and ammunition.
On 29 April, the Committee met via video
teleconference with the European Union regarding the
establishment of the European Union training mission
in the Central African Republic. The representatives
of the European Union informed the members that the
Government of the Central African Republic had been
in contact with them and had requested assistance to
help transform the Forces armées centrafricaines into a
professional force. The European Union training mission
for the Central African Republic therefore intends to
work with the Forces armées centrafricaines in the
areas of administration, command and organization,
including operational training. The Mission also
intends to support the preparation and implementation
of the security sector reform of the armed forces. A
key concern remains the vetting of the members of the
Forces armées centrafricaines to be trained to ensure
that elements previously involved in human rights
abuses are not included in the training.

16-210257/8

S/PV.7734

The situation in the Central African Republic

On 18 May, the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts
provided an overview of the Panel’s second progress
update submitted to the Committee in 2016. The Panel
highlighted that most armed groups had refused to
collaborate with the newly elected President in terms
of issues related to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. Some elements of the Forces armées
centrafricaines had been engaged in racketeering local
populations. Armed groups remained in control of
security and taxation in many areas, and the national
police, gendarmerie and customs authorities had
reported exercising little to no effective authority. The
Panel further reported concerns about arms smuggling
and some armed groups having possession of assault
rifles that were in better condition that those in the
possession of other armed groups.
To date in 2016, the Committee has received a total
of six requests for exemption from the arms embargo,
of which five were approved. The Committee has also
received three notifications concerning exemptions
to the measures. Of those three, one was in relation
to supporting the reform of the security sector in the
Central African Republic, while the other two were in
relation to the assets freeze.
Concerning the travel ban, the Committee
has continued to engage with the regional States
concerned, namely, Chad, Kenya and South Africa, via
letters, advising them of the importance of ensuring
that sanctioned individuals alleged to have travelled
from or to their countries were impeded from doing
so. The Panel has also actively been engaging with
the States concerned and providing information to
members on reported violations of the travel ban.
The Committee continues to work on this matter and
to ensure the effective implementation of the travel
ban. If no feedback is forthcoming, I would suggest
that the President of the Council and I endeavour to
engage bilaterally with the States oncerned, as was the
case in December 2015 when my predecessor and the
representative of the United States, then President of
the Council, met with the representatives of Kenya and
South Africa.
Concerning the asset freeze, during my trip to the
Central African Republic, I raised an issue that the Panel
had brought to the Committee’s attention, namely, that
a sanctioned individual, Mr. Alfred Yekatom, had been
elected to the National Assembly of the Central African
Republic and had been receiving monthly salary

8/8

08/07/2016

payments which, in the absence of an exemption request,
constituted a violation of the assets freeze. With the
Committee’s agreement, I sent a letter on 21 June to the
Ministry of Finance concerning Mr. Yekatom. During
my visit, I outlined the relevant exemptions procedures
to the assets freeze and underscored the importance of
the authorities’ cooperation with the Committee, the
Panel and the Secretariat in that connection.
During the course of this year, the Committee has
also been engaged on other issues of importance to
the sanctions regime. In the lead-up to my visit to the
Central African Republic, on 18 May the Committee
met with representatives of the humanitarian
community, namely, the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The briefers highlighted
the need for continued vigilance on human rights and
humanitarian-related issues in the Central African
Republic, where children continue to be recruited and
used as fighters in armed groups, and acts of sexual
violence continue to be perpetrated with the attackers
going unpunished. Later this month, on 22 July, the
Committee is scheduled to hear a briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, who
last briefed the Committee in May 2014.
In conclusion, I firmly believe that the sanctions
measures continue to be relevant in the context of
the Central African Republic. As Chair, I will make
every effort to ensure that the Committee remains
fully engaged, including by regularly updating its list
of individuals and entities that meet the designation
criteria for sanctions, and by considering new sanctions
designations. I will also strive to ensure that the Panel
of Experts receives the information that it requests from
Member States, particularly the regional States and the
relevant authorities of the Central African Republic,
many of whom I met during the visit.
The President: I thank Ambassador Yelchenko for
his briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

16-21025
