II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing in this regard that the observance of the
Year has contributed towards the reaffirmation of the
goals of a new international economic order,
Recognizing also that the situation of children in the
developing countries depends on the economic and
social development of those countries and consequently
on the establishment of a new international economic
order,
Deeply gratified by the world-wide response of the
international community in observing the Year as a first
essential step towards achieving the longer-range objectives of the Year, while also highlighting the international co-operative efforts towards the improvement
of the well-being of children and the attainment of the
harmonious development of their personalities,
Bearing in mind the conclusions and recommendations of the International Seminar on Children under
Apartheid, held in Paris' from 18 to 20 June 1979 6 at
the headquarters of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, in observance of
the Year,
Noting that the approach adopted by the United
Nations in organizing the Y car contributed to its success,
Convinced that the fresh and necessary impetus to
activities, generated by the Year. should be maintained
and that the new perspectives it has created should he
followed by appropriate action in the years to come,
Having considered the report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund on the International Year of the Child,7
1. Expresses its deep satisfaction to all Governments
which elaborated national programmes for the implementation of the aims of the International Year of the
Child and to those among them which became initiators
of major regional and other international events;
2. Expresses also its deep appreciation to the United
Nations Children's Fund, the lead agency, and to the
Executive Director of the Fund and his Special Representative for the International Year of the Child and
her staff, and commends the efforts of other concerned
organizations of the United Nations system and the contributions made by non-governmental organizations;
3. Urges Governments to make every effort to consolidate and to build further on the results of the Year
in order to achieve lastingly increased benefits for children by such measures, where appropriate, as:
(a) Planning for programmes and services benefiting
children, including integrated mother and child health
care, in their national planning for social and economic
development;
(b) Further identifying, defining and documenting
the situation of children;
(c) Setting specific national targets and goals for
meeting the needs of children, inter alia, in the fields of
health and education and for the development of their
intellectual and cultural abilities;
(d) Increasing budgetary provision for programmes
benefiting children by reviewing and/ or revising present
priorities;
4. Recognizes the importance of assisting and protecting the family as a basic unit of society and the
natural environment for the development and welfare
of all its members, especially the children;
5. Requests Governments and organizations to develop special programmes of assistance to the children
oppressed by the inhuman policy of apartheid;
s A/34/512, annex.
7

See A/34/452 and Add.1.

13

6. Urges Governments and organizations providing
assistance to developing countries through the United
Nations Children's Fund and other channels to review
their policies, in order to give more recognition to programmes benefiting children, and to increase the flow of
such assistance;
7. Stresses the importance of following up the experience and activities of the Year through long-term
plans and action to improve the situation of children
in the world, particularly in the developing countries;
8. Designates the United Nations Children's Fund
as the lead agency of the United Nations system responsible for co-ordinating the development aspects of the
follow-up activities of the Year, in consultation with the
Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation, within their respective spheres
of competence;
9. Notes that the Executive Board of the United
Nations Children's Fund will consider the scope of the
Fund's co-operation with countries as a follow-up to the
Year;
I 0. Requests Governments and organs and organizations of the United Nations system to evaluate and
follow up the impact of the Year on their activities. and
to inform the Secretary-General, who will report thereon
to the General Assemhly at its thirty-fifth session:
I I. Invites non-governmental organizations to continue and expand their programmes related to children
in order to maintain the momentum generated by the
Year;
12. Requests the Preparatory Committee for the
New International Development Strategy, in elaborating
its goals and objectives, to take into account the importance of the interests of children and of meeting their
needs.
39th plenary meeting
18 October 1979

34 / 11.

Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year
1978, 8
Taking note of the statement made by the DirectorGeneral of the International Atomic Energy Agency
on 2 November 1979,U which provides additional information on developments in the Agency's activities
during 1979,
Conscious of the urgent need to develop all sources
of energy, with a view to helping both developing and
industrialized countries to mitigate the effects of the
energy crisis, and bearing in mind the fact that nuclear
energy remains the main readily available alternative to
fossil fuel for the generation of electric power in the
coming decades,
Considering that the International Atomic Energy
Agency will be called upon to play an increasingly important role in making the benefits of nuclear power
8
International Atomic Energy Agency, The Annual Report
for 1978 (Austria, August 1979); transmitted to the members
of the General Assembly by a note of the Secretary-General
(A/34/497).
9
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 52nd meeting, paras. 8-42.

14

General Aaembly-Tblrty-fourtb Session

available to all nations, in particular the developing
countries,
Conscious of the continuing need to protect mankind
from the perils resulting from the misuse of nuclear
energy and noting with appreciation in this connexion
the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency in
the implementation of the relevant provisions of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 10
and other international treaties, conventions and agreements designed to achieve similar objectives,
Appreciating the assistance given by the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the Internat10nal Nuclear Fuel
Cycle Evaluation, which will be completed in February
1980,
Noting the excellent safety record of nuclear power
generation but aware of the need to pay continuing attention to the question of nuclear safety and waste
management,
Bearing in mind the special needs of the developing
countries for technical assistance by the International
Atomic Energy Agency in order to benefit effectively
from the application of nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes as well as from the contribution of nuclear
energy to their economic development,
.
1. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
2. Notes with satisfaction the continuing efforts of
the International Atomic Energy Agency to strengthen
further its activities in the field of technical assistance to
developing countries and urges all States to help the
Agency to achieve this objective by increasing their voluntary contributions;
3. Notes with appreciation that the negotiations on
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material were concluded successfully at Vienna on 26
October 1979 with the signing of the final act and that
the Convention will be opened for signature on 3 March
1980 at United Nations Headquarters in New York and
at the Head9.uarters of the International Atomic Energy
Agency at Vienna;
4. Commends the International Atomic Energy
Agency for its continuing efforts to ensure the safe and
secure use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes
throughout the world and notes with satisfaction the
steady improvement of the Agency's safeguards system;
5. Notes with appreciation the special measures
taken by the International Atomic Energy Agency to
expand and strengthen its programmes in nuclear safety,
particularly aimed at helpmg Member States to develop
their nuclear regulatory framework, to acquire adequate
cadres of trained personnel and to deal effectively with
any emergency that may occur;
6. Urges all States to support the endeavours of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, pursuant to its
statute, in furthering the peaceful uses of nuclear power,
improving the effectiveness of safeguards and promoting
nuclear safety;
7. Notes with satisfaction:
(a) The continuing work of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in keepin~ under review the world's
uranium resources, production and demand, the expansion of the Agency's International Nuclear Information
System, the setting up of the International Tokamak
Reactor workshops, intended to prepare a project for
demonstrating the technical feasibility of generating elec10

Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.

tricity by nuclear fusion, and the assistance given by the
Agency to Member States in assessing the role that nuclear power can play in their energy development;
(b) The progress made by. the International Atomic
Energy Agency towards establishing a system of international storage of plutonium and the action it has taken
in regard to the international management of spent fuel;

8. Notes that the recommendation contained in
paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 33/3 of 2
November 1978 will be considered by the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at
its twenty-third regular session and expresses the hope
that the matter will be brought to an early conclusion;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director-General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency the records of the thirty-fourth session of the
General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.

53rd plenary meeting
2 November 1979

34/20.

Third United Nations Conference on the Law
of the Sea 11

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973, 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
3483 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, 31/63 of 10
December 1976, 32/194 of 20 December 1977 and
33/17 of 10 November 1978,
Taking note of the letter dated 4 September 1979
from the President of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea to the President of the
General Assembly12 informing the latter that, on the
basis of a time-table for its work under which it was to
complete the preparation of a convention on the law
of the sea in 1980, the Conference had decided to recommend to the General Assembly that provision should
be made for it to hold one session, divided into two parts,
in 1980, apart from a possible final session at Caracas
for signature, and that the dates for the two parts of
the session would be from 27 February to 4 April in
New York and from 28 July to 29 August at Geneva,
Considering that the Conference discussed a recommendation regarding a study on the training of nationals
of developing countries in deep-sea mining but did not
have the tiQte to approve formally a decision in that
regard,
l. Approves the convening of the two parts of the
ninth session of the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea in New York for the period from 27
February to 4 April and at Geneva for the period from
28 July to 29 August 1980;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity
as Secretary-General of the Conference, to prepare a
study on the training needs of developing countries in
deep-sea mining and related activities for submission to
the Conference as early as possible in 1980.

61 st plenary meeting
9 November 1979
See also sect. X.B.1, decision 34/407.
Records of the General .Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, .Annexes, agenda item 22, document A/34/479.
11

12 Official
