A /76/PV.44

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

44th plenary meeting

Monday, 6 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the seventy-sixth
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/76/550)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution entitled “Credentials of representatives to
the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly”,
recommended by the Credentials Committee in
paragraph 15 of its report.
I now give the floor to the Chair of the Credentials
Committee, Ms. Anna Karin Eneström of Sweden.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): On behalf of the
Credentials Committee, I have the honour to introduce its
report concerning the credentials of the representatives
to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, as
contained in document A/76/550.
The Committee had before it two communications
concerning the representation of Myanmar to the
seventy-sixth session that indicated different individuals
as representatives and two communications concerning
the representation of Afghanistan to the seventysixth session that indicated different individuals as
representatives. The Committee deferred its decision
on the credentials pertaining to the representatives
of Myanmar and the credentials pertaining to the
representatives of Afghanistan to the seventy-sixth
session of the General Assembly.

Having considered the credentials of representatives
of other Member States to the seventy-sixth session at
its meeting on 1 December, the Credentials Committee
adopted without a vote a draft resolution accepting
those credentials. The Committee also recommended to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution
concerning the credentials of representatives to the
seventy-sixth session, as contained in paragraph 15 of
its report.
I would like to note that, since the days of the meeting
of the Credentials Committee, formal credentials in the
format required by rule 27 of the rules of procedure
were received by the Secretary of the Credentials
Committee regarding Italy and Ukraine.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the
members of the Committee and to the Secretariat for
facilitating our work.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution entitled “Credentials
of representatives to the seventy-sixth session of the
General Assembly”, recommended by the Credentials
Committee in paragraph 15 of its report.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 76/15).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-37215 (E)

*2137215*

A/76/PV.44

Mr. Fernandez De Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(spoke in Spanish): I take the floor on behalf of the
delegations of Australia, Brazil, Canada, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Georgia, Guatemala, Honduras, Israel, the
Marshall Islands, Paraguay, the Republic of Korea, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America and my country, Colombia,
for the purpose of noting in the official record that the
approval of the report of the Credentials Committee
(A/76/550) at the seventy-sixth session of the General
Assembly should not be interpreted as tacit recognition
by our countries of Nicolás Maduro Moros or his
designated representatives to the General Assembly.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation welcomes the work of the Credentials
Committee and thanks its Chair, the Permanent
Representative of Sweden, Ms. Anna Karin Eneström,
for the report of the Committee (A/76/550).
My delegation joined the consensus on resolution
76/15, recommended by the Committee; however, I
would like to express my delegation’s reservations
about the part of the report and the resolution that could
be construed as recognition of the Israeli regime.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the General Assembly for
having accepted the credentials of our delegation as the
sole and legitimate representatives of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. That decision is a recognition
of the sovereign will of our people to elect their leaders
in peace, as well as our inalienable right to selfdetermination and national independence.
Once again, the Government of the United States of
America and its allies have failed in their interventionist
policy against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela by
dissociating themselves from the adoption of resolution
76/15, which was approved by the Credentials
Committee, solely with regard to the credentials
of the constitutionally and democratically elected
Government of President Nicolás Maduro Moros.
The decision of the Government of the United
States of America and its allies to instrumentalize
the General Assembly to promote its policy of regime
change, even exerting pressure on other delegations to
join it in that venture, shows the persistent contempt
of that Government for the purposes and principles
contained in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations and its intention to turn the Organization into a
weapon of intervention to promote coups d’état against
2/27

06/12/2021

the legitimate authorities of any State Member of the
United Nations.
There is no rule in international law that allows
the Government of the United States of America and
its allies to intervene in the internal affairs of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, or any other country,
while ignoring the sovereignty of its people and the
authority of its legitimate representatives. Neither
does it have the legal authority to become the arbiter
of the political systems of the States Members of the
United Nations, or indeed of democracies worldwide.
In that sense, its behaviour as a supposed universal
decision-maker in the electoral processes of sovereign
States demonstrates its persistent non-compliance
with its international obligations and its intention to
destabilize political systems around the world.
The Charter of the United Nations does not allow the
instrumentalization of the General Assembly to ignore
the authorities of its members or to impose selective
criteria about democracy. The United States of America
and its allies are not the measure of the world. When
referring to relations between States and the question of
democracy, there is no normative order other than that
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. An alleged order based on rules not agreed by all
States and in which the United States of America and
its allies impose their rules of conduct is a violation
of the Charter of the Organization. The United States
cannot nationalize the rest of the world.
Finally, we thank Member States for accepting our
credentials, rejecting the colonial aggression against
our country and recognizing the will of our people.
Venezuela is, and will always be, free, independent
and sovereign.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
I call on the representative of Israel on a point
of order.
Mrs. Weiss (Israel): It is unfortunate that I have
to take the floor. I raised my hand to take the floor
after the statement made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran. We strongly object to the
statement made by Iran. We are a member, like every
other member, of this forum, and we expect equal
treatment and respect — and nothing less than that. In
its statement, the Iranian Government referred to us as
a regime, and that is not our proper name. A number of
21-37215

06/12/2021

States have made that objection in the past. We deserve
to be called by our proper name, and we expect that.
We would like it to be stated for the record that we were
called an improper name, and we expect our proper
name to be used in this forum.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 3 and of agenda item 3 as
a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 10
Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/321)
Draft resolution (A/76/L.17)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.17.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): I feel extremely honoured
that my country, Greece, is introducing draft resolution
A/76/L.17, entitled “Return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin”. We hope that
today the General Assembly will adopt this important
draft resolution by consensus, as was the case in
previous years.
I would like to thank both the Secretary-General
and the Director-General of UNESCO for their
comprehensive report (A/76/321) on the return or
restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin,
which outlines the most significant developments that
have taken place on the subject since 2018.
In the very recent past, cultural property has been
more targeted than ever before, in the light of the
unprecedented attacks against it in the course of the
armed conflicts in the Middle East and elsewhere. One
of the consequences of those conflicts is indeed the
looting of antiquities and their illicit trafficking and
trade. The fight against illicit trafficking in cultural
property is therefore a key element in the strategy for
eliminating the sources of any illicit profit-making,
including the financing of terrorism.
The draft resolution before the General Assembly
today expresses deep concern about the loss, destruction,
theft, pillage, illicit removal or misappropriation of

A/76/PV.44

cultural property from archaeological and other sites, in
particular in areas of armed conflict, while at the same
time recalling relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolutions 2199 (2015), 2253 (2015), 2322
(2016) and 2368 (2017), which highlight, among other
things, the direct linkage between illicit trafficking in
cultural property and terrorism financing.
The draft resolution also recalls Security Council
resolution 2347 (2017), which focuses exclusively on the
targeted destruction of cultural heritage in the context
of armed conflicts, as well as on protection against
looting and trafficking, notably by terrorist groups.
Furthermore, the draft resolution recognizes the
leading role of UNESCO in the fight against illicit
trafficking in cultural property and reaffirms the
importance of the 1970 Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property.
As highlighted in the report, the issue of the
return of, or restitution for, cultural property has
gained unprecedented visibility since 2018. That is a
significant development because one of the main aims
of the draft resolution, as made apparent by its title, is
the return of, or restitution for, cultural property that is
of fundamental spiritual, historical and cultural value
to the countries of origin.
In that context, all Member States are called on
to cooperate and take appropriate measures to ensure
that all actors involved in the trade in cultural property,
including, but not limited to, auction houses, art dealers,
art collectors, museum professionals and managers of
online marketplaces, provide verifiable documentation
of provenance and export certificates, as applicable,
related to any cultural property that is imported,
exported or offered for sale, including via the Internet.
Capacity-building is equally critical for the success
of the efforts undertaken with regard to the return of,
or restitution for, cultural property to the countries of
origin. Criminal prosecution and customs and border
controls are indispensable as are preventive measures,
including an appropriate framework for restitution.
In that context, the draft resolution underlines the
critical role of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, UNESCO and INTERPOL, while at the same
time focusing on the added value of the stolen works of
art databases provided by the respective international
organizations as a tool in the fight against illicit

21-372153/27

A/76/PV.44

trafficking in cultural property, of which all Member
States should make use of.
The international community shares a common
responsibility to protect cultural heritage, whether
tangible or intangible and in times of both peace and
war. Cultural property is not simply a testimony of a
nation’s path but also the reflection of its history and
heritage. Therefore, nations must be protected against
the loss, destruction, theft, pillage, illicit removal
or misappropriation of such property, which must
be restored to the historic national environment in
which it can best inspire the collective conscience of
humankind. That is precisely why the objectives of the
draft resolution should leave no State indifferent.
We would therefore like to invite all Member States
to co-sponsor the draft resolution, and we thank States
once again for their support.
Ms. Hassan (Egypt): Egypt would like to sincerely
thank the delegation of Greece for introducing this
important draft resolution (A/76/L.17) and for its efforts
in facilitating the consultations. Egypt joined the list of
main sponsors of the draft resolution in order to support
its cause. Egypt is one of the countries that is most keen
to protect cultural property, being prone to such crimes
since time immemorial.
Egypt stresses the importance of recovering
all stolen cultural property and requests the United
Nations to effectively contribute to achieving the goal
set out in Agenda 2063 of the African Union related to
the restoration of all cultural property. Egypt hopes that
the draft resolution, once adopted, and other processes
will increase the effectiveness of the implementation
of the 1970 UNESCO Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property.
In conclusion, Egypt welcomes the adoption by
UNESCO last year of the resolution entitled “Global
Priority Africa”, which supports the efforts of African
countries to restore their stolen cultural property.
Egypt will continue to take all the necessary measures
at the national and international levels to conserve and
preserve its cultural heritage.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Allow me to express my appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and the Director-General of UNESCO for
the report contained in document A/76/321. I also
wish to commend the Government of Greece for its
4/27

06/12/2021

able leadership in facilitating consultations on draft
resolution A/76/L.17, entitled “Return or restitution of
cultural property to the countries of origin”, of which
Iran is also a co-sponsor. My delegation would also like
to take this opportunity to re-emphasize the prominent
role of UNESCO in the fight against the illicit trafficking
in cultural property and encourage the reinforcement of
its efforts for the return of, or restitution for, cultural
objects to the countries of origin.
Cultural property, while truly considered the
common heritage of humankind, contribute to shaping
the cultural and national identity of countries of
origin and are a testament to their civilizations, values
and cultures. Ownership of cultural property is an
inalienable human right of the people of their soil.
Consequently, the international community shares a
common responsibility as well as a legal and ethical
obligation to not only preserve and protect cultural
property but also secure its return to the countries
of origin.
The removal of cultural property from their
countries of origin by whatever means, forms or
justifications, based on the general principles of
international law, natural law, conscience or human
values, is unacceptable and illegal. Therefore, the
obligation to return cultural property to countries of
origin neither necessarily emanates from international
legally binding instruments nor is limited to their
State parties.
In the same vein, the 1970 Convention on the
Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import,
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property
neither legitimizes any removal of cultural property
from its countries of origin before the entry into force
of that Convention nor exonerates any States, including
its parties, from the obligation to restitute for or return
the cultural objects stolen or illegally exported before
the entry into force of the Convention to the countries
of origin.
However, my delegation believes that, since its
entry into force, the 1970 Convention needs to be
reconsidered in line with the relevant developments,
including the articulation of the non-retroactive
application of the Convention, as well as the recognition
of the possession of cultural property by the people
of their soil following its removal from the countries
of origin by archaeological, ethnological or natural
science missions.
21-37215

06/12/2021

Such removals took place during a period of
international relations when most of the countries of
origin were under colonial domination and the political
influence of foreign Powers — and for various reasons,
including the lack of development and access to
knowledge — and were not aware of the great value of
their cultural property. Furthermore, cultural property
should not be subjected to any confiscation or law
enforcement action or unilateral coercive measures, as
they are a common heritage of humankind.
The illegal international cross-border movement
of cultural objects remains an ever-increasing concern
for countries of origin, including my country. As the
Secretary-General indicates in his report, “threats to
movable cultural heritage have continued to increase
and have taken new forms” (A/76/321, para. 56). In
addition to the traditional main catastrophic causes
leading to the illicit trafficking in cultural property,
such as conflicts, occupation and foreign intervention,
trafficking and trade through illegal markets by
terrorist groups with the aim of financing terrorism has
emerged as one of the main vehicles for the trafficking
in cultural property that has proliferated in recent years,
especially after the creation of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, also known as Da’esh, and Al-Qaida.
My delegation expresses its satisfaction with
the inclusion in the draft resolution before us today
of a proposal to counter the financing of terrorism
through the illicit trafficking in cultural property and
the obligations of States to return those items to the
countries of origin, as indicated in the seventh review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In that regard, we also wish to alert the international
community to the illegal excavations and threats
facing the cultural heritage in Palestine, especially the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, by the occupying regime of Israel and
its attempts to destroy and change its functions. While
that act constitutes a flagrant violation of international
law, it will also lead to the escalation of the already
volatile situation in the Middle East, which is itself the
result of the prolonged occupation of Palestine.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is of the view that
only through international cooperation can we combat
the illicit trafficking in cultural property and ensure
restitution or its return to the countries of origin. In that
context, our proposal on the establishment of a joint
action plan by countries of the Ancient Civilizations
Forum, as well as countries of origin that are victims

A/76/PV.44

of the illicit trafficking in cultural property, will help
coordinate and consolidate efforts to combat the illicit
trafficking in cultural objects and their return, or
restitution for, to the countries of origin.
Finally, given the important role that cultural
heritage plays in the dialogue and peaceful co-existence
among nations, the Islamic Republic of Iran expresses
its readiness to promote the culture of peace through
cooperation with, and the extension of, its technical
assistance to other countries, especially those that host
the ancient Iranian civilization and cultural heritage.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): At the outset, my delegation
would like to commend the delegation of Greece for
its efforts in facilitating draft resolution A/76/L.17,
entitled “Return or restitution of cultural property to
the countries of origin”. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report on this important
matter (A/76/321). Cambodia is pleased to co-sponsor
the draft resolution.
As far as the illicit trafficking in cultural property
from its country of origin is concerned, Cambodia urges
all Member States to fully implement the draft resolution
once adopted, as well as other relevant resolutions. All
appropriated cultural property must be returned to
the countries of origin for the sake of dignity, mutual
understanding and respect. All relevant stakeholders
should make greater efforts to cease trading in cultural
property. That is the key that will prevent the ultimate
separation of cultural property from its origins.
Cambodia has maintained a deep-rooted cultural
identity in South-East Asia for centuries until the
present time. However, over several decades of civil war,
Cambodia experienced the loss of cultural property to
other countries, including into private collections. We
encourage museums and private collectors with Khmer
cultural property to repatriate Cambodian treasures
back to their homeland. Cambodia will continue to
gather extensive evidence and provenance to document
the looting of our treasures and improper possession
by others.
We appreciate the efforts and collaboration of
the Government of the United States of America for
the return to Cambodia of our cultural property from
the Denver Art Museum and other locations. That
partnership has opened up an opportunity for the
return of the souls of our Khmer ancestors, which
were removed from their motherland during war and
conflict. Cambodia will continue to work closely with

21-372155/27

A/76/PV.44

the United States Government for the return of other
important works of art to Cambodia and welcomes
similar invaluable gestures from other countries in
the future.
We commend UNESCO’s work and can measure
with pride the distance covered by that organization.
UNESCO has been able to evolve and embrace all issues
and meet all challenges by offering global cohesion.
We firmly believe that the invaluable cooperation
between Cambodia and UNESCO will further enhance
assistance to restore Cambodian cultural heritage
and identity and ensure that Khmer antiquities are
repatriated, to be enjoyed and cherished by Cambodians
and international visitors alike. The recent presence
in Paris on 12 November of His Majesty Preah Bat
Samdech Preah Boromneath Norodom Sihamoni,
King of Cambodia, during the forty-first General
Conference of UNESCO, is the best testimony to the
unwavering commitment of the Cambodian people to
that irreplaceable organization.
In conclusion, Cambodia has reaffirmed its
commitment to the implementation of relevant
resolutions, as well as its commitment to promote
cooperation with all parties concerned in order to cease
all forms of illicit trafficking in cultural property and
fully cooperate in the restitution of all cultural property
to the respective countries of origin.

06/12/2021

While such actions culminate in uprooting the
cultural and ethnological connection of the local
populations from their lands, they are not only directed
against the people of the country where they are
perpetrated but also against our shared history and the
cultural identity of humankind as a whole.
Much like trafficking in arms or drugs, the illicit
trafficking in cultural property now constitutes a global
industry. The growing dimensions of that crime compel
us to redouble our efforts to combat it, both within and
between States, both in armed conflicts and in times of
peace. Whether or not we succeed in better protecting
cultural property depends on wide‐reaching changes
in attitudes.
Illicit trafficking in cultural property is a crime
against all of us, not just the specific civilization or
country whose heritage is vandalized. The effective
implementation of the international legal framework
is a sine qua non for the success of our efforts. The
draft resolution before us today is a positive step in that
direction, as it contributes to bridging the gap between
legislation and cooperation at the domestic and the
international levels.

At the outset, I wish to express our sincere
appreciation to the delegation of Greece for once again
introducing draft resolution A/76/L.17, on the return of,
or restitution for, cultural property to the countries of
origin, which we have traditionally co-sponsored.

As a long-time victim of the pillage and theft of
incredibly large numbers of artefacts of historical,
archaeological and religious significance, Cyprus has
been struggling for many years to trace and repatriate
its cultural property. In the past four decades alone,
more than 60,000 cultural and religious objects of
immense historical value have been looted from Cyprus’
occupied areas and sold in black markets all over the
world. Under international law, the responsibility for
their return rests with the occupying Power. While we
remain dedicated to locating and repatriating our stolen
treasures, that is not a battle we can fight alone, and we
continue to rely on the efforts of other States and on
robust international cooperation.

The pillaging of, and illicit trafficking in, cultural
property has always had far-reaching proportions.
What we now witness, however, despite our significant
advances in the normative framework for the protection
of cultural property, is the deliberate destruction of
unique monuments of global historical and cultural
significance. As an international community, we have
proven unsuccessful in stopping that, just as we have
proven ineffective in preventing the unacceptable,
arbitrary alteration of the status of ecumenical cultural
and religious landmarks.

As a result of our experiences, Cyprus has always
sought to contribute effectively to international efforts
to combat illicit trafficking and ensure the repatriation
of cultural property. For that reason, Cyprus took the
lead in concluding the Nicosia Convention on Offences
relating to Cultural Property, a unique universal
mechanism to protect the common cultural heritage of
humankind and the only international treaty aiming
to prevent and combat cultural property crimes by
providing for their criminalization. The Nicosia
Convention can be instrumental in international efforts

Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): The protection of
cultural property has long been a priority for Cyprus,
given its rich historical, cultural and religious heritage,
as well as the loss of a very significant amount of our
cultural property since well before our independence.

6/27

21-37215

06/12/2021

to address legal gaps with regard to the prevention
and prosecution of trafficking in cultural property.
We invite all Member States to consider acceding to
the Convention.
At the same time, we welcome other significant
developments in the international arena. I refer to
Security Council resolution 2347 (2017), adopted
unanimously in March 2017, which was a historic
milestone in the international efforts to protect cultural
heritage. We would have liked to have seen additional
work by the Council, following up and building on that
important resolution.
It is important for the Council to be consistent,
even if the members that championed an issue are no
longer serving on the Council. Equally important is the
emergence of relevant case law. The landmark decision
of the International Criminal Court in the case The
Prosecutor v. Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi in 2016 paves
the way for more efficient enforcement of international
justice with respect to cultural heritage crimes.
Bringing such cases to justice serves to enhance public
awareness on the seriousness of international cultural
heritage crimes.
The protection of cultural heritage is an obligation
that touches on many areas of our work at the United
Nations: peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights. The destruction of cultural heritage
and the illicit trafficking in cultural property not only
impair the preservation of collective history and the
safeguarding of cultural identity but also hinder the
realization of economic, political and social rights and
the development of a global civic society. We need a
more integrated approach through the establishment of
multilevel mechanisms on a local, regional and global
scale, leading to a system of global governance for the
protection and enjoyment of cultural heritage.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
permanent delegation of Greece for introducing the
important draft resolution contained in document
A/76/L.17, entitled “Return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin”. My country has
joined the list of countries co-sponsoring the draft
resolution as we believe in its importance and relevance
to the threat faced by our cultural heritage.
The attacks on cultural property experienced in
a number of Middle Eastern countries, particularly in
Syria, Iraq and occupied Palestine, constitute stark

A/76/PV.44

examples of the systematic targeting of international
cultural heritage and common human values. Over
the past 10 years, my country, which is known for its
civilization, cultural heritage and rich history, has faced
a savage terrorist campaign targeting humans and sites.
Terrorist organizations, proxy militias and their
sponsors have targeted public and private property as
well as infrastructure and service facilities. Historic
areas listed by UNESCO as World Heritage Sites have
not been spared. Those groups have wreaked havoc,
destroying cultural sites while financing their terrorist
activities through trafficking illegally in archaeological
monuments. They have sometimes destroyed such
monuments under the influence of extremist thoughts
or distorted explanations of religious interpretations.
Everyone saw the terrorists of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh destroying the historic Arch
of Triumph and the Temple of Baalshamin in Palmyra,
in addition to booby-trapping its amphitheatre. The
Da’esh and Al-Nusra Front terrorists targeted the
monasteries of Maaloula, the Great Umayyad Mosque
in Aleppo and Khalid Bin Al-Walid Mosque in Homs.
They targeted Syrian archaeologists such as the late
Khaled Al-Asaad. They exhumed the graves of historical
figures, philosophers, scientists and clergymen.
It is sad to see all those crimes being committed
while many Western countries remain silent and impede
any action to support Syria in the preservation of its
heritage and the restitution of its looted monuments.
The result of the sponsorship by some countries of
terrorist organizations, including by sending foreign
terrorist fighters to them, is that the border areas that
are out of control of the Syrian State have become a
corridor for smuggling artefacts and other looted
material, such as oil, agricultural crops and properties,
which are transferred to Europe and other countries
with the complicity and facilitation of Turkey and its
forces present illegally on the territories of my country.
The Turkish forces have themselves excavated
and plundered many monument sites and mounds in
areas they occupy in the north and north-west of my
country. They have looted archaeological monuments
and smuggled them into Turkish territory, and then into
black markets in Europe and the United States through
organized crime networks. Such practices include
plundering and destroying historical sites and mounds
in the Afrin area during the search for historical
treasures and burials; excavations at the Prophet Hori

21-372157/27

A/76/PV.44

site, Tal Zraf keh and Brad, as well as many other
historical locations; and destroying scores of other
historical sites and mounds, including Tal Obeidan,
Arab Sheikho, Deir Sawwan, Jandarees village, Tal
Ain Dara, Tal Esteer, Ain Hajar and Kafroun.
In that connection, my country expresses its great
concern at the failure on the part of the international
community to address the phenomenon of illegal
trafficking in cultural property and ensure that it is
not used to finance terrorism. We call for an end to the
disregard by some members of the Organization of their
international obligations, including Security Council
resolution 2199 (2015), and we call for those countries
that sponsor terrorism to be held accountable for their
crimes of looting cultural property.
My country’s delegation stresses the need for
Member States to make every effort to return stolen
Syrian cultural property to its original place in Syria.
In that context, we call on those countries to follow the
example of cooperation between the Syrian Government
represented by the cooperation between its Permanent
Mission in Geneva and the Swiss authorities, which led
to the signing of an agreement a few days ago to return
three monuments stolen from one of the historical sites
in Palmyra registered by UNESCO in 1980 as a World
Heritage Site.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation stresses
the importance of Member States complying with
the provisions of draft resolution A/76/L.17, which
emphasizes the urgent need to address the threat of
terrorism against global heritage and the importance
of international cooperation and coordination with
the affected countries and UNESCO to deal with the
threats against our global heritage, particularly as a
result of terrorist attacks.
We stress once again our full right to the return
of all looted cultural property, in accordance with the
UNESCO 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property and the 1995
Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural
Objects of the International Institute for the Unification
of Private Law.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
8/27

06/12/2021

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.17, entitled “Return or restitution of
cultural property to the countries of origin”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.17 and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/76/L.17: Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belize, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, the Central
African Republic, China, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Djibouti, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
the Gambia, Georgia, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Jordan, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta,
the Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, North Macedonia,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the
Russian Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Yemen
and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.17?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/16).

A/76/L.17

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position on resolution 76/16, may I
remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States.
21-37215

06/12/2021

Ms. Eyrich (United States of America): The United
States would like to thank the delegation of Greece for
its able facilitation of resolution 76/16.
The United States welcomes resolutions at the
General Assembly and other international forums that
draw attention to the important issue of trafficking in
cultural property. We believe strongly that the protection
of cultural heritage in countries of origin is not only the
right thing to do for moral reasons, but it also helps
promote regional stability and good governance.
We also encourage States to modernize their efforts
to disrupt cultural property trafficking by taking into
account the rights of indigenous peoples to the use and
control of their ceremonial objects and to the repatriation
of their human remains and by working to enable
access to and/or the repatriation of human remains and
ceremonial objects that have been trafficked, consistent
with the aspirations of the United Nations Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position on resolution 76/16.
Before calling on representatives who wish to
speak in exercise of the right of reply, may I remind
members that statements in the exercise of the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and to five minutes for the second and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Weiss (Israel): Israel joined the consensus on
this important resolution (resolution 76/16) but finds it
unfortunate that the Islamic Republic of Iran, and then
Syria, decided to sidetrack this debate for the purposes
of politicization.

A/76/PV.44

very Hall, the Jewish people’s deep and long-standing
historic ties to Jerusalem and the holy sites.
Indeed, Iran failed to mention Har Habayit, which
is the Jewish name of the Temple Mount. Har Habayit
is in Jerusalem, and it is Judaism’s holy site. We pray to
that beacon of our cultural heritage three times a day.
Israel recognizes the significance of Jerusalem and its
holy sites to all three Abrahamic faiths. We would hope
that other States would do the same, particularly as we
discuss the importance of cultural property, a principle
that Israel certainly respects and to which it adheres.
Mrs. Inanç Örnekol (Turkey): I am obliged to take
the floor in reply to the statements of representatives
who raised baseless allegations against my country.
However, allow me to begin by expressing our
appreciation to the delegation of Greece for introducing
and facilitating resolution 76/16, entitled “Return
or restitution of cultural property to the countries
of origin”. Turkey is pleased to have once again
co-sponsored this important resolution.
The illicit trade in cultural property continues to be
a source of grave concern. Despite the awareness-raising
and capacity-building efforts to address the challenge,
threats to cultural heritage have been increasing and
have taken on new forms. Removing artefacts from
their natural and historical context is a crime committed
against humankind. Cultural properties that have
survived thousands of years from past civilizations and
been entrusted to our care continue the common history
of humankind.

First, Israel wishes to state again for the record that
we object to the reference to our State as a so-called
regime and expect to be addressed in this forum and
throughout the United Nations system by our proper
formal name, as required under the Charter of the
United Nations for all Member States. We expect no
less than respect and equal treatment.

Situations of conflict or instability further
aggravate the risk of destruction or illicit trafficking in
cultural heritage. The actions of terrorist organizations,
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, also
known as Da’esh, have set an unfortunate example
of that. We strongly condemn the brutal obliteration
of archaeological sites, museums, places of worship
and other religious places, in addition to books
and manuscripts, which are irreplaceable treasures
of humankind.

Secondly, it is ironic that in its statement Iran first
ignored the reality on the ground in Jerusalem, where all
religious faiths have access to the holy sites — something
that was certainly not the case before our holy capital
was reunified. Moreover, apropos the recognition of the
value of cultural property, it is ironic that Iran denied
in its statement, as others have recently done in this

In the face of those unfortunate developments,
Turkey has reinforced all necessary measures to
prevent the illegal transfer of historical artefacts from
their country of origin. Among other precautions,
Turkey regularly conducts import-control operations
along its south and south-east borders in order to
prevent the smuggling of cultural property. Moreover,

21-372159/27

A/76/PV.44

06/12/2021

in close collaboration with UNESCO, INTERPOL and
the World Customs Organization, all governorships in
both State-run and private museums and collectors are
reminded on a daily basis of the risk of illicit trafficking
of goods from neighbouring countries.

does not have the right to speak in the name of the
Syrian people. The Syrian Government is the only one
to speak in the name of its people, while neither Turkey,
nor its leader, nor its President have the right to speak in
the name of the Syrian people.

In that context, the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2199 (2015), of which Turkey is a
co-sponsor, is being meticulously observed. Against
that background, we categorically deny the unfounded
allegations of the representative of the Syrian regime,
which lost its legitimacy long ago. I would like to say
that those are desperate attempts to divert attention
from the enormous destruction the regime continues
to inflict on its own people — and nothing more.
Coming from a regime that has massacred and tortured
the Syrian people before the eyes of the international
community for more than a decade, the allegations have
no credibility, and we refute them in their entirety.

Everyone in this Hall knows from United Nations
reports, including from a report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Security
Council, that thousands of foreign terrorist fighters
have come to my country, Syria, and not by parachutes
or spaceships but most of the time over the TurkishSyrian border under Turkish supervision. The Turkish
intelligence service facilitated the entry of those foreign
terrorist fighters to Syria.

As for the baseless allegations related to Turkey
made by the Greek Cypriot representative, those
comments are devoid of value or meaning as far as
Turkey is concerned. Regarding the issues they raised
concerning the island, that delegation should be
responded to by their counterpart, namely, the Turkish
Cypriot side, whose voice unfortunately cannot be
heard in this Hall due to the occupation of their seats by
the Greek Cypriot Administration since 1963.
Mr. Ghorbanpour Najafabadi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): I wish to exercise my right of reply with regard
to what was said about my delegation earlier. I would
like to inform the General Assembly of the illegal
excavations and threats faced by the cultural heritage
of Palestine, especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
I would like to emphasize that it is not just Al-Aqsa
Mosque; there are other sites. In particular, the threat
to the Al-Aqsa Mosque by the occupying regime of the
Palestinian territories is a fact that has been recognized
in various reports submitted to the Assembly. I would
like to once again alert the international community to
the continuation of that policy, which will definitely
endanger international peace and security. It is the
responsibility of all States to prevent that malicious
policy and behaviour.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We say very clearly — and I use her official
title, in line with the rules and procedures of the United
Nations and in the presence of the President of the
General Assembly — that the representative of Turkey
10/27

Of course, when we talk about support for
terrorism and investing in it, Turkey, with its President
and Government, is undoubtedly one of the main
sponsors of terrorists in Syria and the region. As noted
previously, Turkey facilitated the entry into Syria of
tens of thousands of foreign terrorists. Turkey still
provides all kinds of support to the Al-Nusra Front
and its affiliates of terrorist organizations, which have
killed Syrians. Along with forced displacement, Turkey
also adopts a policy of making everything Turkish in
the territories that it occupies in Syria.
The list of violations committed by Turkey is a long
one, but I will not elaborate.
Ms. Panteli (Cyprus): I take the floor to respond to
the statement by the representative of Turkey. I have to
stress the importance of according the proper respect
to all Member States in this Hall and addressing them
by their proper names. The Republic of Cyprus is the
only recognized State on the island under international
law, and the international community has no doubts
about that.
With regard to the protection of cultural property in
Cyprus, I note that Turkey has not denied the fact that,
due to its occupation, the cultural property of Cyprus
has been looted and sold abroad. There is actually
substantial case law in courts all over the world that
reflects our efforts to repatriate the stolen cultural
property of Cyprus.
Despite the bicommunal efforts on the island to
restore destroyed monuments, the damage is extensive,
and the vast majority of invaluable articles of movable
cultural property remains to be recovered.
21-37215

06/12/2021

Mrs. Inanç Örnekol (Turkey): As to the
hallucinatory statement made by the representative of
the Syrian regime, I will repeat: I do not consider him
as my legitimate counterpart. His comments here are
an affront to the millions of Syrians who have suffered
countless crimes at the hands of the regime. Therefore,
we will not honour his delusional accusations with
a response.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The representative of Turkey insists on
referring to us as the representatives of a regime. That
does not concern me, because I comply with the rules
and procedures of the United Nations.
First, she said that we were not her counterpart.
I partly agree with her that we are not on an equal
footing. I represent a Government that fights terrorism,
whereas she represents a Government that sponsors and
supports terrorism. I therefore partly agree with her
that we are not equals.
Secondly, we do not seek recognition from a
terrorist and criminal Government. Our legitimacy
comes from the Charter of the United Nations and the
United Nations.
It appears that the representative of Turkey wants
us to continue to mention the crimes committed by her
Government, as represented by President Recep Tayyip
Erdoğan. Turkey has adopted a policy of collective
punishment against 2 million civilians in the city
of Al-Hasakah, along with scores of neighbouring
villages, because they reject the Turkish occupation.
Turkey deliberately and repeatedly cuts off the
water supply of those people. The Turkish occupation
forces and their proxies in terrorist organizations have
suspended the pumping of water from the Allouk water
station and its water wells more than 20 times and for
different periods of time. That caused suffering to our
people in Al-Hasakah and health risks linked to the
spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic. I would
like to remind those present that such behaviour follows
the same criminal approach adopted by the terrorists
who cut off the water supply of millions of civilians in
Damascus in 2017.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 10?
It was so decided.

A/76/PV.44

Agenda item 16
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/357)
Draft resolutions (A/76/L.19 and A/76/L.21)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.19.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): On behalf of 91
co-sponsors and counting, I have the honour to introduce
the flagship draft resolution entitled “Follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace” (A/76/L.19).
The adoption of the draft resolution this year
assumes greater relevance and urgency as we continue
to grapple with the unprecedented, multifaceted
challenges brought on by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. This year, in addition to
technical updates we have also included three new
paragraphs — the thirteenth and thirty-first preambular
paragraphs and paragraph 11 — to reflect COVID-19era realities and other important developments.
First, those additions include a recognition of the
rising inequalities in income, opportunities, access
to information and communications technologies,
health coverage and social protection, as well as new
challenges in health-care services and vaccines,
deepening gender inequality and a surge in hate speech,
stigmatization, racism and xenophobia, which all stand
to threaten peace.
Secondly, the draft resolution takes note of the
United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate
Speech, which calls for partnerships with new and
traditional media to promote the values of tolerance,
non-discrimination, pluralism and freedom of
opinion and expression, as well as to address hate
speech narratives.
Finally, the new paragraph 11 calls upon States
to promote the values of a culture of peace for an
inclusive, resilient and sustainable recovery from the
COVID-19 pandemic.
We sincerely thank all delegations for their active
and constructive participation in this year’s informal
consultations on the draft resolution. We deeply
appreciate the spirit of flexibility shown by all and the

21-3721511/27

A/76/PV.44

valuable inputs, which have certainly enriched the draft
resolution before us.
The draft resolution welcomes the convening by
the President of the General Assembly on 7 September
of the High-level Forum on the Culture of Peace, on
the theme “Transformative role of the culture of peace:
promoting resilience and inclusion in post-COVID
recovery”, which saw rich participation by Member
States, civil society and other stakeholders. In keeping
with tradition, the draft resolution requests the President
of the General Assembly to convene the annual Highlevel Forum on the Culture of Peace in September 2022.
We look forward to working closely with the Office of
the President of the General Assembly to make next
year’s event yet another success.
The initiative on the culture of peace, which began
in 1999 as a modest venture, has over time and with
the mandate of the Assembly grown in relevance and
evolved into a dominant theme, finding larger footprints
and recognition in all major United Nations discourse.
In the rapidly changing global situation, it has proved
to be a useful means to complement the obligations of
the Charter of the United Nations for maintaining peace
in the world.
For the past 21 years, the General Assembly has
endorsed the enduring value of a culture of peace and
adopted the flagship draft resolution by consensus.
Today we expect the same strong endorsement from the
Assembly. We sincerely thank those delegations that
have already co-sponsored the draft resolution, and we
look forward to more delegations joining from the floor
ahead of its adoption in order to send a strong message
to the world of the abiding commitment to peace of the
United Nations and the universal appeal of a culture
of peace.
I wish to conclude, Mr. President, by thanking
you and your Office for your continued support for the
follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.21.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): It is my honour and
privilege to join the Permanent Representative of
Pakistan in introducing draft resolution A/76/L.21,
entitled “Promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace”.
12/27

06/12/2021

We thank all Member States for their active
participation and constructive input during the five
informal consultations and about 20 intensive bilateral
negotiations conducted over the past few weeks.
Both the Philippines and Pakistan endeavoured to
accommodate the views, concerns, contributions,
suggestions and input expressed by many delegations
during our consultations, which were conducted in an
open, inclusive and transparent manner. We believe that,
in having done so, we have furthered the objectives of
the draft resolution, which we are honoured to submit
for the seventeenth straight year.
Since November 2004, Pakistan and the
Philippines have co-sponsored a draft resolution
under the agenda item “Culture of peace”, affirming
that mutual understanding and interreligious dialogue
constitute important dimensions of the dialogue among
civilizations and of the culture of peace. The annual
draft resolution has two core objectives.
The first objective is to promote interreligious
and intercultural dialogue as an important tool
in efforts aimed at achieving peace and stability
and the full realization of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The second objective is to strengthen mechanisms
and action for the promotion of a genuine and constructive
dialogue across cultural and religious divides.
For this year’s negotiations, we witnessed creative
efforts by delegations to agree on creative merger
proposals, which contributed to a healthy exchange of
ideas. Moreover, realizing that consistent constructive
engagement and the challenge of addressing certain
issues, the main sponsors have agreed to biennialize
the draft resolution, which can also be viewed as our
contribution to the revitalization agenda. That proposal
will give us enough time to evaluate the draft resolution
in order to help restore more faithfully the original
objective of promoting interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, while focusing on mechanisms and
programmes that will help achieve the draft resolution’s
core objective.
Today our world faces complex challenges
exacerbated by the pandemic, which not only cause
immense human suffering and economic loss but also
hinder greater socioeconomic cooperation. We also
continue to witness a growing trend of xenophobia and
religious intolerance, underpinned by the politics of
identity, as well as the emergence of extremist ideologies
21-37215

06/12/2021

A/76/PV.44

in different parts of the world. As States Members of
the United Nations, we need to continue to build on our
shared values and shared aspirations by strengthening
mechanisms and actions through constructive dialogue,
better understanding and a truly global culture of
peace. In that context, we underline the important role
of UNESCO and the invaluable contributions of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue at the national,
regional and international levels.

and confidence-building, such as the Treaty of Amity
and Cooperation in South-East Asia and the Treaty on
the South-East Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone, as
well as ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the ASEANPlus One, ASEAN-Plus Three, the East Asia Summit,
the ASEAN Regional Forum and the ASEAN Defence
Ministers Meeting-Plus, in order to build mutual trust
and confidence and reinforce an open, transparent,
inclusive and rules-based regional architecture with
ASEAN at the centre.

Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica), Vice-President, took
the Chair.

ASEAN is also committed to realizing a rulesbased community that fully adheres to ASEAN
fundamental principles, shared values and norms, as
well as the principles of international law governing
the peaceful conduct of relations among States. In 2017,
the ASEAN leaders adopted the Declaration on Culture
of Prevention for a Peaceful, Inclusive, Resilient,
Healthy and Harmonious Society. ASEAN’s culture of
prevention is our contribution to the fuller development
of the culture of peace.

There should be no doubt as to the solidarity
of Member States in embracing a culture of peace,
a culture of partnerships and a culture of inclusive
societies. On behalf of the Permanent Missions of
Pakistan and the Philippines, I appeal to all Member
States to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.21, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): I am
honoured to deliver this statement on behalf of the
States members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN).
At the outset, ASEAN would like to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
under this agenda item (A/76/357). We are pleased
to note the continued priority placed by the United
Nations on the agenda, making the promotion of a
culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue increasingly the business of the entire United
Nations system.
South-East Asia is one of the most diverse
regions in the world, with a population of more than
640 million people alongside various ethnicities and
political, economic and social systems. ASEAN has
continued to pursue a culture of peace, guided by the
ASEAN Charter, in order to maintain and enhance
peace, security and stability and further strengthen
peace-oriented values in the region, in line with the
Bangkok Declaration of 1967.
ASEAN has embarked on a journey to build and foster
a caring, cohesive, equitable and peaceful community
based on three pillars: the ASEAN Political-Security
Community, the ASEAN Economic Community and
the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community. ASEAN has
initiated several frameworks to promote cooperation

The culture of prevention focuses on six key
priorities: promoting a culture of peace and intercultural
understanding, promoting a culture of respect for all,
promoting a culture of good governance at all levels,
promoting a culture of resilience and care for the
environment, promoting a culture of healthy lifestyles
and promoting a culture that supports the values
of moderation.
In March, Brunei Darussalam hosted the fourth
meeting of the ASEAN Working Group on a Culture
of Prevention. The meeting considered post-pandemic
recovery efforts and emphasized the significance of
the implementation of the Declaration on a Culture
of Prevention in order to respond to and address
challenges that hinder peace, security and sustainable
developments in the region.
At its core, multilateralism is a key component
of promoting a culture of peace. That was further
reaffirmed during the thirty-eighth ASEAN Summit,
held under the chairmanship of Brunei Darussalam
last month, when the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration
on Upholding Multilateralism was adopted. The
Declaration, among other things, underscored the
commitment to upholding and promoting multilateral
cooperation, anchored in international law, towards
achieving peace, security, stability and prosperity in
the region and beyond.

21-3721513/27

A/76/PV.44

ASEAN is committed to continue working with the
United Nations, particularly through the Plan of Action
to Implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between ASEAN and the United
Nations (2021-2025). The Plan of Action reflects our
commitment to continue upholding multilateralism and
cooperation in the evolving regional architecture, as
well as to contribute to the maintenance and promotion
of sustainable and inclusive peace and stability in the
region and beyond. We are confident that the Plan
of Action will contribute to greater collaboration
between ASEAN and the United Nations, including
to realize the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in a
complementary manner.
We welcome the invaluable role of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations in promoting intercultural and
interreligious dialogue and greater understanding and
respect among civilizations, cultures, religions and
beliefs. We recognize its important role in coordinating
the United Nations Plan of Action to Safeguard
Religious Sites.
ASEAN continues to support the Security Council’s
women and peace and security agenda, as well as the
youth, peace and security agenda, including through
the adoption of the ASEAN Regional Forum Joint
Statement on Promoting the Youth, Peace and Security
Agenda at the twenty-eighth ASEAN Regional Forum,
held on 6 August. The ASEAN Institute for Peace and
Reconciliation has also been conducting activities
with relevant ASEAN bodies and ASEAN external
partners to promote a culture of peace and moderation
in ASEAN. The ASEAN Institute for Peace and
Reconciliation also continues to support the ASEAN
Women for Peace Registry to implement the ASEAN
Leaders’ Joint Statement on Promoting Women, Peace
and Security.
As a regional organization, we remain committed
to engaging in meaningful dialogue with our external
partners to help foster a global culture of peace
through relevant ASEAN-led mechanisms. We share
the aspiration of the international community to
achieve global peace, security and prosperity through
multilateralism, mutual respect, tolerance, preventive
diplomacy, confidence-building, reconciliation and
upholding the rule of law.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm ASEAN’s
commitment to promoting a culture of peace and its
14/27

06/12/2021

readiness to work with the international community
towards building an effective and inclusive multilateral
system, anchored by the United Nations.
Ms. Hussain (Maldives): It is heartening to once
again join the annual consensus, now in its twentysecond year, to reassert, reaffirm and renew the
dedication of Member States to building a culture
of peace.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (A/76/357) on this agenda item and to
extend our appreciation to UNESCO for coordinating
the preparation of the report with the various United
Nations entities.
When we adopted the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace by consensus in 1999, we
lived in a very different world. Yet the notion that we are
engaged in a collective commitment to build a culture
of peace persists, and that shows how fundamental it is
to the achievement of any human endeavour.
What the Secretary-General’s report makes clear is
that peace is not a goal that can be achieved by itself.
It is built on foundations such as a healthy environment
that provides healthy food, water and clean air, as well
as adequate housing, health care, education and social
needs that are met. At the multilateral level, we must
use our foundational institutions, such as the United
Nations, including the Assembly, to resolve differences
before they become disputes.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report,
the coronavirus disease has amplified the existing
inequalities within and among societies and
particularly affects the most vulnerable. That includes
education. As schools around the world suddenly
shifted to remote-based learning, it served as a spark
of innovation for some; but for others, it widened an
already existing socioeconomic and digital divide,
which must be bridged to in order for us not to leave the
most vulnerable disconnected.
With our increasingly online world, we must
contend with the disturbing role that social media
has played in fuelling discrimination, racism and
islamophobia and in exacerbating polarization. We
must ensure that online free speech is not used as an
instrument to incite hatred or violence. Steps must be
taken to build safe, collective online spaces. We must
build an online culture of peace that echoes the words
and commitments made here today.
21-37215

06/12/2021

Climate change also poses a significant threat to
the Maldives and other small island developing States.
Climate change encompasses slow onset events such as
sea-level rise and erosion, which displace populations
and undermine peace. What makes climate change
particularly distressing is that it is also a threat multiplier
that exacerbates existing challenges, including extreme
weather events. Those events can set back decades of
development gains.
Climate change undermines our ability to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals and our capacity to
lay solid foundations for enduring peace. We welcome
the outcomes of the twenty-sixth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, held in Glasgow, but the message is
loud and clear — we urgently need to do more. Climate
change places stress not just on our environments but
also on our people and social systems. Adapting to its
effects consumes an ever-increasing portion of our
fiscal and human capacity.
We must remain vigilant against the compounding
and ever-increasing impacts of climate change. Those
impacts will undermine our food and water security
as well as the global food chains that provide the
necessities of life; if we do not act with foresight and
solidarity, they will be a threat to peace everywhere.
The Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace rightly identifies Governments,
civil society, media and individuals as key actors for
its effective implementation. In the same spirit as the
President’s presidency of hope, peace requires inclusive
and thoughtful engagement among all stakeholders
of society, including Governments, youth groups,
businesses and religious and cultural leaders. Only
through open dialogue can we build a shared purpose
and understanding.
We are a small island nation located in the heart
of the Indian Ocean. For centuries, that has given us
the opportunity to interact with people of different
cultures. Through those engagements, we have
also co-opted elements of their cultures into our
own — thereby making ours richer and more peaceful.
Our commitment to a culture of peace flows from
our core values, prioritizing development and peace.
The Administration of President Ibrahim Mohamed
Solih has further enhanced those priorities, including
through the restoration, revival and protection of our
culture and heritage for future generations.

A/76/PV.44

In conclusion, peace is not a given; it is something
we must constantly work towards. Even when we achieve
it, we must continue to nurture and protect it, for as
we overcome one challenge another is on the horizon.
Therefore, as we mark the twenty-second year of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace, let us with renewed vigour and hope assert and
reaffirm our commitment to build a culture of peace,
a more tolerant global society and a harmonious and
peaceful world for generations to come.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador welcomes the convening of
this important debate of the General Assembly on the
culture of peace, which is being held once again in the
context of challenges exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In that framework, El
Salvador thanks the Secretary-General for his report
(A/76/357) on the promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace, which allows us to take
stock of the progress we have made and challenges
we face today in our continuing efforts to build peace,
resilience, reconciliation and trust.
We also wish to thank Bangladesh, the Philippines
and Pakistan for their able conduct of the negotiations
of the important draft resolutions that the General
Assembly will consider today (A/76/L.19 and
A/76/L.21), which El Salvador supports.
We are all aware that the current crisis we face
has amplified inequalities within and among societies.
Beyond that, the pandemic has generated additional
difficulties for the promotion of a culture of peace,
among them increased discrimination, instability and
violence. Their widespread repercussions have seriously
jeopardized the progress achieved in promoting a culture
of peace, human rights and sustainable development.
The crisis has also clearly shown that, today more
than ever, it is important to invest in solidarity, trust
and the ability to work hand in hand for the common
good. That is why El Salvador wishes to acknowledge
the efforts that the United Nations system has made
for the culture of peace, particularly within the context
of the strategies for response and recovery from the
COVID-19 pandemic.
El Salvador firmly believes in global solidarity as
the only way to recover from the crisis with resilience. An
example of such solidarity is the focus that El Salvador
has placed on the call of the World Health Organization

21-3721515/27

A/76/PV.44

to change places in the supply chain for the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access Facility. In a context that could
be described as a race between access to vaccines and
the efforts to prevent the appearance of variants, my
country hopes that decision will make it possible to
strengthen international cooperation in responding to
the multiple crises triggered by the pandemic and to
increase the number of people with equitable access to
that basic and vital tool.
The pandemic has also shown the importance
of speeding up digital technology as well as the
adoption of measures to close the digital divide. For
that reason, El Salvador has included in its priorities
a strong emphasis on innovation and technology,
which includes providing, with the valuable support
of the United Nations system, technological tools to
students through its Links to Education programme.
My country hopes that approach will contribute to
increasing equitable access to inclusive education and
establishing a basis to promote the culture of peace
through digital transformation.
In addition, the national Growing Together
policy for supporting early childhood development,
which the Government of El Salvador started last
year, aims to nurture the necessary values for the
promotion of a culture of peace from the initial phase
of a person’s development, thereby also strengthening
individual and social resiliency. A recently adopted
law, entitled “Nacer con Cariño” is another example
of El Salvador’s commitment to encouraging early
childhood development.
That context has demonstrated the importance
of continuing to encourage the culture of peace as a
response to global challenges. El Salvador believes that
mainstreaming a focus on peace in COVID-19 pandemic
recovery is a task that everyone must undertake to
ensure a future that will benefit all humankind.
Mr. Moncada (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour to participate in this debate on the culture
of peace. Aware of all that it represents — dialogue,
understanding, cooperation, respect and tolerance
for diversity — a culture of peace is fundamental to
the prevention of conflicts and the strengthening
of the stability and sustainable development of
our peoples. In times of uncertainty and complex
international dynamics, the promotion of a culture of
peace depends on the defence and preservation of the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
16/27

06/12/2021

United Nations — the only way to achieve solid and
lasting peace.
Peace is not sustained by imposing a world order by
way of a new Cold War, with artificial divisions based
on rules that are not agreed upon by the international
community, or with attempts to impose a national
ideology on the rest of the world. The achievements that
are the result of relational practices between States and
a body of international law built on the Charter of the
United Nations for 76 years are today being questioned
and must be preserved.
Our country has faced difficulties in recent years
as a result of a campaign of aggression based on the
illegal application of unilateral coercive measures that
have undermined national peace and stability. Those
are criminal actions, which have grown worse during
the worst pandemic that humankind has faced in more
than a century, and are part of a policy of calculated
cruelty. Consciously depriving an entire nation of its
means of subsistence constitutes an attack on peace and
a crime against humanity.
Despite that aggression, and after an arduous
economic, social and political organization process,
on 21 November Venezuela witnessed a new day of
elections, conducted in peace, to choose the regional
and local authorities of our country. It was the twentyninth election in 22 years, and more than 70,000
candidates participated, including the most extremist
groups supported by the Government of the United
States of America.
The electoral process provided all the necessary
guarantees for the Venezuelan people to fully exercise
their rights and political freedoms through the right
to vote, including extensive international observation.
The elections, held amid international aggression, are
a sign of the will to resolve our political issues with
respect, tolerance and dialogue among all citizens.
In Venezuela, we strengthen peace by affirming our
independence and democracy.
Venezuela wishes to reaffirm its support for the
implementation of the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace, as well as for the continuity
of the consideration of its annual draft resolution by the
General Assembly, as we are aware of the importance
of the meeting and the mutual enrichment of cultures
and religions as an enduring formula for peace.
21-37215

06/12/2021

The harsh times caused by the coronavirus disease
pandemic should make us aware of the fragility
of life and serve to step up our efforts to preserve
future generations. Multilateralism continues to be
the space in which to join those efforts. We trust that
the institutional framework of the United Nations
will continue to be the guide to promote peaceful
coexistence, respect for cultural diversity and dialogue
among civilizations, which constitute the very essence
of the culture of peace.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President for having
organized this annual debate on the culture of peace.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the promotion of
a culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace
(A/76/357). I also commend all of the facilitators of
the draft resolutions that have been introduced today
(A/76/L.19 and A/76/L.21), which Morocco has always
co-sponsored.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has challenged the international community to
strengthen the centrality and importance of building
a peaceful, stable and prosperous world. It showed to
what extent a culture of peace is crucial to overcoming
the gaps among and within societies. In that regard,
Morocco particularly welcomes the role of initiatives
undertaken by the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, to maintain the United Nations at the centre
of multilateralism and all international efforts to fight
the pandemic.
Religious leaders also have an important role to
play to overcome the challenges posed by COVID-19
pandemic. In that regard, the Kingdom of Morocco, in
response to the Secretary-General’s call, organized a
high-level conference in May 2020 on the theme “The
role of religious leaders in addressing the multiple
challenges of COVID-19”.
The culture of peace is the very rationale behind
our Organization. It is founded on the promotion of
political understanding and constructive dialogue
among States on the basis of mutual respect and in
line with the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. There are three pillars
that guide United Nations action: development, peace
and security, and human rights. In that regard, I would
like to reiterate my country’s full support for United

A/76/PV.44

Nations efforts to centre the promotion of a culture of
peace and dialogue among religions and cultures in the
United Nations system.
In line with the guidelines of King Mohammed VI,
the Kingdom of Morocco works tirelessly to promote
peace and dialogue among religions and cultures and
to foster mutual respect, respect for human dignity
and good neighbourliness. Morocco also attaches
great importance to the fight against all forms of
discrimination, xenophobia, hatred and rejection
of others, including Islamophobia, anti-Semitism
and Christianophobia.
Morocco remains committed to continue actions to
fight hate speech. We address a number of challenges
that the world is currently facing, in particular the
rise of ideology-based conflicts, intolerance, violence
and extremism, encouragement of separatism and
encouragement of armed groups. As a stakeholder
working responsibly and actively within the
international community, Morocco is convinced that it
is essential to strengthen multilateralism and collective
and coherent action within our Organization in order to
advance dialogue, pluralism and mutual respect.
My country is proud to have an ancestral tradition
of tolerance, moderation and peaceful coexistence,
as well as the promotion of dialogue among cultures,
religions and civilizations. Morocco is a crossroads and
point of intermingling of various cultures, religions
and civilizations. Respect for cultural diversity and
religious diversity is an integral part of daily life
and of our collective consciousness in Morocco. Just
last week, Jews, Christians and Muslims celebrated
Hanukkah hand in hand in the Neve Shalom Synagogue
in Casablanca.
Morocco also works tirelessly to strengthen the
values of peace, harmony, recognition and respect
for cultural and religious diversity at the national,
regional and international levels, in accordance with
the guidelines of our King. I also recall the historic
visit of His Holiness Pope Francis to Morocco on
30 and 31 March 2019, an initiative undertaken by King
Mohammed VI. That was the second visit by a Pope
after that of Pope Jean-Paul II in 1985 and is strong
evidence of the leading role played by Morocco in
promoting dialogue, understanding and cooperation
among the various religions and cultures.
Morocco attaches fundamental importance to
education, which we consider to be a key element in

21-3721517/27

A/76/PV.44

06/12/2021

ensuring the development of a culture of peace and
working against discrimination, hatred and extremism.
The Moroccan educational system teaches from the
earliest age the virtues of peace and diversity. In
that context, academic curricula and textbooks are
systematically and periodically reviewed to ensure that
they enshrine the virtues of co-existence, tolerance and
harmony. Morocco also decided to teach the history and
culture of the Jewish people in Arabic to our elementary
school pupils.

another illustration of Morocco’s status as a vanguard
of tolerance and dialogue among religions, cultures
and nations.

Young people in Morocco are therefore the
promoters of a number of different initiatives to combat
all forms of discrimination. The Secretary-General’s
report mentions that, from 2018 to 2021, more than 5,000
young people from a number of countries, including
Morocco, participated in the broad mobilization of
youth-led organizations, universities and national
stakeholders led by UNESCO and the Office of
Counter-Terrorism to foster inclusive dialogue for the
prevention of violent extremism.

Morocco is also proud to have contributed to the
implementation of plans of actions, documents and
resolutions that constitute the foundation of efforts and
initiatives within the United Nations to promote a culture
of peace and the values of moderation and tolerance
in the fight against all forms of discrimination and
exclusion, including the United Nations Plan of Action to
Safeguard Religious Sites; the United Nations Strategy
and Plan of Action on Hate Speech; the Marrakesh
Declaration on the Rights of Religious Minorities in
Predominantly Muslim Majority Communities; the
Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of advocacy
of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence; and
the Fez Plan of Action for Religious Leaders and Actors
to Prevent Incitement to Violence that Could Lead to
Atrocity Crimes.

Furthermore, to highlight the fair, noble and
respectful values of Islam and combat all forms of
radicalism and extremism, the Kingdom of Morocco
has launched a number of different initiatives, including
the reform of religious education and the promotion of
cooperation with brotherly and friendly countries, in
particular those in Africa.
In that framework, Morocco established the
Mohammed VI Foundation as well as the Mohammed
VI Institute for the Training of Imams, in accordance
with the directives of King Mohammed VI, Commander
of the Faithful. In that framework, the Kingdom of
Morocco provides for the multidimensional training
of hundreds of clerics from a number of African,
Arab, European and Asian countries. Multilaterally,
Morocco works at two levels; it contributes actively
and responsibly to the debate within various United
Nations bodies on this issue and also participates in
the formulation and dissemination of relevant United
Nations resolutions.
In July 2019, Morocco introduced the historic
resolution 73/328, on promoting interreligious and
intercultural dialogue and tolerance in countering
hate speech. The General Assembly also unanimously
adopted resolution 75/309 in July 2021. For the first time
in United Nations history, that resolution, introduced
by Morocco, proclaimed 18 June each year as the
International Day for Countering Hate Speech. That is
18/27

In January, along with the brotherly Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, Morocco also introduced resolution
75/258, on promoting a culture of peace and tolerance
to safeguard religious sites, which was adopted by
consensus and co-sponsored by a large number of
Member States.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight that the
Kingdom of Morocco is a founding member of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, and we
welcome the presence of High Representative Miguel
Ángel Moratinos. We participate actively in dialogue in
global conferences and work for greater understanding
and cultural and religious enrichment. We will spare
no effort in promoting a dialogue of peace, allowing us
to create synergies within the international community.
Next December, Morocco will be honoured to host the
Global Summit of the Alliance of Civilizations, which
was delayed because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Mr. Ghazali (Malaysia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace (A/76/357). We also thank
the delegation of Bangladesh and the delegations
of Pakistan and the Philippines, respectively, for
submitting draft resolutions A/76/L.19 and A/76/L.21
this year.
21-37215

06/12/2021

A/76/PV.44

The coronavirus disease pandemic has affected
humankind significantly. It has disrupted us
economically and socially, wiping out some of the
hard-won gains of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Sustainable Development Goals.
It has impoverished more than 100 million people
worldwide, pushing them into extreme poverty. We
are also witnessing a growing schism among different
peoples, cultures and religions. As a multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multi-religious country, Malaysia
understands very well the challenges confronting the
world if that dangerous trend is not reversed.

We strongly disagree with the view that the
defamation of religion is not an infringement of
human rights. The defamation of religion constitutes
a derogation of the right to belief and is not mutually
exclusive with freedom of speech and opinion.
Malaysia believes that both rights must be promoted
and respected in a compatible and balanced manner.
Understanding, tolerance and maintaining an exchange
in our differences of conviction, religion and belief is
vital to achieving a culture of peace. We are convinced
that prejudices can be overcome through dialogue,
understanding and cooperation.

Exclusion and inequalities breed instability,
consume peace and disrupt sustainable development.
Recognizing that, in August the Prime Minister of
Malaysia introduced the concept of “keluarga Malaysia”,
or “Malaysian family”, to further strengthen the ethos
of togetherness and inclusivity that has been embraced
by Malaysia since the time of its independence. In an
ethnically diverse and culturally rich country such as
ours, embracing diversity has made us stronger and
better off.

A tapestry without different colours and shades
would be dull and lifeless. The community of nations is
a tapestry of diverse countries rich in different peoples,
cultures and religions. Our diversity should not be seen
as a threat that divides us but should be celebrated and
embraced for our common good. Now is the time for us
to recover and build a better and more resilient home
with care. As a family of nations, we must work hand
in hand and thread by thread and weave towards global
peace and prosperity.

As the Malay proverb goes, Umpama selembar
benang, dikait, ditenun dan dijalin akhirnya menjadi
kain yang sempurna indahnya, which means
“Individual threads, when weaved, knitted and braided
together, become a perfect and beautiful tapestry”. At
times, we may forget that every individual thread in
that tapestry has its purpose in the pattern of a grand
design. However, now is not the time to forget. Instead,
it should serve as a reminder that our differences,
colours and shades, if celebrated, will contribute to the
common good.

Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace (A/76/357). The culture
of peace teaches us that conflicts are resolved at the
negotiating table, and not on the battlefield. It allows
us to listen carefully to all relevant actors, especially
women and girls and young people, who demand the
space at the negotiating table that they deserve.

Malaysia takes an affirmative and positive approach
to peace. We remain convinced that peace resides in
mutual understanding, respect and tolerance among
religions, cultures and peoples. Building a culture of
peace is premised on equality and inclusivity, such
as ensuring that people have access to food, shelter,
education and decent work. In that regard, we need
to ensure that the right to development is pursued and
realized at the national, regional and global levels.
The Secretary-General’s report also highlights
the rise in hate speech, extremism and xenophobia.
Malaysia regrets the legitimization of extremism,
including Islamophobia, in some political circles that
permeate the sphere of public opinion and society
at large.

Peace is a dynamic and living impulse in the most
energetic sense of the word. It is always an unfinished
task, a constantly moving horizon. It is not the work
of heroes or titans but of imperfect women and men
struggling during difficult times for an uncertain but
promising outcome. Peace cannot be forced or imposed
through guns. According to the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute, global military spending
increased to almost $2 trillion in 2020 — an increase of
2.6 per cent in real terms over 2019. The more weapons
we produce and modernize, the more they will escape
our best management and control efforts.
The irony comes from the fact that, as the world
continues to prepare for war, an invisible virus has
brought us to our knees. In the view of Costa Rica,
if only a fraction of those resources were used to

21-3721519/27

A/76/PV.44

combat the pandemic, strengthen the global health
infrastructure, address the climate crisis and step up
investment to meet the Sustainable Development Goals,
our generation could take pride in having redefined our
priorities when circumstances required it.
However, we have not done so, and in many instances
we continue to fall short on our sustainable development
commitments. Costa Rica calls on all States to initiate
without delay the gradual and intentional reduction of
global military spending. Such a reduction is not only
feasible but also indispensable, as reflected in Article
26 of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, Costa Rica welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s recognition that the excessive levels of global
military spending have been absent from the normative
frameworks of the women and peace and security
agenda. Indeed, disarmament and demilitarization have
also been absent from our discussion of this agenda
item and the issues before us today.
We must put those issues on the table and consider
how gender norms, including militarized masculinities,
impact conflict and armed violence, as well as the
production, manufacture, acquisition, possession and
use of deadly weapons. Peace is not sustainable if it
is not inclusive. Women and girls have never had the
option of being absent from the horrors of war, violence
and conflict, and we have been underrepresented in the
response to the pandemic and other peace and security
decision-making forums.
Addressing the inclusion of women and girls in
peace and political processes must be about more
than creating physical space for us or making sure
there are enough women in the room. It must be about
democratizing and reframing the discourse around
women and girls and transforming those spaces so
that they are truly able to honour our different roles,
experiences and contributions to society.
Far from being helpless victims, women and girls
have been on the front lines calling for a cessation of
fighting, as well as offering their services as mediators
to address the root causes of conflict and thus building
sustainable peace. The response to the pandemic is not
only about rectifying pre-existing inequalities but also
building a more inclusive and resilient world for all,
with women and girls at the centre of recovery.
Peace requires a robust multilateral system as well
as greater international cooperation and solidarity. It
20/27

06/12/2021

demands that we refocus our priorities, and above all
that we renew our solemn commitment to leave no one
behind. It demands that all global threats and all global
challenges be addressed in a timely manner, and not
by enabling a two-tier world. Peace is an unmistakably
political process. A young person who is indifferent
to, or annoyed by, politics or has given up on it does
not advance the cause of peace. On the contrary, such
young people actually cede power to those who believe
that war is a legitimate means of resolving conflicts.
In the Preamble of the Charter, the States that make
up this Organization commit to creating the conditions
in which justice can be maintained. Of those conditions,
perhaps the most elemental is will — the will to demand
compliance with obligations; the will to raise our voices
in the face of disrespect for international law; and
above all the will to not allow ideas and practices that
constitute an affront to all humankind go unnoticed.
It is not only through action that evil is condoned but
also, and above all, through indifference and omission.
To remain silent when the crimes are great and the
responsibilities are clear is not to be neutral but to take
the side of the aggressors. The most horrendous crimes
do not cry out for revenge but for justice. Therefore,
impunity remains incompatible with a culture of peace.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the delegation of the Sultanate of Oman, I
deliver this statement on agenda item 16, which is of
a special concern to the Government of my country
as it believes in peace as a value and key principle of
international relations.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace (A/76/357), which is a
response to resolutions 75/25, on the follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace, and 75/26, on the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace. We would also like to thank the delegations
of Bangladesh and Philippines for introducing and
sponsoring draft resolutions A/76/L.19 and A/76/L.21.
We agree with the Secretary-General that more
than ever there is an urgent need for dialogue, solidarity
and renewed multilateral cooperation to counter hate
speech, Islamophobia and contempt for other religions
and followers of other religions as well as migrants,
in particular those of African descent. There is also
21-37215

06/12/2021

an urgent need to counter misinformation, extremist
narratives, inequality and exclusion
We believe that dialogue, solidarity and cooperation
are effective means to build bridges for peacebuilding,
resilience, reconciliation and trust through diversity.
With peace, dialogue and understanding, people live
in stability while cooperation grows among States and
peoples. The Charter of the United Nations asserts those
noble values and urges Member States to establish goodneighbourly relations, not to interfere in the affairs of
States and to promote the spirit of coexistence, tolerance
and cooperation in order to address the challenges we
face in many areas, such as the current challenges of
climate change, bridging the digital gap and fighting
the coronavirus disease pandemic.
My country, the Sultanate of Oman, believes in the
importance of peace; therefore, it is a key component
of its foreign policy and a noble goal that it seeks to
achieve in its relations with all other countries. The
Sultanate of Oman will continue to support peace and
the culture of peace, including all its human values and
principles, with a view to enhancing cooperation and
addressing many international crises. Peace cannot
be achieved with words but with action and behaviour
practised in accordance with international values,
principles and norms and in a manner that does not
contravene the Charter or international law. That is how
we understand peace.
In conclusion, I would like to quote His Majesty
Sultan Haitham Bin Tarik, Sultan of Oman, in his
statement delivered on 23 February 2020:
“The message of Oman for peace will travel the
world, carrying great heritage and noble goals. It
builds and does not destroy. It converges and does
not diverge. That is what we will work to maintain.”
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): At the outset, my delegation
would like to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/76/357), which was requested
by resolution 75/26, on the promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and
cooperation for peace, sponsored by the delegations of
the Philippines and Pakistan. Since 2004, the annual
resolution has promoted interreligious and intercultural
dialogue with the core objective of achieving peace and
stability and promoting a culture of peace. Through
the resolution, we also aim to strengthen mechanisms
and actions that promote a genuine and constructive
dialogue across cultural and religious divides.

A/76/PV.44

In the current era of globalization, we have the
unrivalled opportunity and responsibility to replace
intolerance and discrimination with understanding
and mutual acceptance. However, the greatest paradox
of today’s world is that, while it has brought people
closer and created vast networks of connectivity and
interdependence, it has also spawned divisions and
frictions among and within societies.
Much of the growing mistrust can be traced to the
growing gap in understanding and lack of tolerance
among the various religions and civilizations of the
world. Extremist and terrorist groups exploit that gap
to propagate their own toxic agenda. It is therefore
imperative for all of us to strengthen mechanisms and
actions for the promotion of dialogue and understanding
among all religions and civilizations with a view to
restoring harmony and strengthening cooperation for
peace and development.
Unfortunately, against the backdrop of increasing
Islamophobia in many parts of the world, Muslims
appear to be the primary target of theories such as the
clash of civilizations. Islam is a religion of peace. It
should not be judged by the acts of a fringe group of
extremists, who exist in all societies, religions or belief
systems. We should therefore effectively address the
global drivers of worrisome trends, which include,
among others, unresolved disputes and conflicts, lack of
inclusive socioeconomic development and anti-migrant
rhetoric. Interfaith and intercultural dialogues and
cooperation are particularly significant means for
addressing those issues, especially when considered in
the context of today’s volatile world.
Pakistan is a pluralistic, multicultural and
multi-ethnic society. For us, respecting and promoting
the freedom of religion or belief and the promotion of
interfaith harmony is not only a duty to our citizens as
a functioning democracy; it is also a way of life. Our
founding fathers declared that the religion, caste or
creed of a citizen had nothing to do with the business
of the State. In Pakistan today we seek to build a polity
based on the principles of equality, justice, tolerance
and solidarity. Through initiatives such as the Ehsaas
Programme, we are building a welfare State that
looks after its poor, destitute and needy and aims to
reduce inequality by investing in human development.
Our Government’s development priorities include a
nationwide health insurance scheme and affordable
housing for all.

21-3721521/27

A/76/PV.44

Pakistan seeks to build its relations with its
neighbours and other members of the international
community on the basis of mutual respect and
interreligious and intercultural tolerance and
cooperation. A prime example of Pakistan’s policy is
the initiative taken by the Prime Minister of Pakistan
to open the Kartarpur Sahib Corridor between India
and Pakistan two years ago. In the past two years, the
Corridor has not only fulfilled the earnest desire of the
Sikh community around the world for easy access to
the revered site but is also reflective of the primacy
that Pakistan accords to all the religious minorities in
the country. The Corridor has opened new vistas for
the promotion of interfaith harmony. It was for those
reasons that the Kartarpur Corridor was described by
Secretary-General António Guterres as the “Corridor
of Hope” during his visit to Kartarpur Sahib in
February 2020.
The ultimate objective of dialogue should be to
prevent conflict and promote peace and harmony
through better understanding, moderation and a global
culture of peace. It is our belief that, with enhanced
dialogue and better understanding, it is possible to
achieve the objective of a diverse yet harmonious
and peaceful world, standing firmly on the pillars of
peaceful co-existence and unity in diversity.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend the report of the
Secretary-General on the promotion of a culture of
peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace (A/76/357),
which includes important recommendations. The State
of Qatar is pleased to co-sponsor draft resolutions
A/76/L.19 and A/76/L.21.
My country, the State of Qatar, welcomes all
measures taken by the United Nations system to promote
a culture of peace and interreligious dialogue, in
particular given the spread of fear and misinformation,
the increasing divisions among communities and the
polarization of positions caused by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is a threat to
international peace and security. That calls upon us,
as an international community, to intensify our efforts
and stand together in unity and solidarity to build just,
peaceful and comprehensive societies that are able to
recover in a better way from the current crisis.
In that connection, I would like to stress that
the State of Qatar is committed to implementing the
22/27

06/12/2021

Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace. It gives me pleasure to highlight today
some of the initiatives my country has undertaken to
promote a culture of peace at the national, regional and
international levels. Those initiatives emanate from our
social, religious and civilized heritage.
The State of Qatar has established a number of
institutions related to spreading the culture of peace
and intercultural and interreligious dialogue, accepting
diversity, fighting terrorism and denouncing violence.
Those institutions include the Doha International
Centre for Interfaith Dialogue, the Arab Cultural House
in Berlin and many other cultural and educational
institutions too numerous to mention.
Given that education is a fundamental element of
enhancing and promoting a culture of peace, the State
of Qatar considers education as a top priority in all its
humanitarian relief and development programmes. The
Education Above all Foundation, for example, based
in Doha, works with many international partners to
provide quality education to millions of children and
young people throughout the world, especially in areas
that suffer from conflicts and disasters.
The State of Qatar believes in the important role
of young people in achieving and sustaining peace
and contributes to implementing the youth, peace and
security agenda. Qatar will host a high-level global
conference on comprehensive peace paths for young
people on 20 and 21 January. The conference will
be held virtually due to the COVID-19 pandemic, in
collaboration with Finland, Colombia, the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth and the Education Above
All Foundation. We are confident that the conference
will be a turning point for the youth, peace and security
agenda through its important expected outcomes,
including guidelines to support the implementation of
that agenda at the national level and a five-year strategy
to promote the youth peace process.
As Member States are aware, in less than one
year the State of Qatar will host the 2022 Fédération
Internationale de Football Association World Cup,
which will be held for the first time in the Middle
East and Arab region. It is being organized in the
belief of our country in — and its wise leadership in
promoting — the important role of sports in achieving
sustainable development and promoting peace and
understanding among different cultures.
21-37215

06/12/2021

The State of Qatar sees peace in a comprehensive
manner. Peace for Qatari diplomacy does not mean
the absence of violence. Sustained peace is based
on the resolution of issues and provision of justice.
Therefore, the State of Qatar is greatly interested in
joining international efforts in support of preventive
diplomacy. Such efforts have led to positive results
that are agreeable to all parties concerned and have
contributed to the promotion of international peace and
security and welcomed by the international community.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar renews its
commitment to providing support for all efforts to
promote a culture of peace and non-violence for the
good of humankind as a whole.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
It is a special privilege for me to address the General
Assembly while it is being presided over by the
Permanent Representative of the brotherly country
of Costa Rica, with whom we share the ideals and
principles of peace and democracy.
Ecuador welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/76/357) and notes the submission of
draft resolution A/76/L.19, entitled “Follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace”. I thank the delegation of Bangladesh in
particular for its leadership during the discussion and
negotiation of the draft resolution.
We must express our concern about the persistence
and proliferation of violence and conflict in various
parts of the world. We must eradicate all forms of
discrimination and intolerance. Peace requires a
positive and dynamic participatory process in which
dialogue is encouraged and differences are resolved
in a spirit of mutual understanding and cooperation.
Direct dialogue is the best prevention tool.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has had a
negative impact on various spheres of society, reversing
hard-won progress in development and hampering
progress. We recognize that the pandemic demands
constant leadership, multilateral commitment and
the need to address the special challenges posed by
the infodemic — the disinformation pandemic. We
also emphasize the crucial need for access to free,
reliable, factual, multilingual, specific, precise, clear
information that is based on science, where appropriate,
to slow the spread of the virus.

A/76/PV.44

The infodemic is just one example or illustration of
the many issues that are addressed in a complementary
manner in draft resolution A/76/L.19. Its broad scope
leads us to recall that relevant and central idea contained
in the Constitution of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, which states that
“since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds
of men that the defences of peace must be constructed”.
The concept of the culture of peace is deeply
embedded in the regulations and activities of Ecuador,
and above all in the minds of a peaceful people who are
now threatened by the extreme violence of transnational
organized crime, the perpetrators of which believe
they have the means to undermine our democratic
institutions to advance their monstrous objectives.
They will not succeed because Ecuador is a meeting
point, a country that renews daily its commitment to
peace, development and democracy.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
places significant emphasis on promoting a culture
of peace. We need to get back on track to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals by strengthening
solidarity and designing equitable recovery strategies
that allow the building of resilient societies that are
capable of facing future crises.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our commitment
to deepen efforts to establish a global culture of peace
and revamp the scope of its implementation at the local,
national, regional and international levels.
Mr. Lim (Singapore): Singapore aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Brunei
Darussalam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and adds the following points in its
national capacity.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on the promotion of a culture
of peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace (A/76/357).
The examples cited of how respect for diversity and
cultural pluralism are key enablers of a culture of peace
are especially pertinent today. The coronavirus disease
pandemic has widened fault lines and social tensions
both within and among societies. It has threatened not
just our health but the fragile fabric of society itself. In
that context, achieving a global culture of peace is more
crucial than ever.

21-3721523/27

A/76/PV.44

Singapore is a diverse society in a densely populated
city State. Five and half million people — Chinese,
Malays, Indians, Eurasians and others — live together
on an island smaller than New York City. Many of the
world’s great religions are represented. We enjoy a
high level of racial and religious harmony. People live,
study and grow up together and celebrate one another’s
cultural festivals. According to the 2019 Gallup World
Poll, 95 per cent of Singaporeans in Singapore said that
Singapore was a good place to live for racial and ethnic
minorities. The global average was about 70 per cent,
and Singapore was ranked first worldwide among the
124 countries polled.
But the state of peace that we enjoy today was not
always in place. Our current harmony is built on painful
lessons drawn from the racial riots that marred our early
years of independence. It remains a continuous work in
progress for us, and we cannot rest on our laurels.
To protect and promote that harmony, we continue
to build bridges of understanding across racial,
religious and cultural differences. At the initiative
of our President, Singapore organized the inaugural
International Conference on Cohesive Societies in
2019, which brought together more than 1,000 delegates
from almost 40 countries. We look forward to the next
iteration of the conference in 2022.
Articles 5 and 8 of the Declaration on a Culture of
Peace affirm the key roles of civil society and religious
bodies in the full development of a culture of peace.
Recognizing that ground-up organizations and people of
faith themselves play the largest role in building mutual
understanding and trust, the Singapore Government
also works closely with our non-governmental
organizations, such as the Inter-Religious Organisation.
Founded over 70 years ago by leaders of six
different faiths, the organization has grown to reflect
the religious diversity of Singapore and is now led by a
Council of 31 leaders of 10 different faiths. By working
directly through religious groups, the organization has
made significant ground-up contributions to religious
harmony in Singapore, including by building networks
among people of different faiths, countering religious
extremism and radicalization and promoting local and
international interfaith dialogue.
Our religious and community leaders also work
with each another directly to resolve sensitivities that
arise from time to time, preventing them from flaring
up and causing wider misunderstandings. Their efforts
24/27

06/12/2021

complement national initiatives such as our annual
Racial Harmony Day, which is celebrated in schools
to expose our students to racial, religious and cultural
sensitivities from a young age.
Singapore will continue working closely with the
international community to promote interracial and
interreligious harmony towards our common goal of
fostering a global culture of peace.
Mr. Alenezi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, for his report
(A/76/357), which reviews the measures taken within
the United Nations system to encourage a culture of
peace and interreligious dialogue, while highlighting
the political and economic challenges that the world
faces today.
The State of Kuwait supports the appeal for
international solidarity and multilateral cooperation
launched by the Secretary-General in his report. We
also agree with him on the importance of ending the
state of emergency due to the coronavirus disease and
recovering from the pandemic, as well as the need
to create interreligious and intercultural dialogue in
order to achieve international solidarity for building
sustainable peace.
The Secretary-General’s report on the culture of
peace complements his report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), which includes recommendations and
proposals to ensure the economic and political stability
of States and create a culture of peace among peoples.
For the second consecutive year, the international
community faces economic challenges and significant
pressure on health systems due to the continued
pandemic, which has imposed a new reality with clear
negative implications for people in all walks of life.
Borders have been closed and limitations have been
placed on the international mobility for individuals
and goods, in addition to reduced communication and
dialogue among different peoples and religions. Fears
and concerns have arisen once again because of a new
variant of the coronavirus. Many countries have taken
measures to close their borders and airports, which will
undoubtedly have a negative impact and result in a wider
gap instead of a convergence of ideas and opinions.
That will also deepen disagreements on social
and cultural concepts, while fuelling intolerance and
national and ethnic feelings, thereby undermining
21-37215

06/12/2021

international solidarity. We must therefore redouble
our efforts to bring our positions together and promote
joint action to address such challenges. My country’s
delegation is of the view that the process of addressing
the pandemic and recovering from it must be a top
priority of the international community in order to
settle other important issues.
In that context, we welcome the initiative of the
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Abdullah
Shahid, to hold a high-level meeting on vaccines in
January 2022 in order to highlight the importance
of providing vaccines fairly and at low prices, while
supporting the countries most affected by the spread
of the pandemic. Those countries must be supported to
produce vaccines, because continued instability due to
the pandemic in the most affected countries will prevent
all of us from achieving our noble objective — to
entrench a culture of peace and achieve a sustainable
and dignified life.
The culture of peace is entrenched in my country.
One of the articles of the Kuwaiti Constitution states
that peace is a State objective. The spirit of tolerance,
acceptance of others, intercultural and interreligious
dialogue and dialogue among civilizations have been
inherent in Kuwaiti society for many centuries. In
our contemporary age, those values are enshrined
in our Constitution, which ensures the freedom of
expression, the freedom of religions and the freedom of
religious practices.
In the context of the efforts of the State of
Kuwait to promote a culture of peace, tolerance and
anti-extremism, the High-level Committee to Reinforce
Moderation was established with a view to promoting
the principle of moderation and a moderate approach,
as well as the tolerant Islamic culture, which calls for
tolerance, anti-extremism and anti-terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.
During the spread of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the High-level Committee launched
initiatives and developed strategies to highlight the
positive aspects of anti-extremism, while educating
young people about the noble values of Islam and
rectifying erroneous ideas by holding seminars and
discussion panels in person and through social media.
In conclusion, my country emphasizes that it is
ready to participate in all regional and international
efforts to strengthen a culture of peace and enhance
dialogue among civilizations, while upholding the

A/76/PV.44

values of moderation, tolerance and mutual respect, as
well as rejecting extremism, hatred and violence in all its
forms and manifestations. We urge all Member States to
cooperate in a unified manner through the international
and multilateral system to achieve a more peaceful and
tolerant world for current and future generations.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
As we meet here in the Hall to speak about peace and
the promotion of a culture and an environment that
contribute thereto, the use and the threat of use of force
in international relations continues, unconventional
warfare activities are conducted and interference in
the internal affairs of sovereign States is carried out in
order to satisfy the thirst for imperial domination.
At the same time, unilateralism prevails. Even amid
the challenging conditions imposed by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the implementation
of unilateral coercive measures continues, which not
only violates the Charter of the United Nations and
international law but also impedes the exercise of
the right to development of the countries that suffer
their effects.
There can be no peace without sustainable, equitable
and inclusive economic and social development. There
can be no peace as long as the inequalities resulting
from the unjust international economic order, which are
the root causes of conflicts, continue to be exacerbated.
There can be no peace — and no culture conducive
to peace — if hate speech, racism, xenophobia and
ideological intolerance continue to be encouraged; if the
issue of human rights is politicized to the disadvantage
of developing countries; and if disrespect continues
for the indigenous culture, history, idiosyncrasies and
diverse religions of peoples.
Advancing a culture of peace paves the way for
a better, more equitable and sustainable world, which
calls for the promotion of multilateralism and the strict
observance of the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law.
Cuba is fully committed to the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, as well as
the Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean
as a Zone of Peace, which was adopted in Havana in
2014 in the framework of the second Summit of Heads
of State and Government of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States.

21-3721525/27

A/76/PV.44

06/12/2021

The Proclamation reaffirms the objective of rooting
out forever from our region the use and the threat of use
of force, as well as of advancing the peaceful settlement
of disputes and fostering friendly and cooperative
relations among Latin American and Caribbean peoples
and their relations with other nations, regardless of
their differences.

For millenniums, India has regularly provided
shelter to those persecuted in foreign lands and
allowed them to thrive. India is not just about a culture
but a civilization in itself. The enduring principle of
Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam, which means “the entire
world is one family”, has guided our constant interaction
and exchange of thoughts with the outside world.

Cuba knows the value of peace. For more than six
decades, we have had to face the hostility of the United
States Government and its pursuit of unconventional
warfare and subversion against my country, as well
as the impacts of the most protracted economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed against
any country, which was intensified during the period of
the COVID-19 pandemic, for the sole reason of having
decided, in a sovereign manner, to build a social model
that is an alternative to the dictates of the empire.

We appreciate the efforts of Bangladesh in
submitting draft resolution A/76/L.19, on the followup to the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace, which India is happy to co-sponsor.
We firmly believe that the exercise of the right to the
freedom of opinion and expression and full respect for
the freedom to seek, receive and impart information
play an important role in promoting pluralism and
combating religious intolerance.

As President Miguel Díaz Canel Bermúdez recently
stressed, Cuba has been, is and will always be a country
of peace and will not yield to the attempts to sow
confusion in our country, attempts that are designed to
cause instability in our nation, discredit it and justify
the doctrine of regime change.
Mr. Sharma (India): The culture of peace is the
cornerstone of the global order to build inclusive and
tolerant societies. Under the auspices of the United
Nations, the promotion of a culture of peace has
expanded into a global discourse.
India has always believed in pluralism. It is also
embedded in the ancient Sanskrit religious text, the
Rig Veda, which states that “God is One, but learned
men describe Him in many ways”. As the great Indian
philosopher Swami Vivekananda said, “We not only
believe in universal toleration, but we accept all
religions as true”. Continuing that rich heritage, India
has promoted that culture, inter alia, through tolerance,
understanding and respect for all religions and cultures
under the overarching umbrella of a pluralistic ethos
and democratic principles, which is enshrined in
our Constitution.
India is not just the birthplace of Hinduism,
Buddhism, Sikhism and Jainism but is also a country
in which the teachings of Islam, Judaism, Christianity
and Zoroastrianism have taken firm root, and the
Sufi tradition of Islam has also flourished. Today
every one of the world’s major religions has a home in
India, making it a nation of unparalleled diversity of
continental proportions.
26/27

Unfortunately, we are witnessing disconcerting
trends in the world of today. There is a surge in instances
of intolerance, discrimination and acts of violence
based on religion or belief. Let me say that we strongly
condemn acts of discrimination or violence motivated
by anti-Semitism, Christianophobia and Islamophobia.
However, we are deeply concerned by the growing
manifestations of intolerance, discrimination or violence
against followers of other religions as well, which have
contributed to the emergence of contemporary forms
of religiophobia, especially anti-Hindu, anti-Buddhist
and anti-Sikh phobias, which need to be countered
urgently by the United Nations and all Member States.
Those contemporary forms of religiophobia need to be
factored into our discussions.
We urge for strengthened international efforts to
foster a global discourse on the promotion of a culture
of peace and to reaffirm that interreligious dialogue
should be broader and inclusive of all religions
and faiths. I call on the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations to act accordingly and to speak for all,
and not just a select few.
In today’s world, intolerance, hatred, violence and
terrorism have almost become the norm. There can
be no doubt that terrorism, which is a manifestation
of intolerance and violence, is the antithesis of all
religions and cultures. We are troubled by the increase
in resources, financial and otherwise, that are being
made available to violent and terrorist groups that
misuse religion to justify and propagate their agendas.
India will continue to spread the message of humanity,
pluralism and democracy.
21-37215

06/12/2021

We reiterate our call to fight the negative forces
of intolerance, violence and discrimination together.
Let us build a culture of peace together, rather than
fail separately.
Mr. Boncoeur (Haiti) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the President for
convening this meeting on the culture of peace and
for the opportunity to participate in this debate. My
delegation has also taken due note of the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General (A/76/357) and its
relevant recommendations.
Despite the progress made during the period from
May 2020 to August 2021, as the Secretary-General
underlines in his report, it is nevertheless necessary
to recall that the culture of peace, because of its
complexity, requires much more commitment and a
greater involvement by stakeholders. In that sense, we
encourage Member States, United Nations entities,
regional organizations and relevant actors to do more to
promote peacebuilding and peace-sustaining activities.
To establish lasting peace, my delegation believes
that education and dialogue represent the most effective
means of developing a sense of universal values and
capacities to recognize and accept the values required
for living together, and therefore of contributing to a
more peaceful, more just, more prosperous and more
equitable world. Since wars begin in the minds of men,
it is in the minds of men that the defence of peace must
be constructed. That concept, set out in the preamble
to the Constitution of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, reflects the
importance of education in sustaining peace.
In a context in which uncertainty, violence, racism,
inequalities and hate speech continue to grow, global
solidarity becomes more than necessary. In that regard,
my delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate the
observations and recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral. As such, we commit ourselves to supporting all
initiatives aimed at promoting the culture of peace and
to joining United Nations efforts to promote dialogue,

A/76/PV.44

understanding and cooperation among religions and
cultures in the service of peace.
In conclusion, I would like to refer to the historic
and very significant statement delivered by the late
Pope Paul VI on 4 October 1965 before the United
Nations. In that speech, he made a strong appeal for
peace. He said:
“relationships between the peoples should be
regulated by reason, by justice, by law and by
negotiation; not by force nor by violence nor war,
neither by fear nor by fraud.” (A/PV.1347, para. 27)
According to His Holiness Pope Paul VI,
“it is pride […] which provokes tensions,
struggles for prestige, predominance, colonialism,
selfishness; it is pride that shatters brotherhood.”
(ibid., para. 32)
In that context, he recalled the important United
Nations mission of teaching people peace. He also said:
“You, gentlemen, have done and are doing a
great work; you are teaching men peace. The United
Nations is the great school where that education is
acquired, and we are here in the Aula Magna of that
school. Whoever takes a place here becomes both
pupil and teacher in the art of building peace. And
when you leave this hall, the world looks to you
as to the architects, the builders of peace.” (ibid.,
para. 35)
Let us make sure that we live up to that great and
noble task.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker on this item for this meeting. We
shall continue the debate on the morning of Thursday,
9 December in this Hall, following the conclusion of the
consideration of other agenda items already scheduled
that morning.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 16.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

21-3721527/27
