S/PV.6962

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6962nd meeting

Wednesday, 8 May 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Togo)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Zagainov
Mr. Gasana
Mr. McKell
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Libya

13-32648 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1332648*

S/PV.6962

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of Libya to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council for the
fifth time on the situation in Libya since it was referred
to the International Criminal Court (ICC), in February
2011.
When the Security Council referred the situation
in Libya to the Court, it had determined that it would
be in the interest of peace and security. We have all
witnessed developments in Libya since the demise of the
Al-Qadhafi regime. Despite important progress made
in moving Libya forward on the path of democracy,
the rule of law and respect for human rights, many
challenges remain. The resolve of the Council when it
referred the situation in Libya was not only to ensure
accountability for perpetrators of crimes, but also to
secure lasting peace for the Libyan people. The Council
must therefore continue assisting Libya through the
difficult times that it faces. It is only through our joint
coordinated efforts that justice and peace will prevail.
Following the admissibility challenges filed
by the Libyan Government with regard to the Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi cases and
in accordance with the Rome Statute, investigations
with respect to those cases have been suspended.
The Al-Qadhafi case has advanced to a stage where
it remains for the Chamber to pronounce itself on
the submissions made by all parties. We expect the
Chamber to do so in the near future. Only last week,
my Office filed its response to Libya’s challenge on the

2

admissibility of the Al-Senussi case. It is commendable
that Libya is invoking its rights under the Rome
Statute through a judicial process. In doing so, Libya
demonstrates its full understanding of the difference
between the Council’s political mandate and the ICC’s
judicial mandate, even where the Council has referred
the situation to the International Criminal Court.
More important, Libya is engaged in the
development of the law. Irrespective of the outcome,
the admissibility processes under way at the ICC will
set the standard for years to come on how the Court
and States interact with each other regarding national
proceedings. As the Statute dictates, a State seeking
a finding of inadmissibility of cases before ICC must
satisfy the judges that it is genuinely investigating and
prosecuting the same persons for the same conduct as
that under investigation by the Office of the Prosecutor.
That is the law and nothing short of that will suffice.
By conducting fair, just and transparent judicial
proceedings for all alleged perpetrators, while also
continuing to respect the ICC judicial process, Libya
can set a lasting example for other States.
Given the extensive crimes committed in Libya
and the challenges facing the new Libyan Government,
the ICC’s mandate is still essential to ending impunity
in Libya. My Office therefore continues to conduct
investigations of crimes committed in Libya.
My Office is aware of allegations of serious crimes
committed by former Al-Qadhafi officials, some of who
are now outside of Libya. We are currently engaged in
the process of documenting the most serious of those
crimes and are documenting the current activities of
those officials who were most responsible for them. The
Office plans to take a decision regarding a second case
in the near future and will consider additional cases
after that, depending upon the Government of Libya’s
progress in implementing its comprehensive strategy.
My Office also continues to be concerned about
the allegations of crimes committed by rebel forces,
including the expulsion of residents of Tawergha, who
have been unable to return home, the ongoing alleged
persecution of ethnic groups perceived to have been
affiliated with the Al-Qadhafi regime and specific
incidents as yet unaccounted for, such as the alleged
execution of 50 persons on the grounds of the Mahari
Hotel in Sirte in October 2011, and the alleged arbitrary
detention, torture, killings and destruction of property

13-32648

S/PV.6962

that arose during Libyan Government and militia
operations in Bani Walid in September 2012.
Complementarity
and
cooperation
define
the relationship between the Court and national
justice systems. Both are therefore essential for
the implementation of international justice and the
punishment of crimes under the Rome Statute. Above
all, both are essential for ensuring that prosecution
of the few does not result in impunity for the many.
It is for that reason that my Office continues to
explore possibilities for mutually reinforcing judicial
activities with the Government of Libya in fostering
complementarity.
I recently met the new Libyan Prosecutor-General,
Mr. Abdul Qader Juma Radwan, and the Libyan ICC
focal point, Mr. Ahmed El-Gehani, who travelled
to The Hague at my request to discuss our ongoing
investigations. The constructive and fruitful discussions
between my Office and the Libyan delegation focused
on cooperation and the coordination of efforts to
advance the Office’s investigative activities, both
within and outside Libya. Those preliminary positive
discussions illustrate the willingness of my Office and
the Government of Libya to cooperatively work together
in furthering investigations that could lead to the arrest
and surrender of alleged perpetrators, both inside and
outside Libya. I plan to travel to Libya soon to further
my discussions with the highest political authorities.
Allow me to stress the importance of all of us
working together with the Government of Libya to
realize a comprehensive strategy for justice. My Office
is encouraged to see the important strides made in
transforming Libya, including the first democratic
elections in more than four decades, the installation of
a new Government last November, and the appointment
of a new Prosecutor-General.
Those signs of progress cannot eclipse the
challenge that Libya faces in addressing the legacy of
so many years of impunity. It need not be a challenge
that Libya faces alone. By the same token, Libya must
realize that with the international intervention in Libya,
in the context of all of the developments that have taken
place in the last three years in the region, what happens
with Libya’s perpetrators is a page in the history
books of international justice, no matter where those
investigations and prosecutions take place. They must
be a shining example of what we can achieve through
human endeavours to seek justice. Those trials can be

Libya’s Nuremberg moment, one that will endeavour to
seal the primacy of the rule of law, due process and
human rights for future generations.
My Office looks forward to discussing with
Prosecutor-General Radwan and the Libyan authorities
the best way forward and how we can collaborate
and coordinate our efforts to ensure that all alleged
perpetrators are held to account.
As Prosecutor, I cannot and should not get involved
in political considerations; nor should I ever stretch the
interpretation of the norms adopted in Rome. Equally,
neither the Council or its members nor any State, for
that matter, should ever seek to interfere with the
judicial processes of the Court.
Regardless, I look forward to continuing my
discussions with the Council about how we can ensure
that our coordinated follow-up of referrals of situations
like that in Libya will allow us to bring our considerable
resources and knowledge to bear in ensuring that peace
and justice prevail in Libya.
The President (spoke in
Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.

French):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
the Prosecutor, Ms. Bensouda, for her briefing this
morning on the work of her Office in relation to Libya.
Clearly, the situation in Libya demonstrates the distinct
but complementary roles of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and the Security Council. The Council has
repeatedly highlighted the importance of accountability
and of ending impunity for the most serious crimes, for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Consistent with that, the Council has twice asked the
ICC to play a direct role in the context of a Chapter
VII resolution: first, in respect of Darfur, in resolution
1593 (2005), and, secondly, its referral of the Libyan
situation, in resolution 1970 (2011), which is the subject
of today’s briefing.
While some good progress has been made,
Libya continues, as we know, to face complex and
serious challenges. It is important for all aspects
of the international response — the United Nations
special Mission, the Council’s sanctions regime and
international criminal procedures — to be coordinated
and complementary.

13-326483

S/PV.6962

In March, the Council, in resolution 2095 (2013),
renewed its call on the Libyan Government to continue
to cooperate with the ICC and the Prosecutor. We
are encouraged by the fact that Libya continues
to demonstrate a strong desire to prosecute those
accused of committing Rome Statute crimes and that,
in challenging the admissibility of ICC proceedings,
Libya has followed Rome Statute procedures. As we
await the outcome of those proceedings, we would like
to reiterate the importance of the Libyan Government
respecting the Court’s rulings on the admissibility
challenges, whatever their outcomes.
The situation in Libya demonstrates that the ICC
can, and does, play a significant role in strengthening
the rule of law in States undergoing post-conflict
transition. Referral of the situation in Libya to the ICC
was an important and necessary step for the Council
to have taken. As I mentioned yesterday during the
informal interactive dialogue, the ICC referral has
served as a catalyst for Libya’s own efforts, not just
in regard to the two individuals currently subject
to proceedings, but also with respect to the reform
of Libya’s judicial system, a decisive element of its
transition to democracy.
Ensuring respect for the rule of law in Libya is the
responsibility of the Libyan authorities themselves.
Regardless of the outcome of Libya’s jurisdictional
challenge, it is important to bear in mind that the ICC’s
jurisdiction is limited to those most responsible for
committing serious international crimes. It is therefore
crucial for Libya to ensure that justice is served in
relation to other perpetrators and other crimes.
Libya should continue to work with the Court to
ensure that all allegations of serious international
crimes are investigated and, where appropriate,
prosecuted, regardless of whether those allegations
concern supporters of Muammar Al-Qadhafi or those
who raised arms to establish a new Libya. We very
much welcome the Prosecutor’s advice this morning
of recent constructive initiatives by the Prosecutor
and the Libyan authorities to ensure complementarity
and cooperation in furthering investigations against
perpetrators, both inside and outside Libya, to ensure
that they all are held to account.
The Court is a vital partner for the Council. We
all know that without justice it is difficult to establish
an inclusive and lasting peace. Effective coordination
between the ICC and the Council is essential in order
to ensure that the separate efforts of the two bodies,
4

which have very different mandates, have a multiplying
and reinforcing effect and that they are able to work
together to help end impunity for serious international
crimes.
To enable the Court to carry out its work effectively,
the Council needs to find creative ways to support it.
Doing so is particularly important where the Court’s
jurisdiction derives from a Council resolution. The
continued and active support of the Council is necessary
to underscore the importance of States cooperating
with the Court. Support from the Council is important
to ensure that the objectives of its referrals are realized,
namely, that justice is delivered and that international
peace and security is maintained.
With that in mind, we support expanded cooperation
between the Council and the Court. Yesterday’s informal
interactive dialogue between Council members and
the Prosecutor was a very useful first step towards
considering how the Council can more effectively
support the Court’s work. We look forward to working
with other members of the Council to further develop
what should be an organic relationship between the two
bodies and to implement the Council’s commitment to
an effective follow-up of Council referrals to the Court.
In concluding, let me say that we look forward to
further updates from the Prosecutor, in relation to both
Libya and other situations before the Court.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing on the recent
developments in the Libyan situation, which the
Security Council has referred to it.
Many tasks still lie ahead in Libya’s nation-building
process. Security must be improved, widely scattered
weapons should be collected, and militia groups should
be immobilized and reintegrated. The creation of a
constitution is a very complex and sensitive process of
social contracts.
Nevertheless, the Libyan people have made
significant progress and have already overcome
a number of challenges. National elections were
successfully held for the first time in more than four
decades. A new Government was formed, and the second
anniversary of the revolution was celebrated without
serious disturbances. With the successful completion
of the ongoing transition, Libya will achieve sustained
peace and a stable democracy.

13-32648

S/PV.6962

The Prosecutor has raised four issues.
First, on the issue of cooperation between the
ICC and Libya, in order for the ICC successfully to
discharge the mandate that the Council has given it,
close cooperation between the ICC and Libya is of
pivotal importance. We urge Libya to continue to
adhere to its international obligations, including those
under resolution 1970 (2011), and to further enhance its
cooperation with the ICC.
We welcome the contacts that the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan Government continue to
maintain, and their ongoing efforts to ensure that a
good level of cooperation is preserved. Such contacts
should be regularized, as exemplified by the recent
visit to the ICC by the new Libyan Prosecutor-General.
Secondly, with respect to the admissibility of the
case against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi, we have taken note of the challenges
initiated by Libya before the Court. It is a prerequisite
for Libya to fully cooperate with the ICC in order to
materialize such admissibility challenges. We are
pleased that Libya and the ICC are continuing to
engage constructively on issues relating to the ICC
proceedings. Given the challenges that Libya is facing
in this transitional post-conflict stage, it should be
afforded reasonable time to prepare additional material.
However, the ultimate decision on the matter should be
made by the ICC Pre-Trial Chamber, which is judicially
independent.
Thirdly, concerning the ongoing investigation by
the Office of the Prosecutor, we appreciate its effort
to investigate the allegations of crimes committed by
pro-Al-Qadhafi officials outside of Libya and by rebel
forces. After its ongoing investigations, the Office of
the Prosecutor might open a second case. We hope
that the investigations can corroborate the allegations
of crimes and lead to justice being delivered to any
victims of such serious crimes.
Fourthly, with respect to Libya’s capacity to deal
with past crimes and to promote the rule of law, we
appreciate the important role played by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). As
resolution 2095 (2013) articulates, we encourage
UNSMIL to continue to support Libyan efforts to
promote the rule of law, in accordance with Libya’s
international legal obligations.

In the case of the ICC, as a part of its implementation
of the policy of positive complementarity the Prosecutor
should assist Libyan authorities in prosecutions, using
various methods to encourage Libya to prosecute
cases domestically, whenever possible. The policy of
positive complementarity and Libya’s admissibility
challenges could then be mutually pertinent. Libya’s
early formulation and adoption of an all-encompassing
strategy to address past crimes and to end impunity
will surely demonstrate that the principles of justice
and accountability remain pillars of Libya’s transition
and key to ensuring lasting peace.
In conclusion, we welcome Libya’s cooperation
with the ICC, as evidenced by its recent admissibility
challenge of 2 April. We look forward to a full
investigation of all allegations of serious crimes
committed in Libya, and we encourage the Prosecutor
to continue her investigative efforts, in cooperation
with the Libyan authorities. We stress the need for
the Libyan Government to formulate, make public
and implement a comprehensive strategy to address
such crimes. The Korean Government stands ready
to strongly support the ICC and its activities. We also
believe that the Security Council should continue to
closely monitor the Libyan situation that it has referred.
Mr. Zagainov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, allow me to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing and presentation of her
fifth report on the investigations in Libya pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).
We support the efforts of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to prosecute individuals who committed
heinous crimes during the events in Libya. However,
judging from the report, work continues to stall in
that regard. In spite of appeals for an objective legal
analysis of the activities of all parties to the conflict
and post-conflict violence, investigations continue to
concentrate only on suspects from the entourage of the
former Libyan leader. Even on that front, in spite of
ample legal proceedings and activities, we have yet to
see progress. After almost two years, there has been no
notable progress in prosecuting rebels, although there
are accounts of those individuals committing brutal
crimes in armed clashes. These facts are well known.
According to reports, violence in Libya
unfortunately continues in today’s post-conflict
situation against a backdrop of problems with the
functioning of the State apparatus and the central

13-326485

S/PV.6962

Government’s control over the country as a whole. We
welcome the ICC’s monitoring role in that regard.
Finally, there is the pending matter of the
investigation of cases of civilian causalities and
the destruction of civilian targets during NATO
operations. We suggest that the ICC step up its analysis
of information received from the United Nations factfinding mission, humanitarian non-governmental
organizations and other channels.
We support the legal foundation of ICC activities
pursuant to the Rome Statute, including the principle
of complementarity. Without a doubt, not all crimes
committed in Libya should be investigated by the
Court. The question is how effectively that principle
can be implemented with specific respect to the Libyan
situation. In that regard, it would be no exaggeration
to state that the moment of truth has come for the ICC
with regard to the Libyan investigations.
In our view, the impacts of the crisis in Libya are
a serious obstacle to justice being effectively served.
Reports from various sources, including civil society
bodies, give cause for concern that there are gaping holes
in the Libyan legal system. Some of those are a legacy
from the past, while others are the direct consequence
of recent events. We therefore highly doubt that, at
this time, conditions in Libya are eminently conducive
to conducting fair legal proceedings in line with
international standards with respect to Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi.
The jurisdiction of the ICC over those cases is
contested, and the matter of admissibility will ultimately
be decided by the ICC. However, we understand that
the Libyan side has not yet provided the Court with
convincing information on national investigations. We
do not fully understand why Libya has not done so for
some time now. We suggest that the Prosecutor and
Judges of the ICC take a more careful look into this
situation.
We are also concerned by the lack of information
regarding the detention of a group of ICC staff in Zintan
in June 2012, which was a cause of great concern. That
episode endangered the work of the ICC in Libya,
undermined its credibility and the security of its staff,
and had an adverse impact on interaction between the
Court and States.
With respect to the Security Council interactive
dialogue with the Prosecutor of the ICC that took

6

place yesterday, we should like to know the following.
Concerning the proposal with respect to the possible
future steps of the Security Council to assist the ICC
in the framework of the investigation of the Libyan
situation, we feel that it would be appropriate to
consider it in the light of practical suitability, the
Council’s mandate, the prerogatives of the ICC and the
basic international legal context. For our part, we still
do not understand the added value of the interactive
dialogue that took place yesterday. In any case, we
did not receive responses to our questions. When it
comes to holding such meetings in the future, we would
evaluate their suitability on a case-by-case basis and
in the light of additional information to be provided by
the Prosecutor. Moreover, we suggest that the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, given its
lack of mandate, is not the right format for discussions
on international criminal justice.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
listened carefully to the briefing by Ms. Bensouda.
Thanks to the efforts of the people of Libya,
important progress has been made in the country’s
political transition. We hope that the people of Libya
will work to achieve national cohesion and State unity,
continue to move its political process forward, and
tackle the many challenges it faces in order to achieve
early national reconciliation, social stability and
national economic reconstruction. The international
community is called upon to continue to provide
support and assistance to the Government and the
people of Libya in their efforts.
China’s position on the question of the International
Criminal Court remains unchanged. We support the
Government of Libya in its efforts to strengthen the rule
of law, establish a sound judicial system, investigate
and punish serious crimes. We also hope that the
International Criminal Court, in its activities carried
out under the relevant Security Council resolutions, will
play a positive role in Libya’s national reconstruction
and political transition.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this morning’s important meeting. We welcome the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and thank her for her statement
and her briefing.
Within the complex transition process which
Libya is now undergoing, we welcome the progress

13-32648

S/PV.6962

made by the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC in the
cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. We trust that as the transition process
continues, a greater institutionality will take hold
that will allow Libya to build a State that guarantees
human rights, the rule of law and an end to impunity.
We therefore believe that it is of great importance for
Libya to continue to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court and the Office of the Prosecutor. It is
vital for those bodies to enjoy the support and necessary
assistance of all States, including those that are not yet
parties to the Rome Statute.
Guatemala believes that the Libyan authorities
have the obligation to respect the work of the Court and
the Office of the Prosecutor. To that end, they must be
able to work without impediment or restriction of any
kind. We hope that the security situation in Libya will
improve and that the new Government will be able to
provide the necessary support to all staff of the Court
so that they can conduct investigations appropriately. In
that respect, we wish to acknowledge the efforts made
to designate a focal point for contact with the ICC, and
the discussions aimed at improving cooperation and
coordination between the Government and the Office
of the Prosecutor.
We appreciate the work done until now by the
Office of the Prosecutor, and we see the involvement
and interest of the Libyan authorities in the process as
positive signs. We await with interest the decisions of
the Court on both challenges made by the Government
of Libya to the admissibility of the cases against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi.
We believe that the situation will help determine the
impartiality, independence and ability of the Libya
judicial system to function. As a result, it will also
help strengthen the judiciary, which is essential to
developing the rule of law. Whatever the decision of
the ICC on the admissibility of the two cases may
be, we believe that the Office of the Prosecutor must
closely follow and remain involved in the progress and
decisions made in both cases. In particular, we believe
that all the necessary steps must be taken to preserve
evidence and protect witnesses while the decision is
taken on the challenges to those cases.
Furthermore, with respect to cooperation pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), Libya is obligated to cooperate
with the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor. We
note that many of the requests for assistance made in
connection with the situation in Libya have not yet

been responded to satisfactorily. We therefore believe
that the possibilities of cooperation between the
Council and the International Criminal Court have not
yet been exhausted, not only when it comes to Libya,
but also when it comes to other interested States and
organizations.
Guatemala believes that the Security Council must
continue to monitor the events and situations referred
to the Court, as well as the obstacles that the Court may
encounter in the conduct of its work. As to other crimes
committed in Libya, we believe that it is extremely
important to investigate them and we call on the Office
of the Prosecutor to pursue its important work. We
reaffirm our call for all possible violations of human
rights and crimes against humanity that may have been
committed in Libya to be investigated, no matter who the
perpetrator might be. In that context, we are especially
concerned about gender-based crimes that took place
during the conflict. We hope that investigations of such
crimes will help bring justice to the victims of those
crimes. We likewise call for potential ethnic crimes
and those committed in detention centres outside State
control to be investigated.
Lastly, we wish to reiterate our support for
and commitment to the Court and the Office of the
Prosecutor, and we hope that they will continue to do
their good work in Libya.
Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I should like in turn
to thank the Prosecutor for her report on the situation in
Libya and for her briefing today. The United Kingdom
remains a strong supporter of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). We thank the Prosecutor and her Office
for the detailed work described in the report.
Security and justice sector reform are critical
if Libya is to facilitate the rebuilding of State
institutions and the return to stability. We, along with
our international partners, will continue to work with
Libya to provide it with the support it needs to meet the
challenges that it faces.
We welcome ongoing efforts to investigate and
bring to justice all those members of the former regime
who are guilty of abuses and to press forward with
implementation of the recommendations made in the
latest Human Rights Council resolution adopted on
21 March. It is important, however, that all those who
committed crimes be brought to justice. We encourage
the Libyan authorities to abandon plans to provide
revolutionaries who committed war crimes and crimes

13-326487

S/PV.6962

against humanity with amnesty from punishment
for their crimes. We call on them to investigate and
prosecute all individuals implicated in such abuses.
Addressing security and transitional justice remains the
immediate challenge for the Libyan Government. We
are providing assistance to Libya by sending a justice
adviser to contribute to prison — and justice-sector
reform projects. We stand ready to give further aid
to Libyan-led efforts to build up accountable and
transparent security and justice institutions, improve
security and strengthen the rule of law.
We fully support the ongoing investigations
concerning gender-based crimes, with a particular focus
on those outside Libya, and those relating to allegations
about the situation in Tawergha. Those efforts continue
to play an important part in challenging impunity and
ensuring accountability for those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the most serious crimes.
We welcome the level of cooperation that the
Libyan Government has undertaken with the ICC
in relation to the arrest warrants issued against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. Libya’s
continued cooperation with the ICC is essential. We note
that there are now admissibility challenges submitted
by the Libyan authorities regarding both cases, and that
the Prosecutor’s investigations into them are suspended
pending a ruling from the ICC judges. We continue to
encourage the ICC and the Libyan Government to work
together to address matters arising out of the events of
June 2012. More generally, we are pleased that Libya
and the ICC are continuing to engage constructively on
issues relating to the ICC proceedings. It is important
that the detention of both Abdullah Al-Senussi and Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi be conducted in accordance with
international law, that they have access to legal advisers
and that any potential trial held in Libya be consistent
with Libya’s international human rights obligations.
The authorities of the United Kingdom have played
a part in the ICC’s investigation so far by providing full
support, as and when requested, to the Prosecutor and
her team of investigators. We are a strong, principled
supporter of the ICC and will continue to provide our
full support to the Prosecutor, as and when requested.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her fifth report on the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011) and for the
additional information she has provided today.

8

Rwanda, as co-Chair of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect, would like to stress that the
international community has a responsibility to protect
civilians targeted by their own Governments and a duty
to ensure that the perpetrators of mass atrocities are
brought to justice. That is why we supported resolutions
1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), on Libya, and called for
swift justice for the victims.
Looking forward, we are encouraged by the
achievements of the new Libyan Government
in rebuilding its institutions with the support of
the international community. We are fully aware
of — indeed, concerned about — the daunting
challenges that the country continues to face,
particularly the proliferation of weapons, uncontrolled
militias, terrorist activities and political uncertainty,
all of which are undermining the State authority of
a democratically elected Government. However, we
believe the overall trend is positive and that the Libyan
Government should be supported and encouraged in its
post-conflict efforts aimed at justice, reconciliation and
recovery.
To achieve that goal, it is important that the judicial
process be carried out by Libyans themselves, with the
support of the international community. From our own
humble experience, we know that it is indeed important
that justice be done close to the victims. In that regard,
we take note of Libya’s continued cooperation with
the ICC and welcome the decision of the Office of the
Prosecutor to support the inadmissibility of the case of
Abdullah Al-Senussi on the basis of materials provided
by the Libyan Government. We also hope that the
case of Al-Senussi, together with that of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, will eventually be handled by Libyan
courts.
We would like to take this opportunity to call on
the ICC and the wider international community to
ensure that the remaining suspects of war crimes and
crimes against humanity in Libya, including those
living abroad, are brought before Libyan jurisdictions.
It is important in that regard that the international
community support and provide assistance to improve
Libya’s capacity to deal with past crimes and promote
the rule of law. We also believe that the sanctions
regime in Libya is of paramount importance in building
sustainable peace there. During the past two years, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, which I currently chair,

13-32648

S/PV.6962

has contributed to giving new hope to Libyans in the
aftermath of the conflict.

equality of States, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

I would now like to speak in broader terms about the
role of the ICC and the importance of a genuine system
of international criminal justice. Rwanda has always
believed that combating impunity must be at the core
of the Security Council’s mission. We also believe that
a robust system of international criminal justice, which
must complement national jurisdictions, is essential
to ending impunity for the most serious crimes and
to promoting reconciliation in post-conflict societies.
However, to achieve that goal, such justice must be
independent of political interference and uphold the
principle of the sovereign equality of States. Needless to
say, Rwanda, like many other United Nations Member
States, does not believe that the ICC has lived up to
those aspirations. In fact, it has been selective in its
methods for investigating and prosecuting perpetrators
of serious international crimes, since it has failed to
prosecute similar crimes committed in other parts of
the world with impunity. Furthermore, as has been
stated on many occasions, it is difficult to understand
how equal justice can be served if the Security Council
can refer cases to the Court while the Council’s
permanent members have discretionary power to block
any prosecution of their own nationals or allies.

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my thanks and appreciation
to Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her comprehensive briefing
on developments pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

In that regard, even signatories to the Rome Statute
have recently expressed concerns about the Court.
I would like to cite the note verbale dated Thursday,
2 May 2013, addressed by the Kenyan delegation to
the Security Council, which contains a compelling
case against the methods of work of the Office of the
Prosecutor on the Kenya cases. That was also pointed
out by a judge of the ICC who recently resigned. Why?
In that regard, Rwanda hopes that the Security Council
will soon schedule a decision on the issue raised by
Member States for its programme of work, with a view
to addressing the growing concerns of Member States,
including signatories to the Rome Statute.
In conclusion, I would once again like to call on
the international community to support the Libyan
authorities in their efforts to achieve justice and
reconciliation through a strengthened judicial system.
We also call on the Council and the wider international
justice system to engage in a serious discussion of the
current status of international criminal justice, with the
ultimate goal of establishing an independent judicial
system that respects the principle of the sovereign

More than two years ago, Libya emerged from
dictatorship and despotism and entered an era of
building democracy in a State built upon the rule of law.
The entire world welcomed that positive transformation,
which was not an easy task. On the contrary, the sisterly
country of Libya encountered intractable difficulties.
Human rights were violated, and the Libyan authorities
do not deny that.
The Libyan authorities have undertaken a
commitment to face, at the national and international
levels, the challenges coinciding with the new situation,
whether in the field of security or in humanitarian,
economic and social affairs. To demonstrate that
commitment, Libya has even-handedly addressed
violations committed against Libyans and has given
priority to the judiciary in issuing laws that guarantee
independence, transitional justice and the establishment
of a national reconciliation commission to look into
allegations of human rights violations — which the
Libyan Constitution also refers to with regard to
international treaties. That is very important.
The Libyan authorities have also stated that
they will not protect those suspected of perpetrating
crimes against humanity, nor will they allow impunity
for them. By the same token, they are undertaking
serious investigations, and they will try the accused
in a just manner and in accordance with international
instruments.
The Libyan authorities have also promised to try
those responsible for crimes against humanity and
to develop a plan to achieve national reconciliation,
national justice and the preservation of social justice.
At the same time, the new Libyan authorities, starting
with the National Transitional Council, have declared
their willingness to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court (ICC) with a view to safeguarding
justice for the victims of human rights violations. In
that connection, consultations have been held to look
into the matters under discussion, in a manner that
corresponds with the requirements of national and
international laws, through the investigation and factfinding missions sent to Libya.

13-326489

S/PV.6962

The Libyan authorities continue to emphasize their
intention to cooperate with the ICC in the contex of
respect for Libyan laws and international law. Libya’s
insistence on trying the inner circle of the former
regime does not run counter to ongoing cooperation
with the Court; rather, Libyan authorities are pursuing
the admissibility challenges in accordance with the
Rome Statute.
On that basis, we welcome the general trend in the
Council to give priority to the Libyan judiciary while
respecting the principles of complementarity with
international jurisdictions and taking into consideration
the fact that the Libyan judiciary’s work in dealing with
such cases should be carried out in accordance with
objective, well-known and well-recognized criteria.
We are certain that the new Libya is qualified to
respond to all the aspirations of the Libyan people,
whatever they might be. The new Libya will remain an
active partner in the Arab Maghreb Union in an effort
to achieve the goals and unity we all aspire to and to
avert the dangers flowing from the proliferation of
secessionist terrorist groups and criminal gangs.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support and backing for the Libyan Government, which
is, as we all know, working in a delicate security situation.
We urge the international community, represented by
the Council — as mentioned in the statement made by
Ms. Bensouda — to provide the necessary assistance
with a view to enabling the Libyan Government to
face up to the challenges it faces, foremost among
which are disarmament, security, border monitoring,
the reintegration of former combatants, solving the
problems of refugees in a manner that respects human
rights and the achievement of national reconciliation. I
would like to express Morocco’s readiness to continue
to cooperate with our brothers in Libya to develop
national laws and institute national transitional justice.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I also would like
to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing and for
presenting her fifth report to the Security Council in
accordance with resolution 1970 (2011).
Azerbaijan is not a party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. Nevertheless, as we have
repeatedly stated on previously occasions, the protection
of civilians, respect for international human rights and
humanitarian law and the fight against impunity for

10

the most serious crimes are the responsibility of the
international community as a whole.
Libya’s progress demonstrates the irreversibility
of the democratic transition process in the country.
We know of the efforts of the Government towards the
implementation of the required policies and strategies
to address the challenges that the country is facing. We
commend the Libyan Government for its constructive
cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor and its
engagement in the judicial process at the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
As the report notes, the strength of the Rome
system lies in the possibility for shared responsibilty
and complementary actions between the Court and
Libyan judicial institutions. During the reporting
period, the Libyan authorities continued to demonstrate
their commitment to ensuring an effective and genuine
investigation and fair trials, consistent with the required
international standards.
We note that, based on its assessment of Libya’s
relevant submission, the Office of the Prosecutor
asserted that the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi was
inadmissible and should therefore be prosecuted at the
national level. We look forward to a decision by the
judges of the Pre-Trial Chamber as to whether both
cases remain admissible before the ICC. It is therefore
essential that the Government of Libya continue to
cooperate with the ICC and provide it with all the
necessary information that might be needed by the
Court to properly assess the admissibility challenges.
We take note of the Prosecutor’s update in relation
to gender crimes and on other ongoing investigations,
including with regard to those individuals outside
Libya who continue to pose a security threat to the
Government. The close cooperation between the
authorities and the Office of the Prosecutor is essential
in that regard.
The Government of Libya is committed to a
comprehensive strategy to address all crimes and end
impunity in the country. It is important to continue to
demonstrate that justice remains a key priority and to
ensure that victims of all crimes have the opportunity
to seek resolution within the national legal system.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina would like to thank the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for presenting her fifth report pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).
13-32648

S/PV.6962

The problematic and much-discussed question
of peace and justice is one that the international
community has faced many times — sometimes jointly
and sometimes in opposition to one another. We find
it most encouraging that it has now been recognized
that we cannot maintain the old justice-versus-peace
paradigm, and that we must embrace a new paradigm in
which peace and justice are complementary objectives.
We have come to see that, de jure or de facto, amnesties
do not contribute to peace, and that in some cases they
have actually sent the dangerous message that serious
crimes may be tolerated.
Furthermore, where criminal justice processes
have been launched, we have not seen the anticipated
negative consequences for peace efforts. In 2003,
the Congress of Argentina adopted a declaration of
invalidity — the so-called laws of due obedience or final
point, which might just as well have been called laws
of amnesty, oblivion or pardon. In 2005, the Argentine
Supreme Court unanimously ruled that these laws of
oblivion, as they are known to human rights activists,
were unconstitutional and null and void. Since then,
through due process and respect for all constitutional
guarantees and national justice, 378 members of the
former regime have been found guilty of crimes against
humanity, 232 have been accused with oral proceedings
under way, and 1,013 military, civilian and religious
figures have been indicted.
These legal proceedings have allowed us as a
society— for instance, through the work of the Abuelas
de Plaza de Mayo concerning the systematic abduction
of children — to exercise our rights to truth and identity.
Today, of the 500 children being sought, 107 have been
found and restored to their true identity. I raise this
issue because our debates on this issue have led us to the
conclusion that justice contributes to sustainable peace
and reconciliation. Our painful experience — only one
among thousands of painful experiences that humankind
has suffered and continues to suffer — allows us to
affirm that social reconciliation, sustainable peace
and effective and genuine democracy can be achieved
through justice, truth and remembrance. I apologize for
introducing such personal testimony, but I believe that
the best way to participate in debates is to put one’s
full self into them and to testify to events in our own
countries, not in order to cite them as paragons, but to
demonstrate how, in different circumstances, we can
seek and find responses that honour the principles of
truth, justice and peace.

Argentina welcomes the assertion of the Prosecutor
that previous limitations in contacts with the Libyan
Government have been overcome, and that her Office
renewed its contacts with the new Administration
following the elections of 7 July 2012. We welcome
the constructive dialogue between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan delegation that recently
visited The Hague. We hope that they will proceed to
explore opportunities to foster the complementarity that
defines the relationship between the Court and States.
Another area of potential cooperation mentioned
by the Prosecutor concerns the possibility that aerial
attacks by NATO may have killed or injured civilians.
Like the Prosecutor, we call on NATO to cooperate
fully with the Libyan authorities in their efforts to
investigate casualties, injuries and damages to the
civilian population.
As regards cooperation on the part of all States
with the ICC, Argentina has repeatedly asserted that
it is crucial and cannot be limited to the State or
States parties explicitly involved, whose obligation to
cooperate emanates from the Rome Statute. Argentina
regrets that the Council had not reflected in clearer
terms the obligation of all Member States to cooperate
with the ICC when it makes a referral. At the same
time, we recognize that the Council, in paragraph 5 of
resolution 1970 (2011), has urged all States to cooperate
with the Court in relation to the situation in Libya,
pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi are both currently suspended by
the Office of the Prosecutor due to the challenge of
admissibility presented by Libya. We understand that
the challenge is subject to a judicial evaluation to be
made exclusively by the Court in accordance with
article 17 of the Rome Statute. Argentina takes note of
the opinion of the ICC regarding the inadmissibility of
the Al-Senussi case, and calls on the Libyan authorities
to comply with the decisions of the Court regarding the
admissibility of those cases.
As regards the investigations under way, we hope
that cooperative work will be undertaken between the
Office of the Prosecutor and the Libyan authorities
regarding gender-based crimes, on which the Office is
gathering evidence. Moreover, with respect to crimes
that may have been committed by rebel forces, we
hope that the Office of the Prosecutor shall investigate

13-3264811

S/PV.6962

the allegations of civilian deaths, looting, destruction
of civilian property and forced displacement by the
Misurata militias.
We recognize that Libya has demonstrated its full
readiness to cooperate with the ICC, as acknowledged
by the Prosecutor herself. We call on Libya to provide
the Court with all the information necessary to decide
on the admissibility challenges. Like the Prosecutor,
Argentina fully understands the challenges before
the Libyan authorities, and commends the ICC for its
willingness to support the Libyan Government in its
efforts to address as many cases as possible.
Argentina firmly believes, due to its past experience,
that when heinous crimes have been committed there
can be no sustainable peace without justice. Therefore,
beyond the competence of the ICC — which will
naturally focus on those who appear to be the most
responsible — it is necessary for the Libyan Government
to formulate and put into practice a global strategy for
combating impunity and rendering justice for those
horrendous crimes. Only accountability before the
law and a culture that respects human rights — which
implies a culture of collective memory as a guarantee
that crimes will not recur — will serve to strengthen
peace and provide relief for the victims. Given the
scope of the atrocities committed, Argentina believes
that a comprehensive strategy that is complemented by
the Court can lead to bolstering accountability before
Libyan domestic courts, while at the same time making
it possible for the International Criminal Court to hear
those cases that Libya’s judicial authorities cannot
address.
Some of the elements of my statement have already
been made, so I shall be brief. I would like for the record
to reflect a position that Argentina has promoted, and
would ask to be taken into account — that is, with regard
to the Council’s referrals and the situation in Libya,
which entail an obligation to follow up such referrals.
The Council cannot only take note of reports on the
matter. We are pleased that, in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/2, on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the Council expressed its commitment to
follow up its decisions on ad hoc tribunals and the ICC.
Similarly, Argentina reiterates its concern with regard
to the provision that the two referrals made to date
exempt from the Court’s jurisdiction nationals of States
that are not parties to the Rome Statute for acts or
omissions related to missions established or authorized
by the Council or related to them. Also of concern is the

12

issue of the financing of the expenses stemming from
such referrals.
In each of the cases and in each of the reports — such
as the current fifth report of the Prosecutor — it is
relevant to rethink how the Council and the entire United
Nations is going to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court. At the same time, as we have indicated
and affirmed, the purpose of the Court, its noble mission
and its functioning under a multilateral system is to put
an end to impunity, establish the rule of law, foster and
promote respect for human rights and achieve lasting
peace in comformity with international law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. That
is not something just said by this Ambassador — a
human rights activist — or even by my country; it is
something called for by the international community in
the Kampala Declaration and its preamble.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing. We have taken
note of her fifth report to the Security Council. We
commend her hard work and strong commitment to the
criminal justice system.
Pakistan is not a signatory to the Rome Statute, and
thus it is not a member of the International Criminal
Court. However, we recognize the rights and obligations
of the States that are members of the ICC.
The formation of a democratically elected
Government is a significant achievement for the Libyan
people. The country has now entered the important
phase of constitution-making, which is critical for its
prosperous and stable future. Success in that endeavour
can be achieved only with the support and cooperation
of all stakeholders.
Recent events in Tripoli, however, confirm that
Libya continues to face some daunting challenges.
The actions of the revolutionary brigades are likely to
undermine the progress so far achieved. We call upon
all armed groups in Libya to lay down their arms and
to engage in the democratic process and in dialogue to
resolve their differences and grievances.
Libya has submitted an admissibility challenge
in the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi. The Libyan
Government has asserted that it is willing and able to
prosecute him, and it therefore has precedence over
the Court in accordance with the complementary
nature of its jurisdiction. The Prosecutor’s report has
noted that Libya is acting fully in compliance with the
13-32648

S/PV.6962

Rome Statute in challenging the admissibility of the
cases against Saif Al-Islam and Abdullah Al-Senussi.
We hope that the request of the Libyan authorities to
try Al-Senussi and Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi will be
positively considered.
We understand that the ICC would like to monitor
the trials of those individuals if they are conducted in
Libya. The monitoring would be done in accordance
with the arrangements made between the Court and the
Libyan Government. That would give an opportunity to
the Libyan Government to demonstrate its commitment
to holding fair trials in accordance with due process, as
well as Libya’s international obligations.
The ICC Prosecutor has commended the cooperation
extended by the Libyan Government. We call upon the
Libyan Government to maintain its engagement with
the Court and to provide the necessary information for
the consideration of those cases.
We also encourage NATO to fully cooperate
with the Court, as well as Libya’s national efforts to
investigate civilian casualties during the conflict.
With regard to the investigation of other alleged
crimes committed in Libya, we underline the need
to conduct thorough and impartial investigations
regardless of which side perpetrated the crimes.
The international criminal justice system has
demonstrated that national judicial mechanisms can
ultimately be more efficient and cost-effective in dealing
with such crimes. The ICC and other international
tribunals have succeeded in dealing with only a handful
of cases. For the bulk of the cases, greater reliance on
national judicial systems is advisable.
Therefore, strengthening the Libyan judicial system
is essential for addressing the crimes that occurred in
the country. The Libyan Government must continue
to formulate and implement a comprehensive strategy
to address those crimes. The international community
should extend its full support to Libya to achieve that
objective.
In the long run, the promotion of reconciliation is
essential for fostering national unity and bridging the
fissures caused by the conflict. Achieving a balance
between the imperatives of justice and peace is always
a difficult challenge. That can best be achieved through
national mechanisms and institutions.
In conclusion, we underscore Pakistan’s full support
for the well-being and prosperity of the people of Libya.

We wish them success in their quest for reconciliation,
stability and institution-building.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing and to
welcome her back to the Security Council today. The
United States looks forward to continuing our active
engagement with the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the Office of the Prosecutor, consistent with
our law and policy, to ensure accountability for the
most serious crimes of international concern.
Libya continues to make progress under its first
democratically elected Government in more than
40 years. The Libyan people are moving forward
and charting their own future, and the United States
congratulates them for it.
There are clearly tough challenges ahead, from
building political consensus to strengthening security
and to protecting human rights. There is no doubt that
justice and accountability will remain central to the
success of Libya’s transition and lasting peace in the
country. But Libya is not alone on that path. The United
States and others in the international community stand
ready to assist the Libyan Government and people in
reforming their institutions of justice, strengthening
the rule of law, and advancing human rights and respect
for international law.
We welcome the statements in the Prosecutor’s
report and briefing today regarding Libya’s cooperation,
particularly in the cases involving Abdullah Al-Senussi
and Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. As the Prosecutor noted,
the proceedings involving Al-Senussi and Al-Qadhafi
are reaching critical stages and will continue to attract
considerable attention.
This is an important moment for both Libya and
the International Criminal Court. We urge Libya to
continue adhering to its international obligations,
including under resolution 1970 (2011). Furthermore,
the United States remains deeply concerned by
allegations of rape and sexual violence, as documented
by the United Nations Commission of Inquiry. We
believe that accountability for those and other serious
crimes is critical.
Whatever the outcome of the admissibility
proceedings before the ICC, Libya will need to bolster
domestic accountability structures and processes to
create a strong, fair and credible system of justice. The
Government must not tolerate impunity for perpetrators

13-3264813

S/PV.6962

of serious crimes, regardless of their affiliation or
the nature of their crimes, and it should act to ensure
transitional justice consistent with Libya’s international
human rights obligations. In particular, we urge Libya
to develop and implement a comprehensive transitional
justice strategy that uncovers the truth about past
abuses, holds accountable those most responsible,
brings justice to the victims and addresses the root
causes of abuse. Only by reckoning with its past can
Libya finally realize the promise of its transition.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her report and
her detailed briefing. Luxembourg fully supports the
objectives presented by the Prosecutor. We can never
overstate the importance of respect for the principle of
accountability and the fight against impunity. Those
universal goals guide the work of the United Nations
and are at the centre of the international community’s
concerns. I also wish to commend the Prosecutor for
the investigations her Office has undertaken on all
the facts and evidence necessary to establish the legal
accountability of the perpetrators, in accordance with
the Rome Statute.
We welcome the significant progress made in Libya
in terms of political and democratic transition, even
though challenges undoubtedly remain, in particular
with regard to security. Through the adoption of 1970
(2011), the Security Council decided that the Libyan
authorities should fully cooperate with the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the Prosecutor and provide
them with all necessary assistance. In that regard, we
welcome the visit to The Hague on 19 April of the
Prosecutor-General of Libya and the Libyan focal point
for the ICC to discuss cooperation and the coordination
of efforts to move the investigations forward, in
accordance with the principle of complementarity. We
commend the intention expressed by the Prosecutor
this morning to visit Tripoli in the near future to deepen
those exchanges. We believe that it is highly important
for the Libyan authorities to continue to cooperate with
the ICC and that the Prosecutor should enjoy the support
she needs from all States, including those that are not
parties to the Rome Statute, without precondition or
limitation.
We await with interest the decision to be taken by
the Court with regard to the admissibility challenges
of Libya in the cases of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. That decision will require

14

the Libyan legal system to be assessed for sufficient
impartiality and independence, and for the necessary
capacity to respond to the post-conflict challenges it
faces. We trust that the Court and its assessment will
ensure that the cases will be in full conformity with
international standards. Regardless of the Court’s final
decision, we agree with Ms. Bensouda that the Office
of the Prosecutor must be informed of all measures and
decisions taken by the Libyan authorities in those cases.
We are concerned by the reports, especially
those coming from the International Commission
of Inquiry on Libya, with regard to sexual violence
and the recruitment and use of children. We thank
Ms. Bensouda for the information she provided on the
ongoing investigations. We insist on the need to ensure
the protection of the victims of those acts in order to
prevent any risk of new suffering or potential reprisals.
With regard to the allegations of crimes committed
by rebel forces, we share the concerns of the Office of
the Prosecutor on the situation in Tawergha, where the
violence against the civilian population perpetrated by
Misurata militias could constitute war crimes or crimes
against humanity. We deplore the fact that the security
situation currently makes it impossible for the Office of
the Prosecutor to have access to those areas.
Reprisals, such as those committed against
civilians and described in the Prosecutor’s report, are
unacceptable. Arbitrary arrests, violence in detention
centres and forced disappearances must stop. The
perpetrators must be held accountable. We welcome the
ongoing efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor to that
end. We call on the Prosecutor and her Office to sustain
their commitment along those lines, in cooperation
with the Libyan authorities .
In conclusion, like Ms. Bensouda, we would like
to encourage the Libyan authorities to draw up, publish
and implement a comprehensive strategy to end the
crime and impunity in Libya. The process initiated by
resolution 1970 (2011) must run its course. That calls
both for Libya’s full cooperation with the Office of the
Prosecutor and the full support of the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya. Justice must be done. Impunity cannot be
tolerated. Those responsible for the crimes committed
in Libya must be brought to justice and undergo a fair
trial.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)

13-32648

S/PV.6962

for her report and briefing and, in that connection, I
reiterate our full support to her. It is particularly useful
that this debate was preceded yesterday by an informal
interactive dialogue, which allowed us to prepare for
this meeting.

deliberations and in its directives to the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), the issue of the
security of Libyan judges and prosecutors. That is an
issue that is part and parcel of all efforts to reform local
judicial institutions.

The aspects touched upon today by the Prosecutor
provide insight into the situation in Libya. That country
is in transition after 42 years of dictatorship. Violent
acts continue, including against diplomatic missions.
However, the Libyan authorities, including Prime
Minister Ali Zeidan, have consistently reiterated their
commitment to pursuing the democratization of the
country, and the Council stands ready to help them.

Resolution 1970 (2011) remains an example of the
capacity of the Security Council and, more generally,
the international community to act in a unified
and swift manner. Given the crimes perpetrated by
Libyan officials, both the United Nations and regional
organizations condemned the atrocities that were
perpetrated. Resolution 1970 (2011), referring the
situation in Libya to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, is at the heart of the process for
identifying perpetrators, whatever their rank. It has
allowed us to save thousands of human lives.

Libya, despite its difficulties, has asked to try Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi itself.
That is an option created by the Rome Statute. It is
also a tribute to that post-conflict country that it has
endeavoured thereby to shoulder its responsibilities.
We welcome the Libyan Government’s choice to
avail itself of its right to challenge the admissibility
of the case before the ICC, in full conformity with
the Statute and thus in full conformity with resolution
1970 (2011) . As the Prosecutor reminded us, by law the
final decision will be up to the judges of the ICC. We
have no doubt that Libya, pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), will respect that decision. Libya’s upholding
of its international obligations is a key indicator of its
commitment to the rule of law. From that perspective,
we must not speak about competition between Libya
and the ICC. Libya has obligations under resolution
1970 (2011) and is upholding them; that is the heart of
the matter. That is also an example for other countries
such as the Sudan that refuse to engage in judicial
proceedings with the Court, which runs counter to
Council decisions.
The Prosecutor also indicated that she would
continue her investigation regarding allegations of
sexual crimes committed in Libya by members of
Al-Qadhafi’s entourage, who may be outside of Libya.
She can be assured of our support. The use of rape as
a weapon of terror and a weapon of war is a crime to
which the Council attaches particular importance.
With regard to the other allegations, we support
the Prosecutor in the discussions she is holding with
the Government on a comprehensive strategy aimed
at putting an end to crime and impunity in Libya. As
noted by Ms. Bensouda yesterday, the Council may
have a role to play in that regard by stressing, in its

Today follow-up must be provided to that approach.
The Council must be rigorous and better organize its
cooperation with the ICC when it refers cases to it. That
is one of the lessons that we draw from the public debate
on interaction with the ICC held last year under the
auspices of Guatemala, as well as yesterday’s dialogue.
We must be ready to better and more quickly deal with
the requests for support and cooperation made by the
Court. The easiest thing, of course, would be to request
experts to deal with the issue in the framework of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
We must also ensure that, in the framework of the
Sanctions Committees, we respond to requests for
information from the Court.
The process initiated by resolution 1970 (2011)
must run its course. Indeed, that is what the Council
reiterated in its resolutions 1973 (2011), 2009 (2011),
2040 (2012) and 2095 (2013). That requires both full
cooperation on the part of Libya with the Office of
the Prosecutor and full support from the Council. It
also requires further consultation by the Secretariat
and Mr. Tarek Mitri, the head of UNSMIL, with the
Prosecutor, so as to ensure that UNSMIL contributes
to combating impunity and supports the activities of
the ICC. We must ensure, during the next UNSMIL
briefing, that the Mission describes to the Council the
synergies involved in upholding the mandates of each
institution.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Togo.
I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),

13-3264815

S/PV.6962

for her briefing, which has provided useful information
on the situation in Libya, which is before the Court
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). I wish also to thank
her for the information she provided yesterday during
the interactive dialogue upstream of her briefing today.
While Togo’s position with respect to the Rome
Statute of the ICC has not changed, we nevertheless
feel that that information has allowed us to better
understand the activities of and challenges facing the
Office of the Prosecutor in relation to the situation in
Libya with respect to the principal aspects of the issue:
cooperation, the admissibility of the Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi cases, ongoing
investigations and allegations of crimes committed by
the various parties.
Turning to cooperation, Togo welcomes the
resumption of contacts between the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICC and the Libyan authorities
following the elections and the appointment, on
17 March, of the new Prosecutor-General, Abdul
Quader Radwan. While we encourage discussions
between the ICC and the Libyan authorities, we believe
that such discussions will be perceived as constructive
and fruitful only if they advocate the prosecution of the
perpetrators of the crimes committed, be it on Libyan
soil or outside the country. A major challenge facing
reconciliation in Libya is that prosecution either by the
ICC or by national courts must not target one single
party but all parties, so as not to give the impression of
a victor’s justice.
The ICC must ensure that its cooperation with
the Libyan authorities correct any adverse effects that
might result from any amnesty law, under the pretext
of promoting or protecting the revolution, or that might
aim to protect the perpetrators of crimes committed in
the framework of the revolution but that fall under the
jurisdiction of the Court and thus the Rome Statute.
On the issue of complementarity, Togo believes
that the prosecution and sentencing of perpetrators
is the responsibility first and foremost of the Libyan
authorities. Togo therefore believes that Libya’s decision
to challenge the admissibility of the Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi cases before the
Court under the Rome Statute is a case in point and
an example of active complementarity. We are pleased
that, unlike in the Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi case, there
seems to be evidence in the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi

16

that could establish that the Government is prosecuting
the same case as the ICC.
Nevertheless, it remains that only reference here
can be the decision of the relevant chambers. That
is why Togo awaits with interest the decisions of the
relevant branches of the Court regarding the cases, in
the hope that those decisions will promote the principle
of due process and national reconciliation in Libya.
Indeed, while decisions regarding the admissibility
exception in the Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi cases will not represent a general assessment
of the Libyan legal system, they will serve as an
indicator of the ability of the national justice system to
guarantee due process, justice for victims and the right
to defence for all, as well as witness protection.
With regard to the ongoing investigations, Togo is
convinced that gender crimes must not go unpunished
and is pleased that the fifth report and that which
preceded it confirm that those investigations are
under way. Togo hopes that those investigations
will be concluded and prosecution begun against the
perpetrators.
Moreover, we are concerned about the recurring
reports by human rights organizations of serious
violations of rights in the form of torture or illtreatment, particularly against persons of African
origin on the basis of their alleged association with the
Al-Qadhafi regime.
Togo also expresses its concern about the crimes
committed by rebel forces in Tawergha, near Misrata,
and calls on the Libyan authorities to take measures to
ensure that the perpetrators of those crimes are held
accountable for their actions by national courts, or to
cooperate fully with the ICC. Togo therefore urges
the Libyan authorities not only to draw up a strategy
for past crimes but also to explore the possibilities for
transitional justice to address the impacts of the crisis
and political events, with the aim of promoting peace
throughout the country and national reconciliation.
In that regard, we reiterate our call to all of Libya’s
partners to spare no effort in assisting the country on
the path to achieving those goals.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

13-32648

S/PV.6962

Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Sir, for having given me the opportunity
to speak at this important meeting of the Security
Council. I also congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and I wish
you and your delegation success as you discharge that
lofty mission.
I also wish to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her comprehensive briefing on the work of the ICC
regarding Libya. Ms. Bensouda spoke in detail about the
excellent cooperation between her Office and Libya’s
judicial authorities. It is clear that that relationship is
based on complementarity and cooperation. It is also
clear that both parties are guided by the common goals
of ensuring that justice is done and impunity eradicated.
Without a doubt, the talks between the ICC
Prosecutor and the Libyan Prosecutor-General have
paved the way for further initiatives in that vein.
They may lead to a shift in that relationship, seeing
it become a genuine partnership in the framework of
complementarity, in the light of the suggestion that the
Office of the ICC Prosecutor would investigate those
who stand accused of perpetrating heinous crimes but
are located outside of Libya.
The ICC Prosecutor addressed in detail the cases
of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi
and the proceedings relating to those individuals. I have
little to add to her statement in that regard except to
reiterate that the circumstances of their arrests were
in full conformity with international standards. They,
like all persons responsible for heinous crimes, will
be prosecuted in line with internationally recognized
legal principles. All technical arrangements have been
made to commence trials following the completion of
investigations.
Today I would like to state anew Libya’s
commitment to the rule of law and to eliminating any
links with the practices of the previous regime. Libyan
judicial authorities have indicated their commitment
to conducting impartial, objective and transparent
trials of all those accused of committing crimes and
perpetrating serious violations of human rights in the
course of the revolution against the tyrant Al-Qadhafi,
as well as under his 42-year regime.
When we talk about the rule of law, we mean
that no one can be above the law. No amnesty will be
given to any perpetrator of serious crimes, except by

general arrangements in the framework of transitional
justice and national reconciliation, with the consent
of the victims or their relatives, and in a manner that
promotes social harmony in the spirit of letting bygones
be bygones.
I would like to emphasize that Libya views the ICC
as a necessary and important partner for achieving
justice, preventing impunity and providing assistance
in building technical capacities. Libya hopes that all
States will cooperate with the Libyan authorities and
the ICC in conducting investigations and bringing the
accused to justice. States should not provide accused
individuals with safe haven or invoke flimsy pretexts
to delay their surrender to our judicial authorities.
That is especially important as delaying the handover
of perpetrators will deprive our authorities of the
opportunity to verify a number of claims made in the
course of investigations, thus impeding the delivery of
justice.
I would like to state once again that many
Al-Qadhafi officials accused of perpetrating crimes
remain free and are continuing to work daily to conspire
against Libya and other States. I would like to remind
all States that, by virtue of paragraph 8 of resolution
2040 (2012), other resolutions and the Rome Statute,
all States are duty-bound to closely cooperate with our
authorities to bring an end to impunity. I would like
to take this opportunity to affirm that the failure to
respond to calls for surrender of the accused by the
States that are sheltering them will be viewed as the
obstruction of justice. It is an unfriendly action that
will have an adverse effect on relations between Libya
and those States in the future.
I am well aware that many would like to know about
the latest incidents that took place in Libya, namely, the
siege of the Ministries of Justice and Foreign Affairs
as well as the pressures being put on the General
National Congress to legislate gender segregation.
Those actions are the result of many fanciful and rash
notions held by young people following the end of the
dictatorship and are rooted solely in personal interest.
It is natural and expected in a situation like the one
my country is going through. We are seeing immature
political action and party wrangling guided by national
ambitions, not necessarily ideological ones. In the case
of Libya, political action has generally always been
reasonable — which serves to hamper the spread of
immature behaviour. In any case, it will definitely not
undermine the process of political transformation.

13-3264817

S/PV.6962

The temporary Government is not too weak to
deal with such excesses. However, it is aware of the
daunting challenges it faces and is behaving wisely with
respect to the difficulties presented to our fledgling
institutions. Those institutions are resolved not to use
force against excessive actions undertaken by armed
groups who purport to operate under the Ministry of
Defence. However, those groups are not very familiar
with military rules or practices.
The Government is absolutely committed to
preventing Libyan infighting. It will not use legitimate
force, except in the cases of serious violations of the
law, demonstrable threat to the lives of our people, or
harm to property of the State or foreign nationals.
Despite everything I have mentioned, the
Government is eager to entrench respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. It is constantly
looking for assistance from the international
community and the United Nations in order to achieve
democratic transformation and the building of a stable
and democratic State.
In conclusion, I would like to draw attention to the
fact that the transitional phase in Libya is a decisive
and momentous one for our people. The transitional
Government faces a number of complex and intertwined
challenges that require judicious and patient treatment
that takes into consideration all aspects, with a view
to improving the security situation and creating the
conditions necessary for the achievement of justice and
the building of State institutions on a sound basis. In
turn, that will serve to energize the economy and to
respond to the ambitions and aspirations of our citizens.
There is no doubt that the understanding shown by the
Council and the international community and their help
in building the capacity of our Government will greatly
contribute to the transition and the transformation of
our country into a real democracy.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda to respond to the
comments and questions that were raised.

18

Ms. Bensouda: I also want to express my gratitude
to the members of the Security Council for their words
of encouragement and support for the Office of the
Prosecutor and our work.
While today the Council is not discussing the
situation in Kenya, I find myself compelled to set the
record straight with regard to remarks made by the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) has always
and will always continue to respect the sovereign
equality of all States. However, the ICC will not shy
away from investigating individuals for any alleged
crimes, irrespective of their status. On the basis of the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda’s statement, I
must surmise that the information contained in Kenya’s
letter to the Council is unfounded and incorrect. It is
a backdoor attempt to politicize the judicial processes
of the Court. The letter referred to by the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda has not been transmitted to
us. We therefore reserve our rights to respond to it in
detail in due course and we hope we will be given that
opportunity once it has been transmitted to us.
Furthermore, it is for the presidency of the
International Criminal Court to assign and reassign
judges to different chambers, depending on the
exigencies of the work. I reject as an unfounded attempt
to discredit the work of the International Criminal
Court any insinuation that the reassignment of Judge
Christine Van den Wyngaert has anything to do with
the working methods of the Office of the Prosecutor or
of the Court as a whole.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for the clarifications that she has provided.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

13-32648
