United Nations

S/PV.6095

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6095th meeting
Friday, 20 March 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shalgham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir John Sawers
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2009/132)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution
1846 (2008) (S/2009/146)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-27495 (E)

*0927495*

S/PV.6095

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2009/132)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1846 (2008)
(S/2009/146)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Czech Republic, Malaysia,
Norway and Somalia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Omaar
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia; His Excellency
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union; and His Excellency
Mr. Samir Hosni, Director of African Administration
and the Afro-Arab Cooperation Department of the
League of Arab States.
It is so decided.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, document S/2009/132.
Members of the Council also have before them
the report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1846 (2008), document S/2009/146.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia. I
now give him the floor.
Mr. Ould Abdallah: The purpose of my
presentation is to introduce the next steps in the
implementation of the Djibouti agreement, an ongoing
process, and to explain how I see Somalia’s long march
back to normality. First I would like to make a few
observations, then to outline the importance of the
linkages between governance, security and development,
and finally to discuss how to make the best use of the
first 100 days of the new Government.
A few observations: for years, the situation in
Somalia has been a threat to its people, with continued
armed confrontation and subsequent anarchy, and a
threat to its neighbours, with border insecurity and
trafficking of humans, weapons and drugs. A
vulnerable State has made the whole region vulnerable.
Finally, it has been a threat to the international
community, with increasing irregular migration flows,
home-grown hard drugs, terrorism and piracy.
To address the complexities in Somalia, a new
paradigm, based on the linkages between governance,
security and development, is now needed. While the
Somali elite — military, business and religious leaders,
but also elders and intellectuals — bears most of the
blame for the collapse of their nation, the international
community cannot shirk its own responsibilities.
Today, all of us, Somalis and the international
community, should undertake efforts to win each
other’s hearts and minds. Somalis have to find a way
out of the trap, and we do too.
Obviously, there is no possibility of wide-scale
recovery and rehabilitation if the internal situation
remains volatile. At the same time, without basic
investment in development — providing employment for

09-27495

S/PV.6095

youth and women and rehabilitating neighbourhoods —
criminality will continue to thrive and security will not
improve.
A strategy with achievable goals should help
stabilize the country. For the next 100 days, these goals
should be limited to employment, renovation of
infrastructure and humanitarian assistance. Many
young people are always available for violent
confrontation. A large number of those extremists, who
carry out murder under different banners, are generally
far more interested in their share of revenues than in
ideology. There are plenty of illegitimate ways to make
small and large profits in and from Somalia. How can
we convince the profit-seekers and spoilers that peace
will be more profitable?
Simultaneous assistance to governance, security
and development should be delivered. While large
resources are available for Somalia, a major problem is
their effective and timely disbursement. That issue
should be addressed urgently. However, it should not
be up to the international community alone to support
Somalia. The country has the longest coastline in
Africa — 2,300 kilometres — with rich fish resources
and promising hydrocarbon deposits. More important,
it has an extraordinarily entrepreneurial business
community, and its diaspora sends more than $1 billion
home each year. Those advantages should be mobilized
for peace, reconstruction and development — not for
destruction. Creating insecurity inside the country for
20 years and, now, exposing young members of the
diaspora to terrorist activities and suspicion in their
new homelands is unpatriotic.
During my first statement before the Council, on
17 December 2007 (see S/PV.5805), I presented three
possible courses of action for the United Nations to
follow in Somalia. They were: a business-as-usual
policy; total withdrawal from the country; and
combined, simultaneous, political, security and
development undertakings. The Djibouti agreement is
the result of the last approach. In that connection, I
wish to recognize with thanks the support that I have
received from the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the African Union, the League
of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the European Union, the European
Commission, Norway, the United States, Djibouti and
Kenya, to mention only a few, as well as the permanent
members of the Security Council, who have been very
supportive. The members of the International Contact

09-27495

Group on Somalia, which I chair, have demonstrated a
strong engagement in favour of stability in Somalia.
Today, we need a 100-day assistance programme.
The State legitimacy is established and the legality of
the new institutions is recognized regionally,
internationally and, indeed, by the vast majority of
Somalis. The President, the Speaker, the Prime
Minister, the Cabinet and parliament are all back in
Mogadishu, a welcome departure from past practices of
functioning from outside the capital. Describing
Somalia, The Economist stated recently that there is a
glimmer of hope, and indeed there is a chance for a
fresh start.
That new seriousness of purpose invites the
international community to back the progress being
made through practical actions. Those include, first,
immediate support for the new authorities; secondly,
immediate diplomatic and financial assistance to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM); thirdly,
transparent and unhindered delivery of humanitarian
assistance; fourthly, the matter of individuals on the
Security Council sanctions list; fifthly, impunity; and,
finally, piracy off the Somali coast.
We should now help Somalis reclaim the future
of their country. The new Administration has a
convincing legitimacy and is recognized internationally
by IGAD, the African Union, the European Union, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the United Nations. There is, therefore,
an obligation to respect and cooperate with those new
authorities and to do no harm to their institutions and
their credibility. They should be consulted on,
informed about and associated with all political,
economic and humanitarian actions concerning their
country. That new approach should put an end to past
misunderstandings between some members of the
international community and Somalia’s central
Government. The new Government should also be
informed about Somalia’s assets held in a number of
overseas banks or in accounts managed by
international organizations.
Secondly, pending the mobilization of credible
funding for AMISOM, the courageous and dedicated
African troops and their countries of origin deserve
immediate diplomatic recognition and financial
support. In that context, I hope that the conference for
resource mobilization for AMISOM and the Somali
forces, organized in cooperation with the African

3

S/PV.6095

Union, the League of Arab States, the European Union
and the United Nations within the framework of
resolution 1863 (2009), will be successful. The
Secretary-General is due to submit a report for a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in advance of a
Council decision on the issue in June. The integrated
planning process to develop the Secretary-General’s
recommendations is ongoing.
Thirdly,
after
two
decades
of
armed
confrontation, humanitarian assistance is needed more
than ever before. While the needs are enormous,
Somalia is not to be seen as a purely humanitarian
case. A 20-year-long emergency is a contradiction in
terms. More has to be done, especially at the political
and diplomatic levels, to find a lasting solution. While
humanitarian assistance should be provided in close
cooperation and consultation with the legitimate
Government, it should not and cannot be used as a
political tool by any party, be it the Government, the
opposition or others.
Fourthly, last year a Somali was taken off the list
of the United Nations Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee. I believe that others should qualify when
they demonstrate a sincere desire to help the return of
peace and stability to their country of origin by
severing all links with radical groups.
Finally, the Djibouti Agreement makes provision
for justice and reconciliation. Impunity perpetuates
violence. The country should address crimes against
humanity and war crimes committed by Somalis
against Somalis. A national truth and reconciliation
commission could be established, and the Security
Council may also consider the problem through a
commission of inquiry.
Regarding piracy, it is above all a profitable
business. It is linked to the failure of the State on land
and is its extension offshore. It has to be addressed
vigorously to help the security of maritime trade
routes. By drawing attention to the plight of Somalis,
the international naval presence is a show of solidarity
with the country and the whole region. Indeed, to fight
piracy is also to fight many criminal activities —
illegal fishing, waste dumping and trafficking in
humans and drugs. At the same time, there is the need
to consolidate cooperative work to help trace the
pirates’ financial resources. At the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, we plan to do that with
our colleagues at the United Nations Office on Drugs

4

and Crime. Finally, while Somalia’s sovereignty and
national interests are to be respected, acts of piracy by
private individuals or groups can never be justified.
In conclusion, given the long-standing scepticism
and diehard habits, the struggle for peace will be long.
Therefore, the first priority in Somalia is to liberate the
hijacked Somali peace agenda, held hostage for so
long. I would argue that with the Djibouti Agreement,
the country has passed the crossroads. It is on a oneway street going forward. The price of regression to
the conflict is too high for Somalia, the region and,
indeed, the international community.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, for his briefing
and his detailed report.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia.
Mr. Omaar (Somalia): I am pleased to have this
opportunity to report recent developments and the
significant progress made by the Government of
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and Prime
Minister Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke. First,
however, I wish to thank the Council, the Member
States, the Governments, the Secretary-General and the
United Nations as a whole for the aid and assistance
that they have given to Somalia and the Somali people
over the past 18 years. Their support and that of the
international community has been crucial for the past
efforts for peace in Somalia. We acknowledge and
appreciate that, and we now wish to take that forward
in partnership with them to re-establish the institutions
of the State and to implement the rule of law.
As the Council is aware, the Djibouti peace
process delivered a firm platform for a Government of
national unity, with the election of our new President
on 30 January and his appointment of the Prime
Minister on 13 February. One month ago to this day,
the Prime Minister announced the new Cabinet, which
was sworn into office on 21 February and given an
almost unanimous mandate by parliament on the same
day. Within a week, the President, the Prime Minister,
the Cabinet and parliament all returned to Somalia and
assumed the seat of government on a permanent basis
with the required quorum, and the first Cabinet
meeting took place on 28 February. This assumption of

09-27495

S/PV.6095

the seat of government is permanent and irreversible,
and the business of government is now fully under way
from Mogadishu.
Our first and foremost policy is and will remain
the establishment of peace and security in Somalia.
That can be achieved only through dialogue,
negotiation,
the
will
for
compromise
and
reconciliation. The people of Somalia and the
international community have paid a high price to
reach this point, and we see it as the moment of truth.
We, as the Government, and our partners, the
international community, now have the responsibility
and the opportunity to realize what has eluded us all
for 18 years.
Over the past four weeks of its operation, the
Government has taken five essential actions to lay the
foundations for its programme of peace and
reconciliation.
The first was its immediate and irreversible
assumption of the seat of government in the capital,
Mogadishu.
The second was the integration of the forces of
the Transitional Federal Government and of the
Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia into the Joint
Security Force. That has been successful and effective
in the rebuilding of national security forces, which are
essential to the establishment of peace and security
within the country and are the means for reconciliation
within the priority sector of State institutions.
The third has been the developing mobilization of
the Somali people in support of the peace process. This
mobilization and motivation among the major
stakeholders — including merchants and businessmen,
clan elders, religious leaders, women and young
people — has gathered such momentum that the peace
process is now, in reality, a common property that is
being both championed and defended by the Somali
people and by communities themselves.
Our fourth initiative has been to re-establish the
authority of the State and the rule of law in the
economy. That has started with the assumption of full
authority over Mogadishu port and airport, which are,
respectively, the principal seaport and airport in
Somalia. Both have been restructured with new
administrations
and
internationally
acceptable
operational procedures. They are two new sources of

09-27495

internal revenue for the Government, which we aim to
develop and strengthen.
Our fifth and most recent initiative has been the
re-establishment of our dialogue with the international
community through the International Contact Group on
Somalia, the Arab League and the African Union and
through bilateral discussions in the subregion with
Kenya, Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda, undertaken
through presidential visits to those countries over the
past 10 days.
The need for peace and the will for liberty to
achieve it have shown that, in the end, the voice and
the will of the people must prevail. That has been no
less inevitable in Somalia than it has been in the
history of the world. Today in Somalia there are no
warlords; there are no clan wars; there are no political
factions holding the country hostage. Some, however,
still refuse the offer of peace and dialogue, even when
we reconfirm that the Sharia is the source of the law, as
it is under the Charter of the Transitional Federal
Government, and that it will remain so under the
proposed constitution now under preparation. Yet we
remain ready to negotiate with them, but we will do so
only across the table. The gun must be put away.
We have focused and set our targets on the first
100 days. The Somali people have shown their will for
peace, and our responsibility as a Government is to
provide credibility, coherence and competence in
governance. That can be built only in partnership and
collaboration with the international community. The
society of States that is represented by the United
Nations must put the past and its disappointments
behind it. We are at a landmark moment, and we cannot
afford to fail. We therefore ask you, the member
Governments, and other multilateral institutions to
support the Government with urgent and immediate
action in the following areas.
The first is security stabilization. The
Government’s security and peacekeeping strategy is
based on the twin pillars of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Joint Security Force of
the Government. With regard to AMISOM, we have
requested from the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the Governments of Burundi and Uganda
that three additional battalions be sent to Somalia on an
urgent basis. That needs to be undertaken immediately,
with improved equipment, logistics and medical
facilities.

5

S/PV.6095

With regard to the Joint Security Force, it has not
been adequately funded, resourced or equipped thus
far, yet it is AMISOM’s essential partner for
peacekeeping. Without an operational Joint Security
Force on the Somali side, AMISOM and the
peacekeeping mission will be hampered for lack of a
national partner force that will, in time, take on the
responsibility for security and stability.
As for the United Nations peacekeeping force, we
welcome and support the commitment to establish such
a force for Somalia, and we confirm that a significant
number of the benchmarks detailed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/132) are already in place.
With respect to the pledging conference set for
22 April, it is most crucial to resource the security
sector as a whole, as detailed earlier. Without such
resources, visible and effective demonstration of the
authority of the State and the rule of law will not be
achieved and peace will not be secured.
Finally, with regard to the arms embargo in the
security sector, if the Joint Security Force is to be
equipped by the international community, to partner
with AMISOM and to secure peace, the embargo on the
Government must be readdressed.
The second area concerns, in terms of our
requirements, cooperation with the Government and
capacity-building. The peace process and the
achievements so far have been undertaken in
partnership with the international community. Our
common objectives, and the investments made, have
been to assist the Somali people to establish effective
institutions of State and the rule of law. The
Government of national unity that is now in place has
been recognized by the international community. Yet
the need to work with the organs of the Government —
however fragile — and to respect its dignity and
sovereignty must be highlighted. We all need to make
adjustments in attitudes and in operational habits and
procedures.
Those adjustments must be telescoped into the
resourcing of capacity-building for Government
institutions. Personnel in the ministries and
departments of the Government need training and
provision of expertise to re-establish effective
operations for the delivery of public services and
administrative governance at both the federal and local
levels.

6

With regard to humanitarian aid, as confirmed by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2009/132), more
than 3 million people will need humanitarian assistance
due to both displacement and drought. Of that total,
580,000 are internally displaced people in the vicinity
of Mogadishu. This is a danger to human life that can
be averted. It is also a danger to the peace and stability
that we all seek. The fruits of peace must show in the
lives of the displaced and the victims of drought. They
need the Council to act, as they deserve its assistance.
With regard to piracy, as stated by the SecretaryGeneral, defeating piracy in Somalia requires the
restoration of the rule of law. As the origin and base of
piracy is on land, defeating piracy can only be done in
partnership with the Government. In 2008, 111 piracy
attacks occurred, and in 2009, seven attacks have
occurred already. For our part, we are ready, willing
and able to integrate the required actions against piracy
into the twin pillars of our security development and
stabilization programme, as detailed earlier. We look to
the international community for an immediate, agreed
plan for implementation.
In Somalia, the momentum for peace has created
a new momentum. Somalia is no longer caught in the
stalemate
of
conflict
between
factions
of
approximately equal weight. This momentum is led by
the Government. We have gained credibility with the
Somali people. We are establishing coherence through
the State institutions, which we need to be empowered.
Most of all, however, we need the resources for the
competence needed for governance.
I thank the Security Council for this opportunity
to address the Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia, for his statement.
In view of the fact that the African Union is an
important partner of the United Nations in the peace
process in Somalia and that it has a peacekeeping
mission there, and since the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, is with us today, he will be given the floor
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. The
information he will be presenting to us is
complementary to what the representative of the
Secretary-General and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Somalia have provided. I therefore propose that we
give the floor to Mr. Lamamra to make a statement

09-27495

S/PV.6095

before members of the Council. This is an exceptional
proposal and should not be construed as setting a
precedent in any way. Are there any objections?

I should like to thank the Council for this
opportunity to address it on this very important issue of
Somalia.

Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): Given the
very important relations that we, as France and as the
Security Council, have with the African Union, it is
obvious that it is entirely appropriate to give due
consideration to the statements by representatives of
the African Union. Given our long-standing friendly
relations with Commissioner Lamamra, we of course
do not want to keep him from speaking.

Somalia has witnessed significant progress since
the beginning of the year. Following the resignation of
President Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed on 29 December
2008, a number of positive developments took place in
the country. First, Somali stakeholders, acting in
accordance with the decisions reached within the
context of the Djibouti process, expanded the
Transitional Federal Parliament to accommodate the
Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia and other
stakeholders, including civil society.

However, I must express publicly my reservations
concerning the motivation behind this decision. Those
reasons were made known to me, and it was with
reservations that I accepted the decision, which was
taken because of scheduling constraints on the part of
the Commissioner, who wished to address the Council
before leaving New York. Under these circumstances,
France will, of course, help the Commissioner address
the Council in the way that he has worked out.
However, if it is because this is a subject that
concerns the African Union that the floor will be given
to a regional organization before it is given to the
Security Council, I will have to express my very
serious reservations. That does not seem to be in
accordance with, in particular, the discussions that we
held in this very Chamber a few days ago on relations
between the African Union and the Security Council.
Once again, if it is a matter of scheduling
constraints, it is with great pleasure that I would wish
to help our friend Mr. Lamamra get out of this difficult
situation. Under those circumstances, we have no
objections.
The President (spoke in Arabic): If there are no
further comments it is so decided.
I now invite Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security for the African
Union, to take a seat at the Council table, and I give
him the floor.
Mr. Lamamra (spoke in Arabic): Thank you,
Mr. President, for your understanding and for your
assistance in making it possible for the African Union
to address the Council. This is very important for the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations.
(spoke in English)

09-27495

On 30 January 2009, the expanded parliament
proceeded, in a free and fair manner, to elect a new
President in the person of His Excellency Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed. This election, coupled with the
expansion of the parliament, crowned the process
initiated by the signing of the Djibouti agreement of
19 August 2008. Later, on 13 February, the newly
elected President appointed His Excellency Mr. Omar
Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke as the new Prime Minister,
and a 36-member national unity cabinet was thereafter
constituted. The Government and other transitional
institutions have since relocated to Mogadishu.
It is worth noting that the new President, upon
assumption of duty, expressed his commitment to work
towards effective reconciliation among the Somali
people and bring on board those elements that are still
outside the peace process. He also stressed the
intention of his Government to promote close
cooperation with Somalia’s neighbours. As the Council
is aware, the Djibouti agreement was conducted under
the auspices of the United Nations, with the active
support of the African Union and other international
partners. I should like to underscore the need for
sustained United Nations engagement in the
implementation of the agreement as a critical part of
the effort to promote the success of the peace and
reconciliation process.
The African Union (AU) appreciates the Security
Council’s continued attention in addressing the threats
posed by piracy off the coast of Somalia and beyond.
The effective actions that are being taken should
directly or indirectly assist in promoting much-needed
overall security for Somalia and for the whole region.
Indeed, the security situation in Somalia, and in
Mogadishu in particular, remains very volatile. In

7

S/PV.6095

efforts to address the heightened level of insecurity,
notably the attacks directed at the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), President Sheikh
Sharif met with representatives of a number of armed
opposition groups in a bid to open dialogue with them.
The President also established a national security
committee to oversee efforts to improve security and
broaden reconciliation. Furthermore, a number of
religious clerics, traditional leaders, businessmen and
the influential Hawiiye Cultural and Unity Council
have also intervened and prevailed on some of the
groups concerned to halt their attacks on AMISOM.
That has resulted in a form of cessation of hostilities,
which became effective on 1 March.
I should stress that AMISOM is working closely
with the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to
operationalize the Somali Joint Security Force. At the
moment, AMISOM is providing food rations to the first
batch of recruited TFG/ARS forces. Considering the
need to fully equip the Somali Joint Security Force
with the requisite weapons and ammunition, the AU
has been requested by the Transitional Federal
Government to work with the Security Council and
take advantage of the exemption to the arms embargo
imposed on the country to help the Government
acquire arms for its forces.
The humanitarian situation remains particularly
difficult. In fact, considerable progress recorded earlier
with the return of a number of internally displaced
persons and some refugees to Mogadishu, has been
reversed, as a number of Mogadishu residents have
again been forced out as a result of continued fighting
between various armed elements and TFG forces.

battalion pledged by the Burundian Government. The
African Union Commission is also engaging other
member States to secure additional troops, and I should
like to note the contribution of the Government of
Algeria in providing airlifts for the rotation of the
Burundi contingent units and for the deployment of the
third Ugandan battalion at no cost to the AU.
In addition, efforts continue to be made to
complete the deployment of the police component of
AMISOM as part of the efforts to train, mentor,
restructure and reorganize the Somali police. The AU
and the United Nations Development Programme are
currently developing an integrated support plan for the
Somali Police Force, and I would like to seize this
opportunity to once again extend the African Union’s
sincere appreciation to its bilateral and multilateral
partners who are providing financial and logistical
support to AMISOM.
It is in this light that the AU welcomes Security
Council resolution 1863 (2009), adopted on 16 January
2009, in which the Council expressed its intent to
consider establishing a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia as a follow-on force to AMISOM,
subject to a further decision by 1 June 2009. In this
resolution, the Council also approved the proposals
made by the Secretary-General on 19 December 2008,
for a logistical package to support AMISOM with
equipment and services, as well as the establishment of
a trust fund to provide financial support to AMISOM to
assist in the re-establishment, training, and retention of
an all-inclusive Somali security force.

For its part, AMISOM continues to provide basic
humanitarian relief to local communities. The
AMISOM Level I hospital provides medical care to a
considerable number of Somalis, while AMISOM
water tankers supply portable water to communities
around the camps and beyond.

I therefore call upon the Council to build on its
position and take the decision needed to deploy a
follow-on peacekeeping operation to take over from
AMISOM, in view of the fact that, on 11 March 2009,
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
renewed the mandate of AMISOM for another three
months, in anticipation of the Security Council
decision to deploy a follow-on peacekeeping force.

At this juncture, I should like to inform the
Council that the AU continues to pursue efforts to
enhance AMISOM. The Mission’s current strength is
3,450, consisting of two battalions each from Burundi
and Uganda, against an authorized strength of 8,000.
Steps are under way to deploy, in a matter of days, one
additional battalion pledged by Uganda, while
consultations continue with Burundi as to the
appropriate timing for the deployment of the third

Equally important is the need to urgently
implement the decision by the United Nations to
provide a logistical support package to AMISOM. In
this respect, I look forward to the General Assembly’s
early budgetary approval of the elements of the support
package to be provided through United Nationsassessed contributions. I therefore call on States
Members of the United Nations to generously
contribute to the envisaged United Nations trust fund

8

09-27495

S/PV.6095

that will provide financial and material support to
AMISOM until a United Nations peacekeeping
operation is deployed, and to assist in building Somali
institutions for security and rule of law.
In conclusion, I should like to express
appreciation once again to all partners that have so far
extended support to AMISOM both bilaterally and
multilaterally. We believe that if we collectively
continue to take correct and decisive measures, we will
ensure that the current window of opportunity created
in Somalia will not have been lost.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Lamamra, the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by extending a particularly warm welcome to
the Foreign Minister of Somalia on his first appearance
at this Council. He and his Government are very
welcome at our deliberations, and we congratulate him
on his appointment. We also thank him for his wellconsidered, thorough and, if I may say so, well-judged
statement. Of course, we also welcome our old friend,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and Mr. Lamamra, whom we have just heard speaking.
All speakers have pointed to the encouraging
developments of the last several months. They did not
emphasize one of them, which was the smooth
withdrawal of Ethiopian forces at the beginning of this
year, but we can all recognize that that was an
important step, as were, of course, the election of
President Sharif, the formation of a new transitional
Government and, in particular, the decision,
highlighted by the Foreign Minister, to base the new
Government in Mogadishu. President Sharif has also
shown much personal courage in reaching out to the
different factions in Somalia in an effort to establish
political reconciliation, and in that he has our full
support.
While welcoming the progress that has been
made, we should not underestimate the scale or
complexity of the challenges that Somalia continues to
face. There are four particular areas where progress is
urgently needed and which we believe should be the
focus of the Council’s attention. The first is tackling
the humanitarian crisis. More than 3 million people
need assistance in Somalia. The international
community must continue to provide aid and support
the Government in delivering basic security,

09-27495

employment and services, and the new Government
needs to develop its own revenue streams and set its
budget priorities.
Secondly, there is the political track. We need
Somali solutions to Somali problems, and the Djibouti
process has given us a very good start on that. The
international community must continue to support the
new Government and also give that Government the
space to act and to pursue reconciliation politically.
Over time, the new Government will need to establish
wider justice and reconciliation processes, helping to
create an environment in which different groups can
live together.
I encourage the United Nations Political Office
and other United Nations staff to continue to work with
President Sharif’s Government and to make regular
visits to Mogadishu.
Thirdly, we need to create a secure environment
in which the new Government can work. Some good
work has been done, including by the United Nations
Development Programme, in training the Somali
police. There is still much to be done in strengthening
the joint security forces. We warmly welcome their
creation; this is the only long-term solution. We should
all consider how we can best help.
The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) continues to play a critical role, by
providing security in the centre of Mogadishu, key
installations there, providing a base for President
Sharif’s Government to operate in the capital. I pay
tribute to our brothers from Uganda and Burundi for
their continuing commitment to this difficult operation.
I would like to announce today that the United
Kingdom will be giving this month an additional
£10 million to the United Nations AMISOM trust fund.
That is in addition to the £5 million that we have
already given directly to the African Union for
AMISOM. We encourage others also to contribute.
The Council will need to return in May to the
issue of a possible United Nations peacekeeping
operation. As the Secretary-General says in his current
report, there remains uncertainty about whether a
classic United Nations peacekeeping operation is the
right tool to support the political process in Somalia
(S/2009/132). We look forward to his next report in a
month or so.

9

S/PV.6095

The fourth area we need to pay attention to is
piracy. We need to continue to work to ensure that
security exists on Somalia’s seas as well as on its land.
We have to tackle both piracy at sea and its root causes
on the land. We welcome the work of the Contact
Group and agree with the recommendations in the
Secretary-General’s report, particularly on developing
regional capability. On the operational front, the
United Kingdom is providing the commander and the
headquarters of the European Union naval mission off
of the coast of Somalia. We look forward to continued
progress in tackling this problem.
Recent developments in Somalia give us some
grounds for cautious optimism. This is a country that
has endured almost 20 years of conflict and
humanitarian tragedy. The challenges that President
Sharif and his Government will face in the coming
months remain immense and we must urgently provide
practical support to the new Government, as well as to
AMISOM, if we are to help bring about the stability
and security that the people of Somalia deserve.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the briefing by Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and the statements of Mr. Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia, and Ambassador Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, who join the Council today.
My delegation shares the view of the Special
Representative on what has been called the long march
of Somalia towards stability, taking into account both
the progress made in just a few weeks and the many
remaining challenges. In the light of the success of the
presidential elections held on 30 January in Djibouti, it
is important for the international community to
redouble its efforts to complete the establishment of
the Somali State and its institutions, in close
coordination with the new Government of Somalia, the
United Nations, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and regional organizations.
In Mexico’s view, concrete action in the
following areas is of priority. First, it is fundamentally
important that the Djibouti agreement, signed in 2008
between the Transitional Federal Government and the
Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia, continue to
be the operative mechanism to promote the process of
national peace and reconciliation. The new President
has demonstrated his commitment to international

10

efforts to establish peace. An example is the agreement
reached with some insurgent groups to declare a truce
and proclaim Islamic law, sharia. However, it is
worrying that the most extremist groups remain on the
sidelines of dialogue, which threatens the fragile
progress achieved. The President must therefore
continue his efforts to bring about the full
implementation of the agreement in order to promote
inclusive political dialogue to stabilize the country.
Secondly, it is essential that the new Government
focus its efforts on a complete reform of the security
sector — based upon the recommendations of the
technical assessment mission which visited Addis
Ababa and Nairobi last January — as a useful starting
point to achieve progress in strengthening the Somali
police force with the support of the Joint Security
Committee and the Joint Security Force.
Concrete progress must also be promoted with
regard to the justice system and to programmes to
combat national and regional arms trafficking. That
must be linked to actions to bring about the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants as well as demining activities with
United Nations support. The responsibility of the
African Union here is essential, and close cooperation
and coordination with regional bodies will facilitate the
creation of strategies to consolidate the rule of law and
bring about full compliance with international law as a
basis for socio-economic development.
Thirdly, the Security Council must bring about
the active participation of regional bodies and
mechanisms during discussions on the issue. Exchange
of information and points of view with groups such as
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the International Contact Group on Somalia can
provide valuable contributions to such discussions.
Fourthly, with regard to human rights, the
enlarged police force must ensure full observance of
human rights and adopt measures to protect the civilian
population and ensure those responsible for violations
be held accountable for the deaths of civilians, whether
resulting
from
crossfire
incidents,
targeted
assassinations or the murder of judges, as such acts
foster impunity and undermine the judicial system.
Mexico also condemns the attacks against
humanitarian workers, which have caused a reduction
in humanitarian aid and significantly affected
vulnerable groups, in particular women and children.

09-27495

S/PV.6095

Measures must also be taken to address the alarming
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.
Here, we acknowledge the significant role played by
the Human Rights Unit of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia. We reiterate how important it is for
that Office to continue its work in coordination with
the new Government and AMISOM.
With regard to international humanitarian law,
Mexico calls upon the parties to the conflict to observe
its provisions and principles, to cease attacks
immediately and to avoid situations where civilians
may be affected.
It is also essential that the new Somali
Government fulfil the measures of the sanctions
Committee, as a complementary measure to the
endeavours to bring about peace and security in the
region.
With regard to the report of the Secretary-General
on piracy in Somalia (S/2009/146), we acknowledge
that piracy is one of the consequences of the serious
instability affecting the country. That is why we agree
with the Secretary-General on the importance of
following an integrated approach to achieve stability in
the region.
Mexico condemns acts of piracy, armed robbery
and violent acts against the safety of navigation in the
Gulf of Aden and believes that their perpetrators must
be brought to justice under the applicable legal system.
Likewise, Mexico supports the validity, relevance
and applicability of existing international law to
address the threat represented by acts of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. In that regard, we recognize the
importance of Security Council resolutions 1816
(2008) and 1846 (2008), which authorize, subject to
certain conditions, entry into Somalia’s territorial
waters, in accordance with the United Nations Charter.
I wish to emphasize that in Mexico’s view — as
the texts of the aforementioned resolutions explicitly
indicate — the powers granted to the Security Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter are the legal basis
that permits States to enter Somalia’s territorial waters
for the purpose of suppressing acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea and to employ, in Somalia’s territorial
waters, in a manner consistent with actions permitted
on the high seas with respect to piracy under relevant
international law all necessary measures to counter acts
of piracy and armed robbery.

09-27495

In that sense, in both resolutions, the Security
Council, having determined the situation to be one that
threatens international peace and security, decided on
the measures necessary to maintain or re-establish that
peace and security. It is important also to recall that
both resolutions explicitly establish that the
authorizations granted are not considered precedents in
customary international law. In our view, that is
recognition of the exceptional nature of the authorized
actions and of the Security Council acting pursuant to
Chapter VII of the Charter. With that understanding,
Mexico wishes to review its support for the initiatives
undertaken by the International Maritime Organization
and the Security Council to counter this threat in a
coordinated and consistent way.
Lastly, my delegation supports the work of the
Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, set
up pursuant to resolution 1851 (2008), and recognizes
the importance of the multinational operations taking
place off the coast of Somalia to combat piracy.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abadallah for his briefing on the situation in Somalia
and express our appreciation for the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia. We also thank
Commissioner Lamamra for his very informative
statement.
Reading
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2009/132), we can only conclude that the general
situation in Somalia is still a source of great concern,
notwithstanding the significant progress that has been
recorded, in particular since the signing of the Djibouti
agreement. That is certainly true, especially with
regard to the current security situation.
However, in our opinion, we find ourselves today
in the presence of a new and determined Somalia, with
a Government based in Mogadishu and a clear overall
vision of how to emerge from the situation. That is
why, following the example of the meeting of heads of
State of the African Union, we should welcome the
new Government and, above all, help provide it with
all necessary assistance for it to meet its obligations.
More precisely, we would like to urge the international
community to continue to assist the parties, in
particular the new authorities, to help them bolster
their efforts to strengthen political cooperation and to
integrate, restructure and train the Somali Police Force.

11

S/PV.6095

As we are aware of the difficulties linked to the
scope of the task, it is only right that we congratulate
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the country team, all United Nations agencies and
Somalia’s bilateral partners for their tireless efforts. We
support the conclusions of the International Contact
Group on Somalia, which met on 16 December 2008,
on the need to immediately strengthen the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

We therefore congratulate the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for its diligence and its
comprehensive evaluation of the needs of AMISOM.
The proposals and recommendations made there are, in
our opinion, realistic, given that the analysis by the
technical assessment mission concluded that the
existing logistical support to AMISOM consists of
basic equipment and services that do not meet United
Nations standards.

Despite positive political progress, the security
situation has greatly deteriorated, particularly since the
withdrawal of the Ethiopian troops. Both in Mogadishu
and in other areas, a stronger presence of militias and
other insurgent forces has spread violence throughout
the country. There are more and more victims, both
within the civilian population and among humanitarian
and peacekeeping personnel.

The international community must therefore
firmly support the Secretary-General’s plans and make
every effort for their success. In that regard, we await
with interest the results of the donor conference to be
held on 22 April in Brussels.

Given that fragile security situation, we think that
the security aspect of the Djibouti agreement must be
rapidly implemented, in particular with regard to the
Joint Security Committee, the Joint Security Force and
the Somali Police Force. We believe that sustained
support to those three security bodies is the first step
that the international community must take to help
Somalia today. That will enable the authorities to
strengthen their own security, to protect the civilians
and to secure the supply of humanitarian assistance.
Here, we would like to congratulate Burundi and
Uganda for their commitment and their spirit of
sacrifice, which was further affirmed by their
respective decisions to deploy an additional battalion
each to strengthen AMISOM. Saying that, we strongly
condemn the attacks against AMISOM, and we
reiterate our commitment to the security and integrity
of the African force. The recent murderous attacks of
which AMISOM soldiers were victims raise the urgent
issue of strengthening that Mission.
My delegation believes that at this stage of the
developing situation, we should attach particular
importance to the strengthening of AMISOM, with a
view to a future deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, as recommended by resolution
1863 (2009). AMISOM represents the achievement
upon which the United Nations can build a future
international presence in Somalia and must be
strengthened as rapidly as possible and brought up to
United Nations standards.

12

The already deplorable humanitarian situation
runs the risk of worsening, given the drought in certain
regions. Moreover, the slowing down of humanitarian
operations owing to the insecurity is an issue that must
be dealt with quickly, at a time when displaced persons
are gradually returning to Mogadishu, a city that lacks
basic infrastructure, drinking water and health services.
Moreover, the civilian population remains exposed to
the threat of unexploded ordnance and mines. Burkina
Faso condemns violence against humanitarian
personnel. We congratulate the humanitarian agencies
on their efforts and encourage them to pursue their
activities, despite those difficult conditions.
Burkina Faso firmly believes in the possibility of
a comprehensive and lasting solution to the Somali
crisis. The country’s political actors have made
significant progress and displayed a resolve that the
Secretary-General himself describes as encouraging.
That is why we urge the international community to
overcome its hesitations and to increase its assistance
with a view to the development and strengthening of
Somalia’s new institutions.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Omaar to the
Council and to thank him for his comments. My
Government congratulates him and other members of
the unity Government and assures them of our
cooperation and support. I would also like to welcome
Special Representative Ould Abdallah and to thank him
for his briefing today.
Recent events present an opportunity to make real
progress in Somalia. We welcome the election of
President Sharif and the unity Government’s move to

09-27495

S/PV.6095

Mogadishu. We must support the Somali people so that
they can take advantage of this opening.
We remain encouraged by the political progress
made under the Djibouti agreement. My Government
strongly supports President Sharif’s efforts to
encourage parties that are still outside the Djibouti
process to join him in order to rebuild their troubled
country.
In that spirit, we urge all groups that have yet to
lay down their arms and join the peace and
reconciliation process to do so. Unfortunately, the
terrorist organization Al-Shabaab has failed to join that
process, vowing instead not only to target the new
Government but also to continue its campaign against
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
humanitarian non-governmental organizations.
At the same time, Eritrea continues to provide
financial, logistical and political backing to
Al-Shabaab and other extremists and has issued a
formal statement rejecting the new Somali
Government. We condemn those actions by Al-Shabaab
and Eritrea. They serve only to prolong the conflict in
Somalia and cannot be tolerated.
We highly commend the brave troops from
Burundi and Uganda serving in AMISOM, who
continue to operate under difficult conditions. They are
doing crucial work in securing key infrastructure and
allowing for the delivery of humanitarian aid, and they
deserve our support. The United States, for its part, has
provided logistical assistance to AMISOM totalling
more than $100 million since 2007. We urge African
Union member States that have pledged to provide
troops to AMISOM to arrange to deploy them soon,
and we strongly urge United Nations Member States to
support AMISOM. Of course, Somalia must begin to
provide for its own security, and we should consider
ways to assist in the development of a Somali security
sector.
The Council has made significant efforts to
address the problem of piracy off the Somali coast. The
United States is encouraged by the international
community’s response. On any given day, ships from
15 to 20 different countries are now patrolling those
waters. My Government also believes that the Contact
Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia is proving to
be an effective coordinating mechanism, and we look
forward to the third meeting of that Group. We also
commend the Government of Kenya for offering to

09-27495

prosecute suspected pirates captured by the
international community. We urge all States —
especially those directly harmed by piracy — to help
the Kenyan Government manage the logistical and
financial challenges of prosecuting suspected pirates.
That is a burden that should not fall upon the shoulders
of Kenya and its neighbours alone.
Finally, let me thank the staff of the United
Nations agencies and aid groups that have provided
needed assistance to the Somali people under very
difficult and dangerous circumstances. We strongly
condemn those who impede the delivery of needed
assistance through attacks against aid workers and
AMISOM troops.
Progress in Somalia will not come easily. The
Secretary-General’s upcoming donors conference
presents us with an opportunity to support the Somalis
during this critical period. Let us take advantage of it.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
wish to thank previous speakers, in particular
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia; Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia; and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union.
The Czech Presidency of the European Union
will be taking the floor shortly, and I obviously support
the statement that will be made.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/132)
and the presentations that we have just heard confirm
that a positive dynamic has begun in Somalia. The
expansion of parliament, the election of a President,
the formation of a unity Government and the inclusive
dialogue begun with all parties by the new Somali
President to urge them to join the Djibouti process are
all positive political signals. Moreover, the SecretaryGeneral’s report indicates the initial return of internally
displaced persons to Mogadishu. That is also a sign of
confidence.
In addition, France highlights the fact that the
withdrawal of Ethiopian troops has not created a
security vacuum. In the end, that has not benefited the
most radical groups, instead making it possible to
marginalize them by removing their main argument for
continuing the violence. Somalis should be
congratulated on this progress towards peace and
reconciliation. Congratulations go also to the Special

13

S/PV.6095

Representative of the Secretary-General and, of course,
to his team on their tireless efforts vis-à-vis the parties.
However, every day that passes reminds us of the
extreme fragility of the situation. The humanitarian
situation remains very bad, with more than 3 million
people dependent on international aid and hundreds of
thousands still on the road to Afgooye. The conditions
are all the harsher because humanitarian workers are
being targeted, in constant violation of international
humanitarian law: in 2008, 34 were killed and
26 abducted; since the beginning of this year, three
World Food Programme workers have been killed and
four briefly kidnapped. In Mogadishu itself, attacks
continue against the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). We have, in this Chamber, condemned the
deadly attack of 25 February against AMISOM
soldiers. Two days ago, another soldier was killed and
three others were wounded.
In the light of that situation, the international
community obviously has an essential role to play.
First, we must provide full political support to the
Somali authorities and encourage them to continue
their efforts to achieve reconciliation and dialogue
among all parties. We must also support the
establishment of a robust, well-equipped and trained
Joint Security Force and a professional police force. It
is important to reduce insecurity by directly controlling
the essential areas of the city of Mogadishu so that the
Government can establish its authority in Somalia and
make a real change in people’s lives.
In parallel, we must strengthen the AMISOM
forces, who have fulfilled their mission with great
courage. Here, on behalf of France, I should like to pay
tribute to Burundi and Uganda for their actions and to
the African Union for its efforts to enable AMISOM to
reach full deployment.

package to AMISOM and establish a special trust fund,
making it possible to find additional resources to
support AMISOM and strengthen the Somali security
forces. The Secretary-General has taken an emergency
measure by making available $50 million. The first
ships are beginning to arrive in Mogadishu. By the end
of this month, the General Assembly will debate an
initial instalment of funding. We hope that the donors
conference will be held soon.
The implementation of resolution 1863 (2009) is
a difficult task. Indeed, we must act swiftly and
pragmatically, first focusing on the logistical package,
a concrete measure that can be implemented quickly so
that AMISOM can make an immediate difference.
I should like to stress that the duty of the
international community is not merely to deal with
security issues. In addition to the mechanism of
individual sanctions available to the Council, the fight
against impunity is an essential aspect that we must not
neglect, because the culture of impunity prevailing in
Somalia is a major obstacle on the path of peace.
France fully supports the approach of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in that regard.
Like some previous speakers, I should also like to
recall that, on more than one occasion last year, the
Security Council discussed the possible establishment
of a peacekeeping operation. We will resume that
discussion on the basis of the report of the SecretaryGeneral that is expected in mid-April. But we must not
lose sight of the fact that, in the interests of the Somali
people, what is important is a full and swift
implementation of resolution 1863 (2009).

Strengthening AMISOM requires additional
financial resources. Many donors already provide
significant aid to Somalia and AMISOM — in
particular the European Union, the African Union’s
leading financial partner, including through the African
Peace Facility. France has assisted in the training of
four AMISOM contingents, and French officers are
currently in Uganda to help the parties prepare a
Ugandan contingent.

This means that combating piracy is all the more
necessary. Since the first operation to protect World
Food Programme (WFP) vessels undertaken by France
in November 2007, the fight against piracy has greatly
expanded. The European Union, together with many
other international partners, is playing a major role,
through its Operation Atalanta, to secure the supplies
on which so many Somalians depend. Operation
Atalanta has allowed the secure transportation of more
than 100,000 tons of food aid. The European Union
High Representative for the Common Foreign and
Security Policy has expressed his support for the
protection of United Nations convoys.

The Security Council, through resolution 1863
(2009), has taken the decisions necessary to ensure that
the United Nations can provide a logistical support

It is on the ground in Somalia that the root causes
of piracy must be resolved, but the fight against piracy
is also a matter of urgency. We welcome the fact that

14

09-27495

S/PV.6095

so many nations and organizations are participating in
this fight. Food deliveries by WFP quadrupled between
2007 and 2008.
I would like once again to express our full
support to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. I would like to reiterate to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia that he can fully count on
France to help his Government to respond to, as he so
eloquently stated, the need for peace and the will for
liberty that motivates his people.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
statement. We acknowledge, as stated in his briefing
that significant progress has been made recently in the
political process in Somalia. We have also witnessed
very proactive efforts by the new President, Prime
Minister and cabinet members in urging opposition
groups to participate in the peace process.
However, the prospects for realizing a more
inclusive peace process remain dim. Hostilities against
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
continued to be carried out by rebel groups. The
international community must continue to support the
efforts of the new Government to promote an inclusive
political process.
A major area of concern is the unstable security
situation. The attack on AMISOM in February resulted
in the loss of 11 Burundian soldiers, and recently four
United Nations aid workers were abducted and
subsequently released. In these difficult circumstances,
AMISOM continues to secure strategic installations in
cooperation with the joint security forces. Japan
appreciates and commends the troop-contributing
countries Burundi and Uganda for their important role
in the Mission.
The troop-contributing countries need every
support in terms of logistics, training and equipment. It
is important that the United Nations logistical package
for AMISOM, proposed in the letter by the SecretaryGeneral dated 19 December 2008 (S/2008/804), be
speedily approved in accordance with the relevant
United Nations rules and procedures, with adequate
oversight and transparency.
An international donors conference will be
organized to seek support for AMISOM and for the
capacity-building of Somali institutions, in accordance
with resolution 1863 (2009). Building the capacity of

09-27495

Somali security institutions, including the joint security
forces, is essential for stabilizing the security situation.
Given the difficult situation on the ground, it is
important for the international community to formulate
the best possible way to assist Somali people in
pursuing both a quick response and accountability at
the same time. Japan, for its part, has provided
assistance for humanitarian needs and security sector
enhancement in an amount totalling $64.5 million over
the past two years.
Acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia pose a
threat to the international community, seriously
affecting safe passage and therefore requiring urgent
action. In terms of the efforts of the international
community, just a week ago, on 13 March 2009, the
Japanese Government approved the deployment of
Japan Self-Defence Forces to take measures against
acts of piracy at sea off the coast of Somalia and in the
Gulf of Aden, in accordance with provisions of the
existing law allowing maritime security operations on
an emergency basis. Two destroyer ships have departed
from Japan on this mission. The Japanese Government
has also submitted a new draft law on the penalization
of acts of piracy and measures against acts of piracy
for approval by our Diet.
As was discussed in the series of meetings of the
Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, it is
important to strengthen partnerships, including through
United Nations efforts for information sharing, in order
to improve coordination between the various activities
of Member States and the countries in the region. Japan
will continue its active participation in the coordinated
measures to address Somali piracy issues, drawing on
its experience in Asia, such as the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and
Armed Robbery against ships in Asia.
Finally, we agree with the Secretary-General that
it is important to take a multi-faceted approach to
resolving the unstable situation in Somalia. The
members of the transitional parliament have been
moving back to the capital. The integrated approach
requires a truly inclusive political process that
incorporates various opposition groups, clan leaders,
civil society and other relevant stakeholders for nationbuilding.
It will also be essential to assist institutionbuilding in Somalia, such as efforts to strengthen
governing capacity and infrastructure, for the sake of

15

S/PV.6095

long-term stability. The international community must
strengthen cooperation and interaction with Somalia,
and we should mobilize the necessary support and
resources.
As for the future transition of AMISOM to a
United Nations peacekeeping operation, Japan looks
forward to examining the report of the SecretaryGeneral that is due by 15 April in order to determine
the most appropriate course of action. We hope to
receive a detailed and realistic assessment from the
Secretary-General on the security and political
situation on the ground.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his presentation and for the reports of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia
(S/2009/132) and on ensuring long-term security of
navigation off the Somali coast (S/2009/146), prepared
pursuant to resolution 1846 (2008), on piracy.
We too are grateful for the detailed briefing and
the assessments provided.
We listened carefully to the statement by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar. We welcome the recent positive
political developments in Somalia, the peaceful
transition of power, the election by the expanded
Transitional Federal Parliament or the new President of
the Republic, Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, the
appointment of the Prime Minister and the formation of
the Government. We expect that the new President will
be able to unite the forces from all sides in the Somali
conflict in order to provide for an operational
Government, move ahead with the consolidation of
society and establish the rule of law and a lasting peace
in the country.
We take note of and support the mediation efforts
in this direction, by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Ould Abdallah. We
take note of the findings of the technical assessment
mission, set out in the report of the Secretary-General,
which include, in particular, the proposal made with
respect to the logistical support package for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We assume that
these proposals worked out detail by the relevant
General Assembly bodies, taking into account
established budget procedures.

16

With respect to the prospects of deploying a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia, the
future decision of the Council in this area will depend
to a large extent on the commitment to peace of the
Somalis themselves, on a substantial improvement in
the security situation and on serious progress towards a
political settlement. These basic preconditions are not
yet in place. However, we believe that a possible
United Nations operation in Somalia should be further
planned, and that the modalities of the transformation
of AMISOM — whose work we support — into such
an operation should be further defined.
We will be expecting the corresponding
conclusions and proposals of the Secretary-General in
his April report pursuant to resolution 1863 (2009).
That resolution provides for an increase in
international assistance to the Somali peace process.
Success in this area will contribute to the solution of
the whole complex of problems, including that of
eradicating piracy off the Somali coast. The report of
the Secretary-General on this issue (S/2009/146)
indeed reflects the efforts by the international
community to more effectively combat piracy and
armed robbery at sea in this region. We urge the
Secretary-General to continue his active work in this
area.
International commitments made in the Security
Council have already brought results. However, we are
still far from being able to see the reversal of the
negative trends with respect to the acts of piracy off the
shores of Somalia. We believe that a multidimensional
approach to the problem of piracy is required. We see
the road to a long-term solution in moving the Djibouti
peace process forward to ensure order and security in
the country and to overcome the socio-economic
factors that encourage the growth of piracy. Moreover,
we must do everything possible to strengthen the
capacities of the Somali Government itself, for in the
last analysis, the success of the fight against piracy
depends on the success of the Government.
A special role in establishing conditions for
effectively combating piracy should be played by the
Governments of the region. We therefore believe that
we should support such regional initiatives as the
adoption in Djibouti in January of a code of conduct to
combat piracy along the Horn of Africa. Solving the
problem includes the development of a single legal
basis for the arrest and prosecution of pirates, thus

09-27495

S/PV.6095

facilitating the fight against piracy along the Somali
coast.
The Russian Federation is continuing to make
effective contributions to international anti-piracy
actions and is actively participating in the
implementation of appropriate initiatives, in particular
in the framework of the Contact Group on Piracy Off
the Coast of Somalia. Ships of the Russian naval fleet
are carrying out the task of ensuring the safety of
navigation and of other types of maritime economic
activities off the coast of Somalia. That task is carried
out in coordination with the naval fleets of China,
France, India and the United States, and with the naval
fleet of the European Union and NATO’s Combined
Task Force-151. Since October 2008, more than
80 Russian and other vessels have been escorted, and
four attempts by pirates to capture merchant ships have
been averted. We are committed to working closely
with interested parties on all aspects of the problem.
In concluding, I wish the people and the
Government of Somalia progress in exiting this crisis,
which has lasted too long. Russia will assist them in
finding solutions.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I join other colleagues
in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for
his briefing. I also wish to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Somalia and the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Mr. Lamamra, and
thank them for their briefings.
We are happy that the Minister for Foreign
Affairs could make it to New York to share with us the
latest developments in Somalia. The challenges facing
Somalia within the country are many and indeed
pressing. The conflict in Somalia has also had negative
consequences for the region in terms of refugees,
piracy and proliferation of small arms, as well as
fostering a breeding ground for terror activities.
We are therefore encouraged that the recent
positive political developments, particularly in regard
to the implementation of the Djibouti peace agreement,
point to a new and positive direction in Somalia. These
developments have in the last couple of months
included the expansion of the parliament, the election
of President Ahmed, the appointment of Prime Minister
Sharmarke and the formation of a Government of
national unity. All of these developments provide a
unique opportunity for peace and stability in Somalia.

09-27495

Uganda therefore welcomes the efforts of
President Ahmed and his Government in reaching out
to various groups and for being accommodative of
different opinions. The decision to move the seat of
government to Mogadishu and the Government’s
announcement of four priority areas where minimum
recovery could be expected within the first hundred
days — security and reconciliation, humanitarian
access,
institutional
capacity-building,
and
management of transitional arrangements — are bold
and commendable. In view of that, we call upon all
parties to respond positively to the President’s
initiatives and join the political process so that the
urgent task of rebuilding the country can begin in
earnest.
We commend the international community for the
support that it has extended to the Somali people in
facilitating negotiations in their quest for peace. In this
regard, I want once again to salute the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his pivotal role in the Djibouti peace
process.
While we recognize these positive developments
and thank all who have facilitated the process, we
remain fully aware that the situation in Somalia is still
fragile and that there are some groups that are still bent
on taking the path of violence and who continue to
mount attacks in different parts of the country. The
latest attack on the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which killed a Ugandan army officer, is
one such desperate and condemnable act. Besides
destabilizing the country and delaying the return to
normalcy, these attacks also impede the delivery of
much-needed humanitarian assistance to ordinary
citizens, particularly the most vulnerable. We therefore
condemn the targeting of humanitarian personnel and
all acts of impunity, violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
Like many of those who have spoken before us,
we are deeply disturbed by piracy off the coast of
Somalia. Not only does it impede the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the needy, it also interferes
with international trade and raises shipping costs.
Therefore it has a negative impact on economic
development in the region and worsens the already
negative impact of the current global economic crisis.
The seizure yesterday of a Greek vessel in the
Gulf of Aden is yet another reminder of the menace of

17

S/PV.6095

piracy despite the measures that have been put in place
to address the problem. While measures such as naval
patrols have checked the incidents of attacks, the latest
seizure demonstrates once again that the ultimate
solution to the problem of piracy lies in supporting and
enabling Somalia to regain its standing as a sovereign
entity with working institutions having the capacity to
enforce law and order, rein in pirates on its territory
and provide basic services to the Somali people.
In all these areas, be it in peace and political
processes under way in Somalia or in helping with the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, the rebuilding of
State institutions and the fight against piracy,
AMISOM has been playing a vital role. We believe it
could do even more in these areas to assist the people
of Somalia if it is strengthened. We are therefore
encouraged that a support package is being put in place
that will enable AMISOM not only to sustain its
operations but also to attain its full authorized strength
so that it can better fulfil its mandate.
Finally, the Somali people have suffered long
enough. The initiatives aimed at reconciliation and
political accommodation pursued by President Ahmed
deserve our full support. However, we — as the
international community or as neighbours — can only
do so much. Ultimately, the responsibility for bringing
lasting peace and stability to Somalia rests squarely
with the Somali people themselves. We therefore urge
all Somalis, of all shades of opinion and belief, to give
peace a chance, to forget the past and to look to the
future in rebuilding the country.
Uganda has circulated a draft statement to the
press that we hope can meet with the consensus of the
Council, but we welcome any input by Council
members.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by expressing my thanks to Mr. Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, for his briefing this
morning. I wish also to welcome the presence of
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia, and to thank Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for his statement.
In Somalia we are witnessing one of the world’s
most tragic humanitarian crises and one of the most
challenging political situations for the international
community. There have been no easy solutions for the

18

crisis in Somalia. The situation requires a holistic
approach which, it is now clear, must take account of
the complexity of the problem and make use of a
variety of tools to overcome this unique crisis.
This also requires the cooperation of all segments
of Somalia society who are committed to the Djibouti
process and the firm support of the international
community. Together, we must seek to broaden the
base of the Djibouti agreement, involving the largest
possible number of stakeholders who are now outside
the process, as President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
has been doing.
Those are difficult factors in settling the Somali
crisis; they will certainly demand the commitment of
national and international actors for many years to
come. The task of establishing broad-based legitimate
political institutions is urgent; it is a sine qua non for
moving forward on the path to overcoming the crisis in
Somalia, which will be possible only on the basis of a
long-term strategy embracing the humanitarian,
political, security and development facets of the
Somali crisis.
Here, we welcome as a step in the right direction
the election of Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed as
President of Somalia and the subsequent appointment
of Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke as Prime
Minister. We are confident that they will both be able
to enjoy sufficient legitimacy to foster an inclusive
political process, which can contribute to reconciliation
and lay the foundations for national reconstruction.
The precarious security situation in Somalia is a
matter of concern for my delegation, in particular when
we consider the increase in attacks on personnel of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We
hope that progress in implementing resolution 1863
(2009) and carrying out measures to strengthen
AMISOM will lessen the Mission’s vulnerability and
enhance its effectiveness in the field. In that
connection, we support the Secretary-General’s appeal
to the international community, with a donors
conference in view, to support current activities aimed
at the establishment of a joint security force in
Somalia.
My delegation condemns attacks against the
civilian population and regrets the increased number of
civilian deaths, many of whom have died when caught
in the crossfire in attacks directed against AMISOM. It
is urgent that all endeavours to ensure free access of

09-27495

S/PV.6095

humanitarian assistance and to improve the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel — who are helping
more than 3 million people in Somalia, who are
dependent on this aid — continue. We remind all
parties to the conflict that they are obliged to abide by
the provisions of international law, in particular
international humanitarian law. Fighting impunity is a
high priority because of continued human rights
violations, the blocking of humanitarian assistance,
attacks on international staff distributing aid and
ongoing attacks against the civilian population. It must
be part of the strategy to put an end to the crisis in
Somalia.
My delegation recognizes the will of African
countries to strengthen AMISOM. We support the
Mission’s work; it is a vital element in bringing
stability to Somalia and creating a space in which
dialogue and reconciliation efforts can continue.
Finally, I express our satisfaction at the progress
in cooperative efforts to combat piracy off the Somali
coast, especially because of the importance of those
efforts in ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We hope that the international community’s
commitment to address the crisis brought about by the
proliferation of piracy will heighten the attention the
international community must devote to addressing the
root causes of the crisis in Somalia and to fostering
efforts to achieve peace.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing. I
welcome among us the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia and thank him for sharing his views with us.
My thanks go also to the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s reports on
the situation in Somalia (S/2009/132) and on
combating piracy (S/2009/146). Both reports indeed
contain detailed and useful information about ongoing
developments in the country. I shall limit my remarks
on three topics based on those reports.
The first is on the political developments. Turkey
welcomes the election of the new President. Likewise,
we welcome the appointment of the Prime Minister and
his new Government. Turkey has been supporting the
Djibouti peace process and hopes that the recent
developments herald a better and brighter future for the
war-torn people of Somalia. We would like to see

09-27495

formation of a unity government as a sign of the
willingness of the Somali people to shape the destiny
of their own country.
That said, at this critical moment, it is also our
duty as friends of Somalia to underline the serious
difficulties awaiting the new Government. However,
while doing so, we should be careful not to create an
unnecessarily pessimistic mood in and about Somalia
which could be counter-productive. Indeed, the
unprecedented challenges and difficulties that lie ahead
for the Government of Somalia cannot be ignored or
denied. It is exactly for this reason that we have to
empower the new Government with our support and
assistance so that it can address these challenges. For
that, first and foremost, it needs financial assistance.
In return, the new Government should take rapid
and effective steps towards the implementation of the
Djibouti agreement through national reconciliation and
political dialogue. It has to pursue an outreach policy
vis-à-vis the other groups with a view to including
them in this process to the extent possible.
In the short and medium term, with the support of
partners and friends, it should have proper security and
police forces. Moreover, sustainable programmes to
disarm, demobilize and reintegrate should be
implemented. Since the Government cannot operate on
donations and foreign assistance, it has to seek means
to generate revenues for the immediate expenses of the
State. Swift action is also required for the rehabilitation
or the re-establishment of judicial and corrections
systems in Somalia. Human rights violations and other
humanitarian issues, especially impunity, have to be
addressed.
For the Government to achieve the targets on its
agenda, it has to feel itself secure. This brings me to
my second point, which is about the need for regional
and international peacekeeping operations. Turkey
highly commends the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for its contribution to peace and
stability in Somalia. We praise the dedication and the
courage of the Ugandan and Burundi forces, who are
serving peace under most difficult conditions. They
deserve our full support.
Turkey was one of the sponsors of resolution
1863 (2009), which envisaged the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia,
subject to a further decision of the Council. Turkey
sincerely hopes that this deployment would materialize

19

S/PV.6095

soon. Yet, developments show that we might face
certain delays. We may have to rely solely on
AMISOM for some time to come. Therefore, it
becomes imperative not only to enhance the
capabilities of AMISOM forces, but also to provide the
funds that AMISOM needs. In that sense, Turkey
welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to
convene a donors conference for the establishment of a
trust fund. Turkey will contribute to the fund.
The third point I would like to mention relates to
the acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia, which
continue to be a source of concern for the international
community. In order to operate in the Gulf of Aden and
off the coast of Somalia in the fight against piracy and
armed robbery at sea, the Turkish Government has
allocated a frigate with air assets. The frigate has
joined the international efforts carried out under
Combined Task Force 151, which was recently
launched. Turkey is also a founding member of the
Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, and
actively participates in the working groups formed
under the Contact Group. Having said that, we should
continue to concentrate and cooperate on the
elimination of the root causes of piracy, which are
embedded in Somalia.
Somalia finally has a unity Government operating
from Mogadishu. For that Government to be
successful, first and foremost, the people of Somalia
should develop full faith in it. We must help the Somali
Government develop an image that will gain the
confidence of its own people.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for
convening today’s meeting. We welcome the report of
the Secretary-General on the current situation in
Somalia (S/2009/132), and we thank Mr. Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, and Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their briefings. We welcome the
presence of Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, and thank him for his
statement.
The question of Somalia has persisted for 18 years,
during which enormous suffering has been visited upon
the people of Somalia, posing a grave threat to the
regional situation in the Horn of Africa and
constituting a daunting challenge to the international

20

community. In recent years, with strong support from
the United Nations and other international partners, all
the Somali parties have strengthened the process of
peace talks, which has led to certain positive
developments in the situation in the country. But the
overall situation in Somalia remains fragile and
requires additional efforts by the Somali parties and the
international community.
The key to achieving peace in Somalia is to
strengthen the country’s political foundations. We
support the Djibouti peace process and call upon all
parties concerned to effectively implement the peace
agreement that has been signed.
Once again we congratulate Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed on his election as President of Somalia and we
welcome the formation of a new Government. We
support the new Somali Government as it works to
strengthen the dialogue with various political parties
and we call upon all Somali parties to join the process
of peace negotiations and political reconciliation. We
encourage the new Government promptly to establish
effective governing institutions, so that it can exercise
authority throughout the territory of the country.
We are highly appreciative of the positive role
played by Special Representative Ould Abdallah and
we call upon the international community to continue
to support the national peace and reconciliation process
in Somalia.
A stable and secure environment is needed to
achieve peace in Somalia. We are highly appreciative
of the excellent work carried out by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in extremely difficult
conditions, and we welcome the decision of the African
Union Peace and Security Council to renew the
AMISOM mandate for a further three months. We call
upon the international community to continue to
provide logistical and financial support for AMISOM.
We condemn all attacks against civilians in
Somalia and against AMISOM. We urge all Somali
parties to immediately put in place a ceasefire
throughout the territory of Somalia and to seek a
political settlement. We hope that the joint security and
police forces will be put in place as soon as possible,
and we call upon the international community to
provide the necessary support.
A greater United Nations role is required to
achieve peace in Somalia. We endorse the United

09-27495

S/PV.6095

Nations support package for AMISOM and welcome
the fact that Secretariat sent a technical assessment
mission to the area and submitted reports in that
connection. We would wish the General Assembly to
expedite its consideration of the support package for
AMISOM, and we hope that the Secretariat will
expedite the establishment of the trust fund. We call
upon all countries to continue to provide bilateral
assistance to AMISOM.
The Chinese Government recently provided the
two major troop contributors to AMISOM — Uganda
and Burundi — with 5 million renminbi each for
logistic support. China is ready to continue within its
means to provide further assistance to the Somalia
peace process.
It must not be forgotten that the ultimate purpose
of strengthening AMISOM is to create favourable
conditions for the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. The Security Council should
meet the long-held expectations of the people of
Somalia and of the countries of the African Union by
giving favourable consideration to the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in the country.
We look forward to the report of the Secretary-General
to be submitted in April.
The coming months will be critical for the peace
process in Somalia. The Council’s actions in that
regard will have a long-term impact on the people of
Somalia. The Chinese delegation is ready to work with
other members to further promote a greater Security
Council role on the question of Somalia.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank the
Secretary-General for his two reports (S/2009/132 and
S/2009/146) which focus respectively on the security
and piracy situations in Somalia. I also thank
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah for his detailed briefing. I
welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia, and thank him for his statement. I
also welcome and thank the representatives of the
African Union and the League of Arab States for their
participation in this important meeting of the Security
Council.
The past few months witnessed some significant
progress in the political process in Somalia, including
the election of a new President, the establishment of a
newly expanded parliament and the formation of an
inclusive Government. We reaffirm our belief that, as

09-27495

His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia said, peace and security in Somalia can only
be achieved through dialogue, negotiation, a
willingness to compromise and reconciliation. We
welcome the efforts of President Ahmed to make the
political process more inclusive by reaching out to
various groups in the country.
Despite those encouraging political developments,
strengthened by the determination of the people and the
leaders of Somalia to promote the implementation of a
comprehensive ceasefire, we remain concerned about
the volatile security situation, as reflected in a series of
attacks against the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which led to the death or injury of many
peacekeepers. We are also concerned about the
humanitarian situation, with more than 3 million
Somalis in need of humanitarian assistance and many
civilians fleeing their homes to escape the fighting. We
strongly condemn all such attacks against AMISOM,
humanitarian personnel and civilians, and we call for
an immediate end to them.
Having taken stock of the current piracy situation
off the coast of Somalia and the complexity of the
political and security scene throughout that war-torn
country, and while commending the operational efforts
of Member States within the framework of the Contact
Group on Piracy, we wish to emphasize the need for
the implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions and the Djibouti peace process. We share
the Secretary-General’s view that the scourge of piracy
and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia can
be resolved through an integrated approach that
addresses the conflict, the lack of governance and the
absence of sustainable livelihoods on land in Somalia.
We support his appeal to the international community
to provide the resources necessary to help bring
durable peace and stability to Somalia. We stress the
importance of providing assistance in order to build the
capacity of local and regional stakeholders.
We commend AMISOM for its enduring efforts in
Somalia under very difficult circumstances. We are
mindful that the resources available to AMISOM still
fall far short of the requirements for its full deployment
and for sustaining its operations. My delegation
supports the Secretary-General’s intention to convene
an international donor conference to solicit
contributions to the trust fund for AMISOM.

21

S/PV.6095

Mr. Jurica (Croatia): We would like to join
others in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abadallah, for
his briefing. We are also very grateful for all his hard
work in Somalia. In addition, we appreciate the
intervention by His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.
We share the encouragement expressed around
the table with respect to the positive political
developments in the Djibouti peace process, in
particular the election of Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
as President of Somalia. We hope that his election and,
more important, his future actions will encourage those
Somali partners still outside the Djibouti process to
join in. In that connection, we expect that the
determination of President Ahmed, as expressed in his
inaugural speech, to reach out to all Somalis will yield
concrete results quite soon, thus paving the way for
more inclusive political arrangements and genuine
national reconciliation. The Council, for its part, will
use all its leverage to provide support for the ongoing
political process, including by persuading others to join
in.
Unfortunately, the security situation does not
offer the same encouragement, which makes the recent
positive developments on the political track even more
vulnerable. Although the worst possible scenario of
widespread fighting in the aftermath of the withdrawal
of Ethiopian forces did not materialize, the continuing
insurgency by Al-Shabaab and the increased targeting
of AMISOM troops and humanitarian workers are of
the utmost concern.
As for the security options before us, we firmly
believe that Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) of
16 January 2009 has offered the only viable and
realistic security options available at present, namely,
the enhancing of AMISOM and Somali capacitybuilding, in particular of the joint security and police
forces established under the Djibouti peace process.
We have fully supported the realism and the gradual
nature of such an approach as the basis for our future
actions. Also, we find the conclusions of the technical
assessment mission — in particular the benchmarks for
the eventual peacekeeping operation, as set out in the
report (S/2009/132) — helpful in that respect.
Equally, we very much welcome the intention of
the Secretary-General, as expressed in the report before

22

us, to convene a donors conference and set up trust
funds for AMISOM and for the capacity-building of
Somali institutions. In addition, we wish to express our
appreciation to AMISOM, whose troops are operating
in extremely difficult conditions, in particular since the
withdrawal of Ethiopian forces. We commend the
troop-contributing countries Uganda and Burundi for
their persistence and offer the hope that others will
follow suit in honouring their pledges.
My delegation shares the grave concerns
expressed by Council members regarding the effects of
the continuing deterioration in security on an alreadydire humanitarian situation and on the civilian
population. In a situation in which more than 3 million
Somalis are in dire need of assistance, humanitarian
access should continue to be a priority for the
international community as a whole. Furthermore, we
find the reports from the field about civilians being at
the mercy of all parties involved in the conflict —
including the targeted killings of persons linked to the
Transitional Federal Government, the Islamic Courts
Union, the United Nations and civil society
organizations — extremely disturbing.
All parties to the conflict should be held
accountable
for
violations
of
international
humanitarian law, including guarantees for the
unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid. In that light,
we call once again for an end to the culture of
impunity. We commend the initiatives by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah, to start the deliberations on the need to
set up a mechanism to deal with the issues of justice
and reconciliation. We hope to see concrete results
from that praiseworthy and much-needed effort in the
near future.
Finally, as the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on piracy (S/2009/146) has reminded us, there
remains a critical need to tackle problems in Somalia
with a multifaceted approach. My country subscribes to
that view, which aims to ensure that the political
process, the African Union’s peacekeeping efforts, the
strengthening of law-enforcement institutions and
capacity-building initiatives work in tandem. In
conclusion, I would like to mention that the Croatian
Government has provided several military officers to
join Operation Atalanta in the fight against piracy off
the coast of Somalia.

09-27495

S/PV.6095

Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Like others, I
would like to thank Special Representative Ould
Abdallah for his very important and comprehensive
briefing. We are also grateful for the excellent reports
received from the Secretary-General (S/2009/132 and
S/2009/146). We warmly welcome the participation of
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Foreign Minister of
Somalia, and we were happy to listen to Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union.
Austria fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Czech Presidency of the
European Union. Our comments are meant to
complement that statement.
Despite a difficult political situation, a precarious
security situation and an alarming humanitarian
situation, Somalis have achieved important progress in
the Djibouti peace process. Austria commends that
development and congratulates President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed on his election. We support the
legitimate Government and the continuation of a
political process, which should be as broad-based as
possible.
The international community must act now and
lend its support to Somali efforts to build security and
rule-of-law institutions, as well as to embark on a
reconciliation process. The Foreign Minister spoke of
all those goals, which we support. For that purpose, we
also need to strengthen the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia (UNPOS). We therefore
wholeheartedly
support
the
recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s report in that
regard.
A number of resolutions on Somalia have been
adopted by the Security Council within the past three
months. Those resolutions must be implemented in
good faith, including resolution 1844 (2008), which
targets those who threaten the peace, security and
stability of Somalia.
The security environment and the humanitarian
situation also need our utmost attention: 3.2 million
people — 43 per cent of Somalia’s population — are in
need of humanitarian assistance and 1.9 million are in
a state of humanitarian emergency. Currently,
according to our data, there are over 1 million
internally displaced persons. Unfortunately, the
progress in the peace process has not yet resulted in an
alleviation of that situation.

09-27495

The human rights situation in Somalia has been
of great concern as well, as was rightly noted by the
technical assessment mission. Especially worrying is
the situation of women, in particular violence against
women, as well as traditional harmful practices that are
still widespread. In addition, all the reported human
rights violations have been committed — or most of
them — with total impunity. Austria fully supports the
capacity of UNPOS to focus on the incorporation of
justice and accountability mechanisms in Somalia, as
suggested by the Secretary-General in his report.
Civilians, United Nations staff and, recently,
AMISOM personnel as well as staff of local
non-governmental organizations have been targeted,
abducted and murdered. Austria pays its respect to
humanitarian workers who continue to deliver muchneeded humanitarian aid. We also thank the troopcontributing countries to AMISOM, Uganda and
Burundi, for their continuous commitment and
engagement in bringing stability and security to
Somalia. We join others in condemning the attacks
against AMISOM that we have heard and spoken about
today.
Austria fully supports the strengthening of
AMISOM. The United Nations support package is an
important pillar in that respect. We are therefore
looking forward to the Secretary-General’s report to be
issued in April, which will inform us on the progress in
the political process and the security situation on the
ground and which will serve as a basis for our future
deliberations.
It is very important for the authority and the
effectiveness of any international presence in Somalia
that obligations under international humanitarian law
be fully respected by all sides. The protection of
civilians, especially women and children, must be a
concern and must be ensured by all parties.
As far as piracy is concerned, it is important not
to see it only as a threat to key international shipping
lanes, but also as a factor further aggravating the
security and humanitarian situation in Somalia. Apart
from putting humanitarian supplies at risk, it certainly
also plays a role in financing the activities of what one
might call spoilers of the stabilization process and
particularly illegal flows of arms in violation of the
embargo. Austria therefore stresses the importance of
focused activities to curb piracy in the region and of
course as a member of the European Union (EU) we

23

S/PV.6095

fully support the EU’s naval operation, Operation
Atalanta.
We look forward to continuing and intensifying
the close cooperation between the international
community and Somalia in the interest of Somalia and
all of its people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
At the outset, I wish to express our appreciation
to
Mr.
Ahmedou
Ould
Abdallah,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his valuable briefing. I also wish to thank our
brother Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia, for his presence and for the
information he provided to us today on the situation in
Somalia. I also express our thanks to Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for his valuable briefing.
In the past few months, the leaders of the Somali
people have affirmed their determination to emerge
from the quagmire of the civil war in which that
country has been embroiled for the past 18 years. The
parliament was expanded, followed by the election of
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed as the new President of
the country. A Prime Minister was appointed and a
Government was then formed and endorsed by
parliament. Those are all positive indicators of the
parties’ commitment to the national reconciliation
process under the Djibouti agreement. Dialogue among
all parties to the conflict in Somalia and the
abandonment of policies of exclusion are the only path
to a permanent political settlement.
We believe that the desire of President Sharif to
communicate with all parties that oppose the Djibouti
process, with whatever their various political views, is
a first step in the right direction. For our part, we urge
all factions of the Somali population to respond to the
call of President Sharif and to adopt a spirit of
tolerance and overcome the past in order to spread
peace and reconciliation throughout the country.
My delegation welcomes the completion of
Ethiopia’s full withdrawal from Somalia. We are
grateful for the commitment of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to continue working
under difficult conditions. We urge African Union
(AU) member States that have pledged to contribute

24

troops to make the necessary arrangements to deploy
them without delay. We also call upon the international
community to provide the resources to enable those
States to contribute troops to AMISOM. We hope that
the United Nations logistical support package for
AMISOM will help to apply United Nations criteria
with regard to the participating troops.
The security situation in Somalia is of great
concern despite the fact that no major combat
operations have taken place since the withdrawal of the
Ethiopian forces. The AU Mission has been targeted by
repeated attacks, and armed groups still control several
areas of the country. That has had a negative impact on
the human rights situation and humanitarian
conditions.
On the humanitarian front, the continued
deterioration of humanitarian conditions in Somalia
continues to be of concern. Over 3 million people
require humanitarian aid, and the number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) continues to increase. The
IDPs are not expected to return home anytime soon,
while armed groups continue to target humanitarian
organizations, whether to loot equipment or to abduct
or kill workers. On this occasion, I wish to commend
the World Food Programme and its personnel for their
courage and for their decision to continue providing
humanitarian aid in the southern and central areas of
Somalia despite the difficult conditions.
On another front, with regard to the encouraging
response of the international community in combating
piracy off the Somalian coast, we think that piracy is a
natural response to the unstable situation in Somalia
and cannot be addressed in isolation from the political
situation in the country. Combating piracy therefore
requires a multidimensional approach based on a
political dialogue among all parties, stemming from the
Djibouti process and backed by a peacekeeping
mission and efforts to revive State institutions and
build capacity, in particular relating to law
enforcement.
In that regard, we encourage cooperation among
States, international organizations and United Nations
bodies within the context of international law to
combat piracy and we support considering the
formulation of a national and regional legal framework
to facilitate the arrest and trial of those suspected of
committing acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea.
We affirm the pivotal role of the United Nations in

09-27495

S/PV.6095

coordinating the fight against piracy and in providing
information, and we urge all Member States to offer
information on their efforts to combat piracy.
My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
decision to hold a donors conference in the coming
days to collect contributions for the AMISOM trust
fund and for building the capacity of Somali
institutions. We urge all countries that can to contribute
generously. We look forward to the report that the
Secretary-General will submit by 15 April on the
current situation in Somalia and on the progress made
in fully deploying the African Union Mission and in
expanding it to become a United Nations peacekeeping
mission.
The report will discuss political progress and the
security situation on the ground so that the Council can
use it in its decision on deploying United Nations
peacekeeping forces in Somalia. We also believe that
the lack of stability and the security situation must not
be used as an excuse to oppose the deployment of a
United Nations force in Somalia: United Nations
experience shows that deploying United Nations forces
to unstable areas has proved to be effective in the past.
Once again, my country’s delegation reaffirms its
commitment to work towards national reconciliation in
Somalia and we assure His Excellency the Foreign
Minister — who has informed me that President Sharif
may arrive in Libya tomorrow or the day after — that
we are in contact with all parties and factions. Libya is
the only State that for years has had an embassy in
Somalia. We have set up a hospital in Djibouti to treat
wounded Somalis and we continue to offer food and
medical aid. We have provided hundreds of
scholarships to Somali students, the Tripoli University
has produced many Somali graduates, including
President Sharif. We will continue to offer aid to the
Government, including vehicles, administrative tools
and equipment, and we will work with the AU and the
League of Arab States in that area.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Czech
Republic.
Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the

09-27495

Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Ould Abdallah, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing. I would also like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, and
thank him for his contribution to today’s debate.
During the past two months, the Djibouti peace
process has generated a new scenario for Somalia with
opportunities for an inclusive political solution. The
EU welcomes the expansion of the transitional
parliament, the election of President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed, followed by the appointment of the
Prime Minister, Omar Sharmarke, and his Cabinet. The
EU encourages President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
and Prime Minister Omar Sharmarke to continue their
efforts to achieve a cessation of hostilities and to create
an inclusive peace process involving all parties to the
conflict. Such a process must also give women a voice.
The EU welcomes the intention of the President to
reach out to those groups that remain opposed to the
Djibouti process.
The EU looks forward to working with the
President, the enlarged Transitional Federal Parliament
and the Government of national unity in their
endeavours and will continue to support the political
process as it takes on challenges and opportunities to
further consolidate reconciliation, to restore peace for
all the Somali people and to rebuild the country.
Despite positive developments at the political
level, the situation on the ground remains extremely
volatile. Security constraints continue to hamper
humanitarian operations across Somalia and have led
to a wave of attacks on humanitarian workers,
peacekeepers and human rights defenders, with the
civilian population bearing the brunt of the casualties.
The European Union acknowledges that the support of
the international community to the Somali Joint
Security Force and the Somali Police Service is key.
In that context, the EU condemns the attack of
22 February on AMISOM, leading to the death of
11 Burundian peacekeepers and injuries to others, and
those against humanitarian workers. The humanitarian
situation remains critical. More than 3 million people

25

S/PV.6095

in Somalia still need humanitarian assistance. The acts
of piracy off the coast of Somalia remain a source of
real concern to the Somali people and, in particular, to
the millions who depend on the assistance transferred
to Somalia by sea by the World Food Programme.
The EU welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recommendations contained in his comprehensive
report (S/2009/132). The Security Council has
expressed, in resolution 1863 (2009), its intent to
establish a United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Somalia as a follow-on force to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), subject to its further
decision by 1 June 2009. In any case, in the upcoming
months, AMISOM, as well as Somali security
institutions, will continue to play an important role in
ensuring security, stability and law and order and in
supporting the political process and facilitating
humanitarian activities. That is why both the
reinforcement of AMISOM and the establishment of an
effective Somali security sector should be supported,
as widely as possible, by the international community.
In that regard, the European Union supports the
requests contained in Security Council resolution 1863
(2009) to provide a United Nations logistical support
package to support AMISOM and to establish a trust
fund.
Through its Joint Strategy Paper 2008-2013, the
European Union continues to ensure medium- to longterm assistance to Somalia. Priority is given to
promoting a peaceful and secure environment, human
rights, democratic processes and institution-building.
The European Community’s support programme for the
same period amounts to €215 million, with good
governance,
security,
education,
economic
development and support of livelihoods as priority
sectors.
With regard to support for AMISOM, the
European Commission has so far committed a total of
€40 million. Recognizing the need for immediate
actions in favour of the Somali security sector,
financial support from the European Commission and
EU member States to the civilian Somali Police Force
will also continue, through the United Nations
Development Programme, under its Rule of Law and
Security Programme and/or through other new
channels, such as the African Union and AMISOM.
In February, the African Union requested that the
European Union financially support the immediate and

26

short-term needs of the AMISOM police component.
The European Commission is, in principle, open to
contributing through the African Peace Facility.
The direct engagement of the European Union in
the fight against piracy started in September 2008,
when it completed the actions launched by some
European member States in November 2007, which
continued until 8 December 2008, when they were
replaced by a naval operation, Operation Atalanta. In
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1846
(2008), Operation Atalanta focuses on three primary
tasks: first, the protection of World Food Programme
shipping providing assistance to Somalis dependent on
humanitarian assistance; secondly, the escort of some
of the most vulnerable vessels in the area of
responsibility; and thirdly, to the utmost extent
possible, the deterrence and repression of acts of piracy
through surveillance and patrolling in the maritime
areas where the pirates have proved to be most active.
However, suppressing piracy off the coast of
Somalia can only be achieved by addressing the root
causes of the problem, which the instability and the
lack of rule of law and good governance, and by
assisting the development of the capacities of the State
of Somalia.
Operation Atalanta currently has a strength of
some 1,000 personnel from 12 member States. The
naval force is currently comprised of five frigates
provided by France, Germany, Greece, Spain and Italy.
Helicopters and maritime patrol aircraft were made
available by France and Spain. One more Spanish
warship is expected to join the operation soon, as are
three Swedish ships in May. In August, Norway will
deploy a frigate, and the Netherlands and Belgium will
deploy their frigates in the second semester of 2009.
Other contributors such as Croatia, Ukraine and
Switzerland
are
also
considering
possible
contributions.
The European Union operation is commanded by
a British admiral from multinational headquarters in
Northwood, United Kingdom. That headquarters is also
the location for the Maritime Security Centre-Horn of
Africa, a joint enterprise between the EU military
operation and the shipping industry, which is helping to
ensure the most effective interaction with the industry
and the widest possible application of agreed best
practice, thus minimizing risk.

09-27495

S/PV.6095

The EU operation is effectively fighting piracy
together with other countries that have deployed their
naval units in the Gulf of Aden and that work with
Combined Task Force 151, operating in the area, as
well as countries of the region.
The
EU
Secretary-General
and
High
Representative, Javier Solana, stated, in his letter
addressed to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, that the
European Union is ready, through its naval Operation
Atalanta, to contribute, within its means and
capabilities, to the protection at sea of the United
Nations vessels delivering the logistical support
package to AMISOM. In this context, it is very
important for the European Union to continue to have
an operational contact point in the Secretariat in New
York, in addition to the focal point of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia in Nairobi.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that the
international community should continue to support the
political process in Somalia. This support should be
complemented by the efforts of Somalis themselves,
who are ultimately responsible for the achievement of
full national reconciliation. The EU stands ready to
continue to assist Somalia. The EU is, inter alia,
currently working on a comprehensive and coherent
approach towards the Horn of Africa, including the
regional dimension of the situation in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Norway.
Ms. Enge (Norway): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to speak, and I thank His
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Somalia, Special
Representative Ould Abdallah and African Union
Commissioner Lamamra for their briefings earlier.
The past few months have brought about
remarkable changes in Somalia. We have seen broadbased reconciliation emerge from the Djibouti process.
We have seen a peaceful leadership transition by
constitutional means. And we have not seen the
instability and increased violence that many feared
would erupt after the Ethiopian troops pulled out.
Violence has diminished, Mogadishu is more peaceful,
the new leadership is back in the capital and people
have started, tentatively, to return to their homes.
This is a commendable achievement by the
Somali people and their leaders, and we are
encouraged by their progress. We would also like to

09-27495

recognize the efforts of Special Representative Ould
Abdallah and his staff at the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia, a steady source of inspiration in
finding compromises to push the process forward.
We are encouraged, but we know there is still a
long way to go. The new Somali leaders are facing
tremendous challenges. The security situation is still
tenuous. Humanitarian needs are overwhelming.
Human rights and impunity are major concerns, and the
reconciliation process must continue to move forward.
The list of achievements has grown, but so have
people’s expectations. Somalis at home and abroad are
eager to see a peace that will bring not only protection,
but also a more prosperous future.
We know that there are still groups and elements
in the country that are prepared to use violent means to
overturn the achievements that have been made. This
includes attacks on African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) peacekeepers. Such attacks can only be
condemned in the strongest terms. We pay tribute to
the peacekeepers from Burundi and Uganda, who stay
on in spite of extremely difficult circumstances.
The international community must stand together
in supporting the new Somali leadership against the
elements that try to destroy the peace process. Norway
supports the Security Council decision to establish a
trust fund for support to AMISOM. We agree on the
need for a donors conference to solicit contributions
for the fund and for the capacity-building of Somali
institutions, including the Joint Security Force and the
Somali Police Force.
But
peacebuilding
requires
more
than
establishing the instruments to deal with immediate
threats to security. The new leadership must continue
its efforts to reach out to those groups that are still not
part of the peace and reconciliation process.
It is also of utmost importance that the leadership
be able to respond to the people’s needs for basic
services by providing safe access for humanitarian
assistance and by focusing on recovery and
reconstruction. For the past few years, Norway has
committed approximately $35 million annually to
Somalia. As co-founders of the International Contact
Group on Somalia and chair of the friends of Somalia
group, we will continue to be actively engaged in
responding to the needs of the people of Somalia.

27

S/PV.6095

Off the coast of Somalia, we are pleased to see
that the international community has stepped up its
efforts to safeguard the sea lanes. In the Council, in
December, Norway pledged to contribute to these naval
operations (S/PV.6046). I can confirm that Norway will
send one of its new frigates to participate in the
European Union Operation Atalanta. The preparation
for the deployment of the vessel in August this year is
well under way.
Norway participates actively in the international
Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, and
we commend the United States for its initiative to
establish that Group. We look forward to the continued
discussions in the Group on key issues such as
enhanced coordination and close cooperation in order
to bring to justice those who commit acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea.
A sustainable solution to the piracy problem can
only be found through a comprehensive approach in
which the Somali authorities, including the regional
government in Puntland, have to play a key role. For
this reason, it might be useful to establish closer
cooperation and coordination between the current
operations at sea and the authorities on land, especially
with regard to coastal surveillance.
The new President and his Government should
know that the international community is ready to fully
cooperate with the new leadership. But we know that
the challenges during the remaining two years of the
transition period will be enormous. We will follow
developments in the coming months closely, and we
stand ready to offer our advice and support whenever
needed.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): Mr. President, let me
at the outset express how pleased we are to see you
preside over our meeting today, and we thank you for
allowing us to participate in it.
We wish to welcome Foreign Minister Omaar
here today and congratulate him on his appointment.
We wish to thank Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his presentation.
We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the situation in Somalia (S/2009/132) and
his report pursuant to the Security Council resolution

28

1846 (2008) (S/2009/146). My delegation noted the
positive developments highlighted in the two reports.
We warmly welcome the strong commitments by the
international community to persevere in the efforts to
resolve the situation in Somalia. But despite these
developments, there remain many more challenges that
need to be addressed.
Malaysia condemns the acts of piracy and armed
robberies at sea off the coast of Somalia. The situation
is a serious threat to the flow of global maritime trade.
It endangers the lives of crew members on board the
hijacked or attacked ships. The situation also causes
serious impediments to conveyance of international
humanitarian assistance to Somalia and of the
projected supplies of United Nations assistance to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Malaysia was directly drawn to the situation of
piracy off the coast of Somalia when three Malaysianflagged ships were hijacked in the Gulf of Aden
between August and December of 2008. We dispatched
five Royal Malaysian Navy vessels to the Gulf of Aden
in rotation. The objective then was to render the
necessary assistance in the effort to seek the release of
the hijacked Malaysian ships. Currently, the Malaysian
Navy provides escort and necessary security coverage
to other Malaysian-flagged vessels plying the sea in the
area. Malaysian Navy vessels have also provided
security to vessels of other countries upon request and
have been successful in thwarting a couple of attempts
by pirates to board and hijack such foreign vessels.
Malaysia had raised serious concerns to the
international community over the piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia. We raised the issue
during the general debate at the sixty-third session of
the General Assembly and also during the meeting of
our Foreign Minister with the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, in September of last year. Malaysia
urged the international community to immediately and
collectively formulate concrete steps and a framework
of cooperation to address the problem. With this
position in mind, we joined other States in
co-sponsoring resolution 1846 (2008) in particular.
Malaysia welcomes the anti-piracy operations
undertaken by Member States and regional and
international organizations, and in particular welcomes
the collaborative efforts by neighbouring littoral States
in that endeavour. We firmly believe, however, that the
United Nations should take a leadership role, including

09-27495

S/PV.6095

through establishing a United Nations naval force to
combat piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia.

Sharmarke’s leadership — at the same time it affirms
the urgent need to offer tangible support for this
process at the political, financial and material levels.

We share the view that, fundamentally, the longlasting solution to the problem of piracy off the coast
of Somalia can be achieved only with political
stability, the prevalence of the rule of law and an
improved socio-economic situation in the country.
Therefore, the counter-piracy action should be carried
out in a holistic manner that involves political
solutions and reform of the security sector and in the
economic and human rights spheres in Somalia.

We are facing a truly positive development that
must be sustained with the necessary capacity to
implement all of these changes. Therefore, we reaffirm
the need urgently to offer all forms of financial and
logistic support to the Somali Government so that it
can establish effective State institutions and implement
its programmes for reconciliation, security and stability
and provide basic services for the Somali people.

Finally, let me reiterate Malaysia’s continued
readiness to work and cooperate with others in the
international efforts to resolve the scourge of piracy
and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia and in the
resolution of the overall situation in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, I
give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Samir Hosni,
Director of African Administration and the Afro-Arab
Cooperation Department of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Hosni (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
thank the Foreign Minister of Somalia, Mr. Omaar, and
Mr. Ould Abdallah and Mr. Lamamra for the detailed
statements that they have given. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, and
members of the Security Council, for giving me this
opportunity to address the Council on the situation in
Somalia.
This statement comes at a critical and promising
juncture in the peace process that has been ably led by
Mr. Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah,
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
with the active participation of the African Union and
the League of Arab States and the clear support of the
international community. In this context, allow me to
briefly make the following observations.
First, while the Arab States welcomes the
important measures that have been taken to implement
the Djibouti agreement that was signed last August —
the most important of which is the formation of an
expanded parliament and the extension of the
transitional period for the work of Somali institutions,
as well as the election of Mr. Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed as President and the formation of a national
unity Government under Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali

09-27495

Despite the fact that the Arab League is neither a
donor nor a financial organization, it responded to the
call by the African Union Peace and Security Council
and transferred last week $1 million to the Somali
Government’s account so that it could start establishing
the Joint Security Forces as stipulated in the Djibouti
agreement — to be comprised of 10,000 troops — for
the purposes of maintaining law and order and to
guarantee the sustainability of the current Somali
institutions. The Arab summit to be held at the end of
this month in Doha, the capital of Qatar, will have on
its agenda support for the newly formed Somali
institutions.
Secondly, we welcome, support and reaffirm the
positive direction that the Somali national unity
Government has taken in terms of actively seeking
national reconciliation with all factions of Somali
society, domestically and abroad. We urge all Somali
factions to renounce violence and reconsider their
positions and join the march towards Somali national
reconciliation.
Thirdly, we also welcome the efforts of and the
role played by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and we call for offering it the urgent
logistic and financial support it needs so that the
African Union (AU) can increase the size of the
Mission to the authorized size, namely, 8,000 troops.
We strongly condemn the recent attacks against
AMISOM’s personnel, which have led to the deaths of
12 peacekeepers from Burundi and have wounded
17 other peacekeepers, not to mention the numerous
Somali civilian casualties. We highly commend the
AMISOM forces, who work under very difficult
conditions in Somalia, and we call on all parties to
offer support to those who work on behalf of us all, the
international community, to establish peace and
stability in the country.

29

S/PV.6095

Fourthly, we join the request of the African Union
to deploy a United Nations peacebuilding force in
Somalia. The Security Council must respond to the
strong, shared desire of the Government of Somalia,
the AU and the Arab League for continued support to
AMISOM and build upon it and authorize the United
Nations to take over responsibility for peacekeeping in
Somalia at an early stage.
Fifthly, I reaffirm the organic link between
piracy, on the one hand, and the Somali question in
general, on the other. This issue forces us to seriously
consider the best and most effective way to support
efforts to establish peace and stability in Somalia,
especially after Somali parties succeeded in the
implementation of the Djibouti agreement. We, the
international community, must show adequate support
for them and protect the achievements that have been
made towards peace in Somalia. We must also prevent
any regression in efforts towards a settlement; that
could have negative effects in the political and security
spheres which would be very grave indeed if, God
forbid, they should take place.
Finally, the reconstruction of Somalia must be at
the top of the international community’s agenda. For
our part, at the Arab regional level, the League of Arab
States, in coordination with the African Union, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the United
Nations, will this year convene a conference on the
reconstruction of Somalia. At that conference, the
Somali Government will present its development plans
and the necessary feasibility studies. The Arab States
and Arab investment funds will participate in the
conference; we hope indeed that everybody will
participate.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia, has asked to make a statement in response to
comments made. There being no objection, I give him
the floor.
Mr. Omaar (Somalia): I wish first, on behalf of
my Government and my people, to express our
gratitude for the deep sympathy and appreciation that
all participants have shown for the Somali people in
the circumstances that currently prevail. I think that the
international community and the Somali people are in
partnership not only on the issues of Somalia but on
those related to the subregion as well.

30

Essentially, I believe, the Somalis have delivered
part of what they can do. On the political aspects, we
have responded — and I think we have delivered. It is
30 days since the Government was put together. It will
be another 30 days before the pledging conference for
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
That means that 60 days will have gone out of the 100day target we have set ourselves: we will be left with
only 40 days. I therefore want to reinforce the urgency
and immediacy of the situation.
Finally, I want to say that we have a balance
sheet. In our view, we have four points on the plus side
and four points on the minus side. On the plus side we
have political will; we have public momentum; we
have 3,300 joint security forces that are ready in terms
of human resources; and we have the willingness and
the receptivity of the international community and the
regional countries. Those are the four pluses.
The four points on the minus side are these: we
have the spoilers who so far reject peace and stability;
we have piracy; we have a lack of resources; and we
have the past failures to deal with, in terms of both
history and perception.
We can do nothing about the past. We are not
responsible for that, and for that reason we ask the
Council not to place us in a chicken-and-egg situation.
We are living in the present, and we need the Council’s
urgent assistance to enable us to meet the targets for
the 100 days. This is a dynamic situation, yet we
believe we can establish peace and bring more people
on board and into the peace process. But we need
urgent attention, in parallel, to AMISOM and to our
security forces.
If we can get to that benchmark, I think the next
meeting will be far more positive.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia and would ask him to be concise in his
remarks.
Mr. Ould Abdallah: I will be brief. I wish first to
offer a point of information. It is my understanding that
the conference for the mobilization of resources for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
Somali security forces, about which we have been
talking, will be held on 22 April in Brussels, subject to
confirmation with all members. That is because of
logistical and a number of other considerations.

09-27495

S/PV.6095

Secondly, I thank the Council for its renewed
interest and concern with respect to the tragedy of
Somalia, especially its rejection of permanent
blackmail by a number of Somalis who know how
eager we in New York are to look at the headlines and
websites: one grenade makes a huge difference; one
mortar shell makes a huge difference. I do not like to
compare today’s world hot spots with Somalia, but if
we look at the statistics of the number of deaths, which
are terrible, Somalia is in a difficult position, but the
situation is not as bad as it might be. It is permanent
blackmail that I am talking about, and we should free
ourselves from that permanent blackmail.
We are talking about people, and they need peace.
They are ready for peace. We will look to the April
report to provide accurate figures. We will be in the
field; my deputy was in Mogadishu last week.
Before concluding, I would like to thank the
delegation of the United States of America for

09-27495

mentioning the negative role of Eritrea. Somalia has no
border with Eritrea. I am a civil servant, but, like
members of the Council, I have seen the report with a
call by a Government which is normally friendly — the
two countries are members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and they have no common
border — inviting the destabilization of this country.
That needed to be noted, and I am grateful to the
United States delegation for having spoken of it. Many
members of the Council have told me the same thing,
and I hope that it will be raised next time. I do not
want it to be made into an issue, but it has to be raised.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda. A statement to
the press by the President regarding this meeting will
be issued.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

31
