S/2001/360

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 April 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 12 April 2001 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 11 April 2001,
which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
I should be grateful if you bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-33304 (E) 160401

*0133304*

S/2001/360

Annex
Letter dated 11 April 2001 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
I am writing to inform you that the North Atlantic Council agreed to authorize
the Commander of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to allow the return of Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian forces to sector D of the Ground Safety Zone,
corresponding to the municipality of Medvedja, subject to the agreement of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian authorities and to specific conditions
stipulated by the KFOR Commander. This decision will be effective as from
Thursday, 12 April.
With regard to the controlled entry of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia/Serbian forces into sector B of the Ground Safety Zone, the Council will
consider the situation at a later stage, taking into account the security implications
and the appropriate timing for such entry.
In taking the decision to allow the return of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia/Serbian forces to sector D, the Council took into consideration the
security implementations of such return, as well as the report of my Personal
Representative, Mr. Feith, on his recent visits to the region together with Mr. Lehne,
the Personal Representative of the European Union High Representative, Javier
Solana. The Council welcomed the steps taken by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Serbian authorities, in particular the start of the dialogue with
representatives of the ethnic Albanian community, the efforts of the Deputy Prime
Minister of Serbia, Nebojsa Covic, to establish increased control over the actions of
the Serbian police, his agreement to discuss the return of ethnic Albanian displaced
persons to Medvedja and his agreement in principle to the establishment of a multiethnic police force.
While these steps are certainly encouraging, more visible progress needs to be
made on both confidence-building measures and the dialogue before the Council
considers the return of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian forces to sector B. I
have written to both Mr. Covic and the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs, Goran
Svilanovic, recalling the expectations of the international community in general, and
NATO in particular, that there should be more rapid and substantial progress in the
implementation of confidence-building measures. I have made clear that, in its
consideration of additional decisions, the Council will wish to see concrete progress
in the dialogue, the granting of amnesty, the setting up of a multi-ethnic police force
and the return of ethnic Albanian displaced persons to Medvedja. The Council will
expect Mr. Covic and Mr. Svilanovic to address these issues when they visit NATO
headquarters on 25 April.
The Council’s decisions constitute another step in the determination of NATO
to contribute to the peaceful resolution of the problems in southern Serbia. The
return of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian forces to sector D represents an
important test case for future decisions regarding sector B, as the Medvedja
municipality is an area with a mixed population. Therefore, NATO and KFOR will
be closely monitoring the returning Federal Republic of Yugoslavia/Serbian forces.
In this context, we expect that individuals who were involved in Kosovo in 1998 and
1999 will not be part of the returning forces.

2

S/2001/360

The Council will also wish to see steps taken by the ethnic Albanian
community, in particular towards the demilitarization of armed groups. I hope that
the process of the dialogue will address this and other relevant issues.
I will keep you informed of further Council decisions as they are taken.
(Signed) George Robertson

3
