S/PV.7930

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7930th meeting

Tuesday, 25 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Letter dated 17 April 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/328)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-11126 (E)
*1711126*

S/PV.7930

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Letter dated 17 April 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/328)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan and Head of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/328, which contains a letter dated
17 April 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Shearer and Ambassador Gorgui
Ciss, Deputy Permanent Representative of Senegal, on
behalf of the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Shearer.
Mr. Shearer: I thank the Council for the
opportunity to brief it today and would like to touch
on updates from the ground as well as the progress and
challenges we can expect going forward.
I have been Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan for three months and during
that time have travelled to all 10 of the Mission’s main
field offices. I have quickly learned that Juba is not
South Sudan. Each of the field offices of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) faces its
own unique array of different ethnic, political and
humanitarian challenges. And in each, UNMISS
field personnel experience some of the most difficult
circumstances and living conditions that I have seen in
my many years of work in conflict zones around the
world. For example, a convoy delivering humanitarian
supplies from Juba to Bentiu, in the North, a distance
2/21

25/04/2017

of about 1,000 kilometres, or 600 miles, takes more
than two weeks. That is owing not only to the appalling
roads, but also to the fact that as many as 90 official and,
mostly, unofficial checkpoints have to be negotiated
along the way.
UNMISS is currently providing direct protection
to more than 220,000 civilians in six different locations
around the country. The largest site, which is in Bentiu
and hosting 125,000 people, is the second-largest urban
area in South Sudan, and I have no doubt that thousands
of civilians would not be alive today if it were not for
UNMISS. Now more than ever, the 12,000 United
Nations Blue Helmets and 2,000 United Nations police
officers are vital to the protection of civilians.
Since last year, the security, economic and
humanitarian situations have worsened markedly.
Just in the past few days, the currency dramatically
devalued, leaving the Government struggling to meet
its financial obligations. As the frustrations mount,
so does the risk of instability. Virtually no part of
the country is immune to conflict, and yet there
has been no concerted effort by any party to adhere
to a ceasefire. Instead, over the past month we have
actually been seeing the conflict intensify. In some of
the violence, the Government forces have responded
to attacks by the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
(SPLA) in Opposition and other armed groups, notably
in Wau and the Equatorias, in the South. In other
areas, in contrast, SPLA operations such as those in
Upper Nile and Jonglei appear far more strategic, and
are focused on taking opposition-held areas. In early
April, the killing of SPLA soldiers by opposition forces
triggered retaliatory attacks by Government forces in
and around the town of Wau. Multiple witnesses have
reported to UNMISS that the SPLA shot many victims
after asking them what ethnic group they belonged
to. More than 15,000 civilians have sought refuge in
the protection sites alongside the UNMISS base, and
another 5,000 have fled to the Catholic Church areas in
Wau. At UNMISS, we have reinforced our protection
capabilities with additional troops and stepped up the
amount of patrolling that we are doing.
In the Equatorias, in the South, opposition attacks
have focused on vehicles along major supply routes.
Following an ambush by suspected opposition forces
on the Government near Pajok in Eastern Equatoria,
the Government forces, very regrettably, responded by
torching houses, looting shops, hospitals and schools
and, almost invariably, committing acts of sexual
17-11126

25/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

violence. Once again, boys and men were targeted
along ethnic lines. Since the beginning of the year,
60,000 civilians have fled in fear each month from the
Equatorias to Uganda. Most of them, unfortunately,
are farmers, so that what was once the country’s
breadbasket is being depopulated, and when these
people leave the area, they are no longer involved in
the production of food. The United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization estimates that South Sudan
is losing about 1,000 metric tonnes of locally produced
food as a result. A group of religious leaders I met
with recently in Torit, a town in the South, told me that
around three-quarters of its population had already fled
to Uganda.
As I said, in addition to those more retaliatory
operations, there are also significant military operations
being conducted that are aimed at gaining a tactical
advantage over opposition positions before the onset of
the rainy season. Government offensives are currently
going on in Upper Nile, towards the town of Tonga, and
as we speak, an SPLA military force is moving into the
area of Kodok, north of Malakal, on the west bank of
the Nile, signalling an offensive into an area that we
believe could displace as many as 70,000 civilians. And
in a third offensive, we are seeing SPLA moves into
Nuer areas of Waat that are under opposition control.
In the face of this escalation of the past few months,
UNMISS has increased the robustness of its protection
activities. Our integrated patrols to most of the conflict
areas have increased. They are aimed at deterring
violence, monitoring and reporting on the human rights
situation and engaging with political parties at the
local level.
Unfortunately, roadblocks and the denial of flightsafety assurances have restricted the Mission’s ability
to reach key locations as quickly as we would like.
However, I am proud to say that the troop-contributing
countries are standing their ground. In recent days, a
Rwandan patrol to Pajok in Eastern Equatoria slept
at the checkpoint, refusing to back down when SPLA
soldiers demanded that it return to base, and was
able to get through the following day. In Upper Nile,
Mongolian peacekeepers cocked their weapons at SPLA
in Opposition soldiers who were abducting young boys
for recruitment and secured their release. Chinese
peacekeepers braved fire to help humanitarian workers
to safety in Kajo Keji, in the Equatorias, and Ethiopian
soldiers reacted swiftly in order to apprehend armed

S/PV.7930

men who were trying to penetrate our protection-ofcivilian sites in Juba.
Our formed police units are patrolling both inside
and outside the protection sites, thereby freeing up our
military forces to conduct further long-range patrols. I
was heartened by Major General Cammaert’s comments
in his recent report on the progress that has been made
with regard to our troop movements, and we will be
pushing further on his follow-up recommendations.
The deployment of a regional protection force will
again also free up resources to project our presence
beyond Juba. However, we should remain realistic
in our expectations. An additional 4,000 troops will
certainly boost our capacity but will largely have to
function under similar rules of engagement.
The humanitarian consequences of the violence
have been disastrous. One third of South Sudan’s
population are currently either displaced or refugees.
This is a man-made disaster, unlike that of the other
countries in the region experiencing famine brought
on by drought. People have been forced to flee their
homes and, as the people I have met in places such as
Leer have told me, they have exhausted their coping
mechanisms. For many, three years of conflict have
eroded their basic livelihoods, prevented them from
planting and harvesting and caused cattle to be looted
on a grand scale.
I want to single out the courage and efforts of
humanitarian workers, who, despite massive logistical
hurdles, have operated to provide lifesaving support to
the most isolated communities. In the past month, there
have been three attacks on aid workers alone, killing 10
people. Non-governmental organizations in Mayendit
county were forced to evacuate, and humanitarian
compounds and supplies have been repeatedly looted,
most recently by opposition forces, in Waat and Yuai.
Agencies still struggle to gain clearances to access the
most vulnerable.
Despite what appears to be attempts by the parties
to achieve victory by military means, a political solution
is the only way forward for South Sudan. Military
offensives are fracturing groups and intensifying ethnic
divisions to a degree that will hinder reconciliation.
Regrettably, no party has shown interest in reviving the
peace agreement. President Kiir’s announcement of a
national dialogue has been welcomed, but skepticism
remains. An independent convener is essential, as is
the need to bring in all constituencies, including those

17-111263/21

S/PV.7930

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

outside the country. Unlike this time last year, when
the conflict was construed on a bipolar basis, today the
opposition has splintered. Our peacebuilding efforts,
by necessity, will need to be more widely cast than in
the past.
To create political will, the parties need to be
speaking with one voice. The African Union, the
Security Council and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) must be united in dealing
with the parties. I work hand in hand with the United
Nations Special Envoy for Sudan and South Sudan, as
well as with the African Union and its Envoy, President
Konaré, and IGAD Chair President Mogae to identify
ways to revitalize the peace process.
Let me underscore that the political process in
South Sudan is not dead; however, it requires significant
resuscitation. UNMISS will work together with our
partners on opportunities to forge viable solutions to
bring an end to the hostilities and the suffering of the
people of South Sudan. To do so will require the support
of the Council, speaking with a united voice against the
current state of affairs.
I end by saying that I am heartened by what I have
encountered within UNMISS. It is truly making a
difference on the ground. I stand proud to be associated
with the Mission and all that it has achieved.
The President: I thank Mr. Shearer for his
briefing. We appreciate his sacrifice and leadership on
this matter.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ciss.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I am
honoured to speak to the Security Council on behalf of
Ambassador Fodé Seck, Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan. He is unfortunately unable
to attend this meeting due to a last-minute conflict of
schedules. He offers his apologies.
In my statement, I shall summarize the main
conclusions and recommendations contained in the
final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2017/326),
introduced to the Committee on 16 March, as well as the
outcome of the consideration of these conclusions and
recommendations by the members of the Committee on
29 March. I shall also briefly touch on the work carried
out by the Committee since the Chair’s briefing to the
Council on 17 November 2016 (see S/PV.7814).
4/21

25/04/2017

With regard to the political situation, the Panel
again asssessed that the Agreement on the Settlement
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan August
2015 had de facto been shattered. In its view, the
political arrangement between President Salva Kiir and
First Vice-President Taban Deng Gai left the significant
segment to one part of the opposition movements,
other political camps and many influential non-Dinka
community leaders. The Panel concluded that the
political arrangement arrangement was
“not nationally unifying, ha[d] not arrested
the security and humanitarian crisis and [was
increasingly an obstacle to genuine political
reconciliation, undermining the transition to
the inclusive and sustainable peace envisaged
in resolutions 2206 (2015) and 2290 (2016)”
(S/2017/326, p. 2).
On the question of security, the Panel noted that
the conflict in South Sudan was becoming increasingly
asymmetrical, and that the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Government, the
SPLM/A in Opposition and other armed groups had
all conducted military operations in 2016 and the
first quarter of 2017. Nevertheless, it was considered
that the military exercises carried out and planned by
the SPLM/A in Government, under the leadership of
President Kiir, had been the largest by far.
Throughout its mandate, the Panel of Experts
identified widespread violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
by all parties. It indicates in its final report that such
violations had continued unabated, including attacks
against civilians, violations of the rights to freedom of
expression and opinion, and violations of the rights of
the child. Those violations have been committed in a
climate of near-total impunity and in the absence of any
credible effort to prevent or punish the perpetrators.
The Panel also considered the events that led to the
declaration of famine in two counties of Unitty state in
February 2017. Specifically, it found that in the years
prior to the famine, the Government had conducted
repeated military operations in the southern part of the
state that had hampered humanitarian assistance and
led to forced population displacements.
At the humanitarian level, the Panel reported that
at least 100,000 South Sudanese were starving to death
and that a million more were on the brink of starvation.
In this context, the Panel found that South Sudan was
17-11126

25/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7930

the world’s deadliest country for humanitarian workers.
Since the beginning of the war in December 2013, it
has recorded the deaths of at least 72 humanitarian
workers and reported to the Committee at the meeting
on 29 March that the figure had risen to 80. Violent
attacks on humanitarian workers were only one of the
factors hampering the delivery of aid. Other factors
included the intimidation, harassment and detention of
humanitarian personnel; the looting of humanitarian
supplies; restrictions on the freedom of movement; and
a general climate of insecurity.

He was accompanied by representatives of France and
the United Kingdom who sit on the Committee, and
members of the Panel of Experts. On that occasion,
the Chair was privileged to hear directly from many
stakeholders on the ground, as they expressed differing
opinions about the situation in South Sudan. He was
also able to see the extent to which sanctions have been
enforced in the country and region. When he returned
from his visit, he circulated a detailed report to his
colleagues on the Committee for their consideration
during consultations on 18 January.

In accordance with its mandate, the Panel reported
cases of the sale, supply or transfer of arms and related
equipment and reported regional efforts to halt the
deterioration of the situation and the macroeconomic
conditions in South Sudan.

On 21 March, the Committee held consultations
at which the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children in Armed Conflict,
Leila Zerrougui, and former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Zainab Hawa Bangura, made presentations.
Ms. Zerrougui noted, among other things, that
security conditions in South Sudan had continued to
deteriorate, thereby exacerbating a situation that leads
to the perpetration of gross violations against children,
including in particular, the recruitment and tremendous
exploitation of children; the targeting of civilians,
including children on the basis of their ethnicity,
involving murder, abduction, illegal detention, rape,
sexual violence; the torching of villages; looting and the
denial of access to humanitarian assistance. Famine has
also exacerbated the situation. It is estimated that more
than 1 million children suffer from acute malnutrition
and that there are in excess of 250,000 cases of severe
malnutrition. Ms. Zerrougui underscored that the
perpetrators of serious violations against children
must be held to account for their actions. If that is not
done, it will given them the green light to commit other
barbaric acts.

The Group of Experts makes four recommendations
in its final report. It recommends that the Security
Council impose an arms embargo on South Sudan. It
also recommends that the Council should send a letter
to the President of the Human Rights Council and to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
requesting that the Commission receive the full legal
and forensic support necessary to execute effectively
its mandate to collect, preserve and analyse evidence of
human rights violations and violations of international
humanitarian law. Since these two recommendations
are addressed to the Security Council, the Committee
has taken no decision in their respect.
With regard to the other two recommendations of
the Panel of Experts, the Committee decided to take
note of the recommendation that it consider listing
other individuals and entities on the list. Finally,
in accordance with the last recommendation, the
Committee decided to consider the possibility that
Ambassador Seck, in his capacity as Chair, write to the
States members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to reiterate their obligation to enforce the
travel ban and asset freeze established under resolution
2206 (2015) and extended under resolution 2290 (2016).
Draft letters were circulated to the members of the
Committee under a tacit approval procedure which
expires on that date.
I would also like to brief Council members on
the work done by the Committee since the Chair
addressed them on 17 November 2016. The Chair
had the opportunity to visit South Sudan, Ethiopia,
Uganda and the Sudan from 10 to 19 December 2016.

Ms. Bangura, along with Ms. Zerrougui, stated
that after three years of conflict, the situation in South
Sudan remained just as disastrous and impunity just
as pervasive. She underscored that rape, gang rape
and other acts of sexual violence continued to be
committed in an environment of impunity. She pointed
out that the Committee had an important role to play,
such as punishing the perpetrators of sexual violence
by genuinely adopting targeted measures against those
in high-ranking positions. There must be consequences
for committing acts of sexual violence or giving orders
for such acts to be committed; if not, such crimes
will persist.

17-111265/21

S/PV.7930

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President: I thank Ambassador Ciss for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to members of the Council who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by complimenting Mr. Shearer and the entire
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
team for the steps that they have taken to enhance
the Mission’s ability to fulfil its mandate, despite the
hostile circumstances in which it operates.
The situation in South Sudan is dire, but I want to
recall what we, the members of the Security Council,
agreed to on 23 March in presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/4. We called for an immediate ceasefire
by all parties. We called for steps to be taken to allow
life-saving assistance to get to those in need. We called
for the immediate removal of obstacles to UNMISS and
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force. We
also gave our support to joint United Nations, African
Union (AU) and Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) efforts to bring the parties back
to the peace agreement. We said that we would to those
benchmarks and reassess; so let us do that.
The lack of progress since that presidential
statement a month ago is deafening. Fighting and
violence in South Sudan have never been so widespread.
Events that unfolded in Wau earlier this month are a
distressing indication of the apathy of the parties to the
conflict towards achieving peace by political means.
United Nations reports detail clashes between the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and the opposition,
which resulted in the SPLA seeking violent retribution
against civilians in a community they believed to be in
support of the opposition.
It is always difficult to deliver aid in a highly
insecure environment like South Sudan. But, let us
be clear, it is not only the presence of conflict that
impedes the ability of humanitarian workers to address
the ever-worsening food situation; it is the way in
which the conflict is conducted, namely, the fact
that it contravenes international humanitarian law.
International humanitarian law was breached with
the murder of three World Food Programme (WFP)
employees in Wau. That was by no means an isolated
incident. As Ambassador Ciss noted in his briefing, the
murder of those WFP employees adds to the toll of 80
humanitarians who have been killed in South Sudan
since December 2013. That must stop. What is also
6/21

25/04/2017

unacceptable is the news that the Government of South
Sudan has detained without charge a WFP employee.
We call on the Government of South Sudan for his
immediate and unconditional release, and urge others
to join that call.
The violence in Wau is also an example of the
unacceptable and chronic obstructions placed upon
UNMISS by the Government of South Sudan. Despite
repeated attempts, UNMISS has been prevented from
patrolling in Wau and is thus unable to protect civilians.
A continued lack of Government cooperation has also
prevented meaningful progress on the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force.
The Council has heard time and again of the
shocking impact that this conflict is having on the
world’s youngest nation. One example is the fact that
at least one in every four South Sudanese has now been
forced from his or her home since the outbreak of the
conflict in December 2013 — what a damning statistic.
Despite multiple statements made in the Council and
the efforts of the United Nations, the African Union and
IGAD to bring the parties together, we have collectively
failed to bring about an end to the conflict. We are
further from the IGAD peace agreement than ever.
Yes, we have all pledged to do more. Yes, the
Government of South Sudan has time and again
promised peace, but the people of South Sudan are fed
up with pledges and promises. They need action. We
therefore strongly encourage the AU, IGAD and the
United Nations to build on their commitment to working
together by developing a clear joint plan of action to
solve the ongoing crisis in South Sudan without delay.
In conclusion, the question we each need to ask
ourselves as we walk out of the Chamber is: How much
further are we prepared to let the situation deteriorate
on our watch? My answer is — no further at all. With
that in mind, I call on regional countries to avert the
suffering in their backyards. I remind fellow Council
colleagues that it is incumbent on us to use every
available tool to pull South Sudan back from the abyss.
Dialogue is needed, but so is pressure. An arms embargo
would prevent further devastation and re-arming when
the rainy season inevitably slows the fighting. Targeted
sanctions would remind those in power that a return
to peace is the right alternative to the rape and killing
of civilians.
We hear month after month the same lack of
commitment to peace on the part of all parties. We owe
17-11126

25/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

it to the people of South Sudan to end the horror and
secure lasting peace.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative David Shearer for his briefing and for
the good work he has been doing since assuming his
new post a few months ago. We also thank the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Senegal for his briefing
on the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan.
We remain extremely concerned about the worsening
security and humanitarian situation in South Sudan.
All reports indicate that what is happening in the
country is indeed deeply disturbing, and, with every
passing day, the situation seems to get worse. Fighting
has continued unabated across several parts of the
country with devastating consequences for the civilian
population. The high level of insecurity coupled with
the drought situation in the country has left many
South Sudanese food insecure. The dire humanitarian
situation requires urgent attention, and, before it is too
late, all necessary measures must be taken to save lives
and forestall the famine. In that connection, ensuring
safe and unhindered access for humanitarian actors is
absolutely critical to reach those in need of life-saving
assistance, and it is incumbent upon all the parties on
the ground to facilitate that without any preconditions.
The cessation of all hostilities and violence in
the country is imperative not only for facilitating the
delivery of humanitarian aid, but also for creating the
conditions necessary for the holding of genuine and
inclusive dialogue so as to achieve lasting peace and
reconciliation in South Sudan. It is important that the
Government honour its commitments to its unilateral
ceasefire, and all other parties should also be urged to
immediately stop fighting. The 2015 Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan remains an
important framework to end the conflict in South Sudan,
and we believe that it is through the full implementation
of the Agreement, greater inclusivity, forgiveness and
reconciliation that peace and stability can be restored
in the country. That is what necessitates the need for
reinvigorating the peace process and, in that regard, we
continue to believe that the national dialogue initiative
announced by the Government has the real potential
to facilitate that objective if it is conducted in an allinclusive manner.
We cannot overemphasize the need for unity of
purpose among the Intergovernmental Authority on

S/PV.7930

Development (IGAD), the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations in the search for lasting peace, security
and stability in South Sudan. In that connection, the joint
press statement of 29 January continues to represent a
useful framework for cooperation among those three
organizations in their joint efforts to reinvigorate the
South Sudanese peace process. Its implementation
remains the key to addressing the South Sudan issue.
Of course, we fully understand the growing frustration
within the international community because of the
prevailing situation on the ground and the lack of any
meaningful progress. However, there is no option for
the three organizations other than redoubling their
efforts to reverse the current alarming trajectory.
In that regard, we would like to stress one very
critical point that Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Shearer mentioned earlier. At no time
has the alignment of voices and actions of the region,
the AU, the United Nations, the Security Council and
the international community in general been as critical
as it is today. A one-voice message is what could make
a difference in South Sudan.
The countries of the region are being inundated
with thousands of refugees fleeing South Sudan because
of the rapidly deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation. Therefore, they have a stake in resolving
the South Sudanese conflict and can indeed play an
important role in the search for a lasting solution to it.
Recently, there has been progress in adopting a common
regional approach to deal with the South Sudanese
issue. That was demonstrated during the thirtieth
extraordinary summit of IGAD Assembly of Heads of
State and Government on South Sudan in Nairobi, and
the communiqué issued at the conclusion of the summit
is a testament to positive developments in the region.
That is why the assertion in the final report of the Panel
of Experts on South Sudan established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) (S/2017/326) — that the region
is fractured in its response to the conflict in South
Sudan — does not, in our opinion, accurately reflect the
reality on the ground. Nevertheless, we acknowledge
that there have been deficiencies. The need to do more
remains so as to consolidate the unity of the region. I
would like to indicate that every possible effort is being
exerted in that direction.
We also know full well that no matter what we in
the region and the rest of the international community
do, nothing can be achieved without the willingness
and readiness of the South Sudanese parties to stop

17-111267/21

S/PV.7930

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the fighting and find a lasting solution through
reconciliation and dialogue. That is why the Council
needs to continue to urge them to do so in order to end
the suffering of the South Sudanese people.
Finally, with regard to the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force, we are working with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to expedite
the deployment of an advance infantry company,
as indicated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/328). We welcome the limited progress made in
the deployment preparation but also note the challenges
that still need to be addressed. We hope that the United
Nations and the Government of South Sudan will reach
a common understanding in addressing those issues
and pave the way for the full and speedy deployment
of the Force.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. David Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Senegal for
their briefings.
The Security Council has been meeting intensively
since July 2016 to discuss the situation in South Sudan
following the armed clashes in the capital of Juba
between Government and opposition forces, which
triggered a cycle of violence in the country. Despite
the difference of opinion between the members of the
Security Council on how to address the crisis, there
has always been and remains a general consensus
and true unanimity within the Council with regard to
the importance of reviving a political settlement of
the crisis as a pillar for achieving peace and stability
and for ending the suffering, human rights violations,
displacement and looming famine faced by civilians in
South Sudan.
Despite the efforts of the regional parties and the
international entities mandated with following up on
and reviving the political solution, nothing has yet
crystallized into a practical and inclusive initiative
ensuring that the parties will completely cease hostilities
and revive their commitment to the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. In that context, we emphasize the importance
of coordinating the international and regional efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council, the Security Council, the Secretary-General
and the Chair of the AU Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
8/21

25/04/2017

Mahamat, so as to develop a comprehensive political
initiative for a solution. That may require us to focus our
efforts on persuading the Government and opposition
leaders to end hostilities for a preliminary three-month
period so as to allow for national dialogue and provide
it with momentum.
We are convinced that further delay to opening the
political horizon and ceasing the hostilities will further
complicate and aggravate the crisis. We therefore fear
that the Security Council’s meetings on South Sudan
might become routine gatherings at which principled
positions concerning the conflict are repeated without
any real ability to influence the situation on the ground.
We also fear that such debates may become removed
from the conflict and the reality on the ground. In that
context, let us be mindful of the information contained
in the final report of the Panel of Experts on South
Sudan established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
(S/2017/326) pertaining to the collapse of the Peace
Agreement. We note that such a superficial reading of
the political situation could unfortunately give a green
light to the parties on both sides to continue fighting
without any legal or political framework.
We have continued to call in the Council for a
focus on a political solution, and we also believe that
there is an urgent need and moral and legal obligation
for the parties to the conflict to end all forms of
violence, commit to and respect the principles of
international law, uphold their responsibilities with
regard to civilians, and ensure the security and safety
of humanitarian workers. We therefore believe that
continued obstruction of humanitarian efforts will lead
only to further suffering and increase the human cost of
the conflict. It will also undermine the regional efforts
under way to achieve a political settlement and to end
the suffering of civilians.
In this context, we also emphasize the importance of
continuing to work with the Government of South Sudan
to facilitate access to the affected areas quickly, safely
and in a manner free of obstacles. This is necessary
for UNMISS to carry out its mandate as adopted by
the Council. In this respect, we wish to express our
surprise at the continued delay in deploying the
regional protection force. It is important that we arrive
at a common understanding between the Secretariat and
the Government on the details of the force’s mandate,
its terms of reference and its location. We stress also
the importance of ensuring the necessary capacity and
training for the force before its deployment so that it
17-11126

25/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

can effectively discharge its mandate. We must also
create conditions conducive to ensuring its security.
It is the Council’s responsibility to not only prevent
the collapse of the State in South Sudan but also to
support it in future. The Council is well aware, on
the basis of its experience with other conflicts, that
the vacuum that results from the collapse of a State
can be filled only by chaos, the price of which is paid
primarily by civilians — women, men and children. It
is the Council’s responsibility to work to elevate the
substantive discussion on the crisis in South Sudan so
that it can identify priorities in terms of actions to be
taken, and to use the best tools available to it to support
such actions and ensure their success. For this reason,
we must work on improving the content of the reports
received by the Council from the Secretariat, as well as
periodically engage in dialogue with the various South
Sudanese and regional parties.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I wish to thank you for having convened this
important meeting on the issue of South Sudan. I should
also like to thank in particular Special Representative
of the Secretary-General David Shearer for his briefing
and for his leadership of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) since taking up his functions
in January. I also welcome the briefing by the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, and
I congratulate Senegal for its resolute action at the helm
of the Committee.
One month ago, the Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/4) listing the actions expected
of the South Sudanese parties by the end of April in order
to stabilize the situation. However, as the briefers have
underscored, it is clear that these demands have not been
complied with. Hostilities have not ceased, far from it;
the humanitarian situation remains catastrophic; there
has been weak implementation of the peace agreement;
the inclusiveness of the national dialogue has not been
ensured; and UNMISS and humanitarian actors remain
subject to intolerable restrictions and attacks.
Given this situation, the international community,
and in particular the Council, must take action along
two main, complementary lines.
The first priority is to protect civilians. Once
again, civilians are the victims of the worst atrocities
perpetrated in South Sudan. The situation has
deteriorated even further in the country in recent weeks

S/PV.7930

and months. The relative calm that prevails in Juba
should not distract us from the violence of the fighting
in many parts of the country, including the Upper Nile
area, Bahr el-Ghazal and the Equatorias. As a result,
human rights violations have multiplied, in particular
against women and children, who are subject to the
worst atrocities. Those civilians who are able to escape
the violence are forced to leave their homes and swell
the ranks of the already more than 1.6 million displaced
persons in the country.
The protection of civilians requires the mobilization
of the international community, guided by several
concerns. The first priority is the implementation
of the cessation of hostilities. This will require all
international actors to bring pressure to bear on the
South Sudanese parties to impress upon them the fact
that their weapons must fall silent.
Regional
organizations,
including
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union (AU), naturally have a leading
role to play.
We must also ensure humanitarian access to the
civilian population. The resurgence of attacks against
humanitarian actors is intolerable. We were particularly
shocked by the recent killings of three humanitarian
workers in Wau and six others in March, near Pibor.
Those responsible for these crimes, as with any attack
of this kind, must be identified and brought to justice.
Full support also must be provided to UNMISS in
its efforts to protect civilians. We welcome the more
robust stance that it has adopted in recent months. Yet
we cannot stand by as the Mission, which received its
mandate from the Council, continues to be subject to
restrictions on its movement as well as to bureaucratic
impediments that prevent it from fulfilling its mandate,
which is today more necessary than ever. The Council,
like other regional actors and all partners in South
Sudan, must unequivocally condemn such practices.
Finally, an arms embargo must be imposed, as the
Panel of Experts has recommended once again. France
has long been in favour of such an embargo. This is a
sine qua non both for the protection of civilians and for
the establishment of conditions conducive to a genuine
political dialogue.
The second area of action is to achieve progress
with respect to a political solution to the conflict. To
reach this goal, we must first of all be realistic about

17-111269/21

S/PV.7930

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the current situation. The recent spike in clashes
between Government troops, the opposition and the
various armed groups makes clear that these actors
continue to seek above all to consolidate their military
positions as the rainy season approaches. This type of
behaviour unfortunately makes it abundantly clear that
South Sudanese stakeholders are continuing to choose
a military approach over a political one.
Indeed, while the fighting is intensifying, the
political process remains at an impasse. The peace
agreement of 2015, the result of IGAD’s efforts, must
remain the cornerstone of the solution to the conflict in
South Sudan. It is the responsibility of the Transitional
Government of National Unity, which itself came out of
the agreement, to ensure this. The responsibility also
falls to all South Sudanese stakeholders concerned to
ensure that the agreement is effectively implemented.
This applies also to the national dialogue, which
can have value only if it includes the full political
spectrum of the South Sudanese population and civil
society, and if it is conducted in a transparent, impartial
and independent manner, one that will make it possible
to identify lasting solutions to the country’s problems.
In this context, we welcome the efforts of the
Chairman of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, Mr. Festus Mogae, as well as those of the
African Union High Representative for South Sudan,
Мr. Alpha Oumar Кonaré, to ensure progress in the
implementation of the peace agreement, including
the national dialogue. To that end, they must be able
to count on the steadfast support and continuing
and coordinated mobilization of the international
community and in particular of IGAD, the AU and,
of course, the Council. We also reiterate our support
for the Secretary-General’s commitment to creating a
positive dynamic and ensuring optimal coordination
among all actors in this respect.
Finally, we wish to recall that, in order to shift
the mindset of spoilers to the peace process in South
Sudan, the Council has a relevant tool at its disposal:
targeted sanctions. We should not hesitate to apply
them when the situation warrants it. This applies
also to perpetrators of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
The efforts that need to be made by the Security
Council are clear. The Council will have to take all
necessary actions if its expectations, as set forth on
23 March, are ignored by South Sudanese stakeholders.
10/21

25/04/2017

Along with IGAD and the AU, we must take action so
as to ensure that weapons in South Sudan fall silent
and that the intolerable suffering of civilians comes to
an end.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like first to welcome
Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, and thank him for
providing a vivid picture of the situation on the ground.
Japan appreciates and supports his efforts to bring
peace to the people of South Sudan in a very difficult
environment. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Ciss for his updates and Ambassador Seck for his very
active chairmanship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning
South Sudan.
Regrettably, we have been witnessing very
concerning incidents in South Sudan. These include
the ongoing violence across the country, attacks on
civilians — by the Sudan People’s Liberation Army, for
example — continued access restrictions and famine.
A staggering 3.5 million people, nearly a third of the
population, have been displaced. Many of them are
women and children. We are also appalled by the killing
of humanitarian workers, with 14 deaths in 2017 alone.
Those brave humanitarian workers sought only to help
the South Sudanese people. The Government must
fulfil its primary responsibility to protect civilians.
On 23 March, the Security Council was united in
adopting presidential statement S/PRST/2017/4, calling
for five steps to be taken, including a permanent
ceasefire, humanitarian access and the removal of
obstacles to the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) operations. It is very disappointing
that there has been no concrete action so far. Despite
having personally participated in the 25 March
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
summit, President Kiir has not yet announced a
unilateral ceasefire as agreed upon in its communiqué.
Japan urges all parties, including the Government,
to respond immediately and fully to the Presidential
Statement. In that connection, we take note of the South
Sudanese Government’s recognition that an inclusive
national dialogue is necessary to improve the country’s
security. Japan reiterates the importance of a genuinely
inclusive national dialogue and is ready to support the
efforts of the Government to that end.
Regional engagement is increasingly important in
sending a clear message to South Sudan. In addition
17-11126

25/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to bilateral efforts, last month saw visits by the
African Union (AU) High Representative and the AU
Commission Chairperson to South Sudan, the AU
Peace and Security Council communiqué, the IGAD
summit meeting, and President Mogae’s meeting with
Riek Machar. We welcome those efforts and encourage
the region to strengthen them. We also appreciate and
support the neighbouring countries that are hosting
nearly 1.7 million South Sudanese refugees.
Japan welcomes the follow-up report of the
special investigation on the Juba violence last July
(S/2017/328). We are encouraged that UNMISS has
enhanced its capabilities to protect civilians, including
through more robust patrols, and that it has bolstered
contingency planning and staff safety, as we heard
from Mr. Shearer today. There is progress, but it is still
not sufficient. It must be accompanied by meaningful
efforts by the Government. Japan reiterates its call for
the Government’s full cooperation with UNMISS on
the implementation of its mandate, including on the
early deployment of the regional protection force.
In conclusion, the Council remains united in
backing commitments of the AU, IGAD and the
Secretary-General to collectively support the peace
process. We believe the Secretary-General’s continued
involvement is particularly important if we are to
build on the 29 January joint press statement. Japan
remains firm in its commitment to peace and stability
in South Sudan.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan, Mr. David Shearer, for his update on the
situation in South Sudan. We are pleased to hear of
the implementation of some measures to improve the
protection of civilians and create weapons-free zones.
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) can continue to count on Italy’s support. I
also wish to thank the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan, Ambassador Seck, and Ambassador Ciss for
their report on the Committee’s activities.
As others have recalled, on 23 March the
Security Council adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/4 on South Sudan. We feel the need to
repeat the five points that South Sudan is called upon
to respect: immediate ceasefire; removal of obstacles
to humanitarian assistance; support for the mediation
efforts of the United Nations, the African Union (AU)

S/PV.7930

and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD); the removal of obstacles to UNMISS and
the Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism and deployment of the regional protection
force; and ending attacks on humanitarian personnel
and facilities.
We cannot but observe that with only a few days
left until the expiration date of 30 April, set by the
presidential statement, the situation has deteriorated on
all five points. Despite the IGAD statement of 25 March,
the ceasefire has not been announced in South Sudan.
As the Secretary-General’s letter (S/2017/328) indicates,
the clashes are contributing to the exodus of the civilian
population from the country. The final report of the
Panel of Experts on South Sudan established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) (S/2017/326) explains that
military action is continuing along ethnic lines, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance continues to
be met with attacks on personnel and the national
dialogue announced by the Government has been
indefinitely postponed.
The result is that the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan keeps
being violated, fighting widens in the country and there
is no national dialogue. South Sudanese women and
children are the first victims of that non-compliance.
The tragedy is driven by human rights violations, the
use of child soldiers, sexual and gender-based violence
as a war tactic, and the impunity guaranteed by the
delays in establishing the Hybrid Court of South Sudan.
There can be no peace without accountability.
Anyone who thinks that the differences can be solved
through military means must be deluded. The only
result would be a divided, indebted country filled with
resentment — a situation which would weigh on the
population for generations to come. We ask all parties
to comply with the relevant resolutions, to cooperate
with UNMISS and allow the immediate deployment
of the regional protection force. We will continue to
support the shuttle diplomacy of Special Representative
Alpha Konaré, with the assistance of Mr. Shearer,
Special Envoy Haysom, President Mogae and IGAD.
We call on the regional stakeholders to act in unity
and without further delay so that the parties may cease
their hostilities.
In South Sudan today, there is no peace and there
is no security. The impact of the conflict on the region,
in terms of refugees and arms flow, for example,

17-1112611/21

S/PV.7930

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

is increasingly destabilizing. During last month’s
ministerial briefing, we observed that the time to
contain that immense tragedy was ending. Today we
observe, with regret, that our assertion is more pressing
than ever. Therefore, in the next few weeks, the Council
will have to carefully examine the options available in
order to convince South Sudan that stability must be
restored in the country.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the United States for having convened this
meeting. We also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer, and Ambassador
Ciss for their briefings.
At present, the situation in South Sudan remains
very complex. President Kiir has made an appeal for
peace through dialogue. At the same time, the political,
security, development and humanitarian sectors in
South Sudan continue to face numerous challenges. In
particular, the severity of the ongoing famine is making
it increasingly difficult for achieving sustained peace.
China proposes that international community provide
assistance in the following three areas.
First, we must continue to advance the political
settlement in South Sudan. Achieving peace and
stability is a shared aspiration of all parties in South
Sudan. A political settlement is the only way out for
South Sudan. What is at stake is for the international
community to convince all parties in South Sudan
to abandon military means, cease hostilities and
immediately get back to the political-settlement track
so as to implement the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan in earnest.
China welcomes President Kiir’s initiative in
hosting a national dialogue. We look forward to seeing
an early start of such a dialogue, which should have
the extensive and active participation of all parties in
South Sudan. China hails and supports the efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union (AU) and all other parties aimed at
contributing actively to South Sudan’s political process.
We hope that IGAD, the AU and the United Nations can
achieve enhanced coordination and emit a joint signal
in favour of finding synergies for the achievement of
a solution.
Secondly, we must assist the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) in better
fulfilling its mandate. Secretary-General Guterres
recently submitted a report on the restructuring of
12/21

25/04/2017

UNMISS (S/2017/224). It is our hope that the Secretariat
can use this as a good opportunity to press ahead with
the reform of the peacekeeping system to make the
Mission better perform its mandate and increase its
operational effectiveness so as to ensure greater safety
for peacekeepers and better respond to the complex
situation. China hopes that the Secretariat can improve
its coordination with South Sudan’s Transitional
Government of National Unity and IGAD to promote
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force and
to properly address any issues that might arise in
cooperation. We hope that the Government of South
Sudan can actively implement the Security Council’s
resolutions and presidential statement S/PRST/2017/4,
and support the better fulfilment of UNMISS mandates
and the deployment of the Regional Protection Force.
Thirdly, it is important for the Security Council
to send out more positive and supportive messages. At
present, under the current circumstances, the Security
Council must encourage all parties in South Sudan
to actively engage in the dialogue process and stay
jointly committed to peace, stability and development.
The international community must provide timely and
effective assistance to help the South Sudanese people
to overcome their current difficulties.
China notes that the Panel of Experts of the South
Sudan Sanctions Committee recently submitted its final
report (S/2017/326). China believes that any actions
taken by the Security Council must be cautious ones,
lead to promoting the process of a political settlement
and support the mediation efforts of IGAD and the AU.
Given the severity of famine that South Sudan is
facing and as a response to the United Nations appeal,
the Chinese Government has decided, with the help
of the World Food Programme to provide $5 million
in contingency food aid to South Sudan and through
bilateral channels to provide 8,750 tons of food to
assist South Sudan in better responding to famine.
China is ready to continue to play its constructive
part in restoring peace, stability and development in
South Sudan.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral David Shearer for his sobering briefing but
also for the very energetic way with which he has begun
his mission under difficult circumstances. I would also
like to thank the representative of Senegal for his strong
17-11126

25/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

leadership at the helm of the Committee established
pursuant to 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan.
As many colleagues have mentioned this morning,
it was just over a month ago that the Security Council
met at the ministerial level (see S/PV.7906) to adopt a
presidential statement on South Sudan (S/PRST/2017/4).
We called for an end to the violence, for increased
humanitarian access, for the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) to be able
to do its work, and for support for implementation of
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. Two days later, on 25 March,
the Heads of State of countries members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
issued a communiqué deciding that all humanitarian
corridors should be immediately opened.
The IGAD extraordinary summit further declared
that the Government of South Sudan had agreed to
announce a unilateral ceasefire. In the month since
then, however, the parties have failed to deliver on even
one of these commitments and benchmarks. Instead,
the political, security and humanitarian situation in
South Sudan has continued to deteriorate, as we heard
this morning. Millions are starving, and millions more
are displaced either inside or outside the country.
Continued fighting and reports of increased ethnically
motivated violence is of deep concern. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, this is a
man-made disaster.
Attacks against civilians and reports of high levels
of sexual and gender-based violence in Wau, Pajok and
Malakal are appalling. Yet in the face of the growing
desperation and suffering of the people, we continue to
see the denial of access for humanitarian actors and a
failure to take the steps needed to end conflict and build
peace. While the belligerents have continued their war
of attrition, they must by now realize that only a political
solution can resolve the conflict. Immediate adherence
to the ceasefire by all parties is critically needed to
allow for a meaningful political process. Such a process
should be closely supported by the United Nations, the
African Union and IGAD and aimed at revitalizing a
comprehensive and inclusive political dialogue, always
with the full and effective participation of women.
The innocent civilians trapped in the nightmare
in South Sudan cannot wait. While efforts to find a
political solution continue, there is a need to urgently
address the humanitarian situation to avoid catastrophic

S/PV.7930

consequences. Humanitarians must be able to do
their job. It is unacceptable that South Sudan remain
one of the most dangerous countries in the world for
humanitarian workers. We have just heard this morning
of the World Food Programme as being just the latest
entity to experience unacceptable obstacles to its work.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/224)
indicates that the Government’s procedures change
regularly and that denials or delays in clearance appear to
be systematic rather than incidental. Any manipulation
of access to humanitarian aid for the civilian population
is inexcusable and must end. We call on all parties to
the conflict to uphold humanitarian principles and meet
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
The rapid, safe and unhindered delivery of relief across
South Sudan must be ensured.
Those responsible for human rights violations
and abuses must be identified and held accountable.
Accountability can be an effective deterrent of atrocity
crimes. We therefore encourage the President of the
Security Council to take forward the Panel of Experts’
proposal that we heard about this morning that the
Council write to the President of the Human Rights
Council and to the High Commissioner for Human
Rights to request that the Commission on Human
Rights in South Sudan receive the full legal and forensic
support needed to carry out its work.
It is essential that the Council stands united on the
situation in South Sudan, and there is no reason why we
should not. We must support further intensified efforts
by the African Union High Representative, former
President Konaré, and by the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission Chairperson, former President
Mogae. We should also coordinate closely with regional
leaders to use their influence over the parties.
The region has indeed a critical role to play, but this
does not absolve the Security Council and the United
Nations of its responsibilities. We therefore welcome
the leadership shown by Secretary-General Guterres
and encourage him to continue to actively engage
on South Sudan, as many others have said here this
morning, using his good offices and bringing the United
Nations system together. Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Shearer and the United Nations
Special Envoy for the region, Nicholas Haysom, have
particularly important roles in these efforts and deserve
our strongest support.

17-1112613/21

S/PV.7930

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

25/04/2017

The longer this conflict is allowed to continue, with
the deepening of ethnic hatred and fragmentation in
South Sudanese society by the day, the harder the road
for recovery, reconciliation and peace will be. We must
therefore make every possible effort to find a way to
urgently to break this spiral of violence.

We note the efforts of the Secretary-General to
fully cooperate with all troop-contributing countries
as they participate in UNMISS. We have always
advocated a thoughtful and mutually respectful
dialogue among the parties, especially when it comes
to such dangerous missions.

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer, for his briefing
on the situation in South Sudan, as well as the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Senegal, Mr. Ciss, for his
briefing on the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan over the recent reporting period. We welcome
the personal engagement of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Guterres, in favour of finding a solution to the
conflict in South Sudan.

We share the concern of our colleagues about the
disastrous humanitarian situation in the country, and
we note the efforts of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs to improve things. We call
on South Sudan to ensure conditions conducive to the
provision of international humanitarian assistance to
those in need. We welcome the statement of President
Kiir on granting humanitarian access to regions that
are experiencing a food crisis.

We support the initiative to coordinate action in
the format of the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the United
Nations, which should ensure peace, stability and
security in the country. Our view is that IGAD indeed
should play a leading role in the process. Generally
speaking, we must note the consistent commitment of
the Secretary-General to expanding the partnership
with the African Union and subregional organizations
to resolve the most difficult conflicts on the continent,
seeking African solutions to African problems with
relevant support from the United Nations, including in
South Sudan.
We pay tribute to our colleagues of the Secretariat,
who have once again presented a balanced assessment
in their monthly briefing. We agree that there has
been some progress in preparing for the deployment
of the regional protection force. The timetable for the
deployment of the advanced teams was slightly delayed,
but that is not the fault of South Sudan. The fact is that
Juba has maintained a constructive position on the
issue of the Regional Protection Force, as evidenced
by the Government’s allocation of the first land parcel
for deployment. We call on the Secretariat to continue
to cooperate with Juba so as to resolve all existing
problems with regard to the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS), including the
need to create a mechanism for the prompt resolution
of visa problems and for determining the modalities for
deploying the regional protection force while complying
with the basic norms of peacekeeping.
14/21

We would be remiss were we not to note the
assistance provided to the people of South Sudan by
neighbouring countries, in particular the Sudan, which
opened the border crossing in the area of Bentiu,
and the hosting by Uganda of a significant number
of refugees. At the same time, we stress that the
famine in various parts of South Sudan, just as that in
neighbouring Somalia and Kenya, is the result not only
of security problems but also of bad weather, which
has been recognized by representatives of international
humanitarian organizations, among others.
We agree that it will be impossible to stabilize
South Sudan without a full ceasefire and the launching
of an inclusive political process. In that connection,
we welcome President Kiir’s announcement that a
national dialogue will be held in the framework of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. In principle, our view is that
the parameters of a national dialogue and the location
of the consultations should be determined by the South
Sudanese themselves. It would be unfair to blame
the ongoing violence exclusively on the Transitional
Government of National Unity, which, as we know,
has declared unilaterally a ceasefire. It is important
that the opposition take similar measures. We hold the
view that, to a large degree, the security incidents are
the result of command-and-control problems, as well
as a lack of discipline among party ranks. We must not
forget the splintering of the anti-Government forces
between supporters of Taban Deng Gai and Machar, as
well as clashes among members of different ethnicities
and criminal gangs.
17-11126

25/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Our position on the tightening of Security Council
sanctions against South Sudan has not changed. If we
are to establish lasting peace in South Sudan, what we
need is not a Security Council arms embargo, but rather
targeted measures to disarm civilians and demobilize
and reintegrate combatants. We also believe that it is
essential to heed the views of the countries of the region
that the discussion of the introduction of additional
restrictions on Juba is counterproductive.
Against that backdrop, we draw attention to the
duplicity of the approach of some of our colleagues
who appear to strongly advocate introducing an
arms embargo in the Security Council, but outside
the Chamber bring pressure to bear on independent
members of the Panel of Experts on South Sudan
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), who are
investigating the possible involvement of those Council
members in supplying weapons to South Sudan.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would like to begin by thanking
you, Madam President, for having organized this
meeting on the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS). My thanks also go to Mr. David Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, not
only for his important statement, but also for everything
he is doing in his capacity as Head of the Mission.
The crisis in South Sudan, which has gone unabated
for more than three years, requires today urgent action
to put an end to human rights violations and ensure
the protection of civilians, of whom approximately
1.4 million are internally displaced. The situation is
further compounded by the famine in several parts
of South Sudan. It is therefore essential that the
international community act quickly to prevent people
from dying of hunger and to ensure a swift resolution
of the conflict.
We call on all parties to the conflict in South Sudan
to immediately resume their dialogue and implement
thee Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. We believe that the
process of national dialogue, launched last December
2016 by President Salva Kiir, could play a key role in
bringing peace to the country if it is inclusive, free
and transparent.
With regard to UNMISS, the delegation of Senegal
welcomes the genuine progress made in preparing for
the deployment of the regional protection force with
the upcoming arrival of the first wave of the regional

S/PV.7930

protection force in Juba, pending the security clearances
of the Transitional Government of National Unity.
We commend the progress made in the Government’s
allocation of the second land parcel required for the
northern base of the regional protection force, with a
site 10 kilometres north of Juba, whose capacities will
be assessed by UNMISS. We note that UNMISS had
already secured an area next to the airport to serve as a
temporary base for a Rwandan battalion. Nevertheless,
we call for more cooperation from the Transitional
Government of National Unity on the allocation of
the tasks of the regional protection force in Juba and
encourage the authorities of South Sudan to take all
necessary measures for the swift deployment of the
regional protection force.
In the meantime, UNMISS continues to come up
against numerous obstacles in its daily operations.
Among these are requests for visa payments to the
staff of the Mission since last January by the national
immigration authorities. This violates the terms of the
status of forces agreement and has a negative impact on
the Mission’s ability to plan, including as pertains to the
regional protection force. To address this issue, we call
for the cooperation of the Transitional Government of
National Unity, in particular in establishing a one-stop
shop that will handle visas and other authorizations
for UNMISS.
With regard to the ongoing restrictions on the
freedom of movement of UNMISS, these restrictions
continue to undermine the Mission’s ability to take
action swiftly in the event of attacks against civilians in
a context of increasing ethnic violence and in violation
of the status of forces agreement. Targeted attacks and
threats to humanitarian workers are continuing, as are
restrictions on humanitarian access to certain parts of
the country, including in areas such as Wau, Yei and the
western part of Bahr el-Ghazal.
Overall, the security situation in the country
continues to deteriorate in many regions and the
consequences of this considerable violence have
affected a large number of civilians. We therefore call
on all armed actors to immediately cease hostilities and
to allow UNMISS and humanitarian workers to access
civilians in need of assistance. Without such unimpeded
access, the situation is likely to worsen and the local
populations will to suffer from it.
This is the right moment to pay tribute to the
efforts of UNMISS which, despite all the difficulties

17-1112615/21

S/PV.7930

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

encountered, continues to operate in a hostile
environment. I should also like to pay tribute to the
troop-contributing countries for their dedication to the
cause of peace in South Sudan.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to welcome the Special Representative
of the Secretary General for South Sudan, Mr. David
Shearer. As this is the first time he is briefing the
Council, I wish to convey to him my delegation’s wishes
for his success and its full support as he acquits himself
of task he has taken up. I also wish to thank him for
his briefing, which gives us a complete overview of the
latest developments in South Sudan, and of which we
have carefully taken note.
Likewise, I wish to thank our colleague, Mr. Gorgui
Ciss, for his briefing on the work carried out over the
past five months by the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan,
which is chaired by Ambassador Seck of Senegal.
Uruguay expresses its deep concern and alarm at
the political, security, humanitarian and economic crisis
taking place in South Sudan. We reiterate once again
that the conflict cannot be resolved through military
means. In that connection, we urge all political and
military actors in South Sudan to immediately cease
hostilities throughout the country. We also recall that
the Government has the primary responsibility and the
duty to protect its population and to ensure that those
who commit crimes and abuses are held accountable.
It is vital that progress be made toward reaching
a political solution to the conflict, through genuine,
transparent and inclusive dialogue, the main objective
of which should be the full implementation of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan of August 2015. As the
Secretary-General has stated on various occasions,
if national dialogue is to be feasible, armed activities
must cease throughout South Sudan, an impartial entity
must steer the dialogue, and there must be a process
that includes all interested national parties.
On 23 March, the Council adopted presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/4, whereby the parties to the
conflict were encouraged to adopt five measures,
ranging from immediate accession to a permanent
ceasefire and a peaceful resolution of the crisis, to the
immediate elimination of obstacles to the operations of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and humanitarian staff. In that statement, the Council
16/21

25/04/2017

expressed its intention to review progress in terms of
enforcement of the measures no later than 3 April.
One month after the adoption of that statement,
it grieves us to note that progress has been very
limited — practically nil. The parties to the conflict
continue to carry out military operations and to
commit violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law on a massive scale, and all of this in a
climate of total impunity. We have not forgotten that, as
a direct consequence of the conflict, the humanitarian
situation has reached a critical level, with famine
emerging in several areas of the country. Meanwhile,
time continues to go by and the suffering of millions
of civilians, who have nothing to do with the conflict,
continues to increase. How long will we continue
to wait?
This month, the Council held an interesting open
debate (S/PV.7926) that linked human rights, peace
and security. Today, South Sudan is an example of
what should not happen in a country. After what was
seen in South Sudan during the Security Council visit
six months ago and the episodes of violence 2016 in
Malakal, Wau and Juba, it is very difficult to remain
calm and indifferent. The miserable living conditions
of internally displaced persons and the vulnerability
of all civilians in general should be more than enough
reason to deploy the regional protection force. Such a
deployment cannot be held up any longer.
In connection with the aforesaid, I wish to recognize
the complex work being carried out by UNMISS and
humanitarian partners to avoid the occurrence of more
atrocities and to provide assistance to those most in
need, in an extremely dangerous environment. In
that regard, it is unacceptable that the Mission and
humanitarian partners should constantly be confronted
with numerous obstacles, including restrictions to
access, the obstruction of patrols and humanitarian
operations, and the denial and delay of admission of
United Nations personnel into the country. All of
that hampers the ability of the Mission to carry out
the fundamental tasks of its mandate. We urge the
Government of South Sudan to fully cooperate with the
implementation of resolution 2327 (2016), including the
deployment of the regional protection force, and to put
an end to any restrictions on the Mission.
In conclusion, I wish to recognize the important
ongoing efforts being undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral and his team in the Secretariat to advance
17-11126

25/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the implementation of the recommendations of the
independent special investigation with regard to the
actions taken by UNMISS in response to the violence
that occurred in Juba last July. Uruguay is of the view
that the implementation of the recommendations will
help UNMISS in particular, but also peacekeeping
operations as a whole, to improve effectiveness in
protecting civilians, to improve the formulation
of contingency plans, and to achieve improved
accountability for deployed personnel. All of that
points to what we seek to do: improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to preface my remarks by thanking the
United States presidency for having convened this
very important meeting. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), Mr. David Shearer, for his briefing.
We reiterate our full support for all the work that he and
his team are doing in the country.
Similarly, we welcome the briefing of the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Senegal, Ambassador
Gorgui Ciss, pertaining to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan, which is chaired by Senegal.
The current situation in South Sudan is one of
the most alarming in the world. A huge part of the
population suffer high levels of insecurity as a result of
the ongoing armed clashes between the various actors.
They are also faced with the worst humanitarian crisis
since their independence. We reiterate our full support
for the efforts of the Secretary-General as he seeks
to find a solution that will open the door to lasting
and sustainable peace in South Sudan. The cessation
of hostilities and the resumption of a dialogue-led
peace process is key. There must also be an end to all
restrictions on humanitarian access and these must be
the key priorities on which we must focus our efforts at
this juncture.
In a similar vein, we pay tribute to the key
role played by regional organizations in the quest
for a solution to the conflict. We welcome the
communiqué of the thirtieth extraordinary summit
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
Heads of State and Government on South Sudan made
on 25 March. We call on the Government of South
Sudan to implement the ceasefire and the general

S/PV.7930

amnesty, which would promote participation in the
process of national dialogue. In the same way, we urge
all stakeholders to work with the Government along
those lines and to guarantee an inclusive political
process in which all people of South Sudan will have an
opportunity to express their needs and to contribute to
the development of the country.
The ongoing support of the African Union,
the Security Council and the entire international
community, as well as the good offices of the Chair
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission,
Mr. Festus Mogae, and the African Union High
Representative for South Sudan, Mr. Alpha Konaré,
will be crucial to ensuring that this dialogue process is
genuinely inclusive and that it enjoys legitimacy.
With regard to the security situation, we are
concerned about the recent clashes in Pajok and
the town of Wau, which have left more than a dozen
people dead. We condemn them and we hope that the
Government will speedily bring those responsible
to justice with full regard to due process. One of the
key issues in the efforts to achieve peace in South
Sudan is the transitional judicial process, because such
acts cannot go unpunished. We therefore call for full
compliance with chapter V of the peace agreement and
trust that the African Union will take all necessary
steps to ensure that a hybrid court can be established so
that South Sudan can deliver impartial, credible justice.
We welcome the progress that has been made so
far on the deployment of a regional protection force
and call on all those involved to ensure that it is fully
deployed as soon as possible, in order to achieve its
key goal, which is to ensure the safety and security of
civilians in South Sudan.
On the humanitarian front, and to echo an issue
raised by Under-Secretary-General Stephen O’Brien,
we call on the international community and the relevant
international entities to make the necessary aid available
so that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) can respond to the worrying situation
of famine in former Unity state. So far, according
to information from OCHA, less than 30 per cent of
the necessary financing is in place. We also urge the
Government of South Sudan to cooperate fully with
UNMISS so that it can fulfil the mandate conferred
on it by the Security Council. It is also important to
ensure that we can guarantee the safety and security
of humanitarian workers in South Sudan so that they

17-1112617/21

S/PV.7930

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

25/04/2017

can deliver aid to the hundreds of thousands of South
Sudanese in need.

protection force by June, which will bolster the
force’s capabilities.

In conclusion, Bolivia commends the bravery
of UNMISS and the humanitarian workers in South
Sudan at a time when security issues are so evident.
Despite that, they continue to do their work in a spirit
of professionalism and dedication, and we are grateful
to them.

Given the gravity of the humanitarian crisis and
food insecurity in South Sudan, both the Government
and the non-State actors involved should ensure
unhindered humanitarian access to those in need,
especially in areas affected by famine. South Sudan has
become the most dangerous country in the world, with
an alarmingly high death rate among humanitarian
workers, and we urge the Government to ensure their
security and bring their killers to justice.

Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to join other
speakers in thanking Special Representative Shearer
and Ambassador Ciss for their comprehensive briefings.
Kazakhstan’s principled position is that there can
be no military solution to any conflict, including that
in South Sudan. My delegation supports the joint press
statement of 29 January by the African Union, the
United Nations and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), as well as IGAD’s communiqué
of 25 March in that regard. In fact, only inclusive and
transparent dialogue, along with implementation of the
peace agreement, can result in genuine reconciliation
and thereby lay a foundation for the rule of law to
prevail. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) cannot be a substitute for a political process,
and the international community should therefore
give all possible support to the national dialogue in
South Sudan.
Kazakhstan is concerned about the fact that UNMISS
regularly encounters obstructions, bureaucratic
impediments and restrictions on its operations and
freedom of movement while implementing its mandate.
To be effective, any peacekeeping mission needs its
host Government to comply with the obligations set
out in its status-of-forces agreement. We believe that
UNMISS’s operations will be greatly enhanced by the
speedy deployment of a regional protection force, and
we welcome the fact that during his meeting on 26 and
27 March in Juba with Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chair of the African Union Commission, President
Kiir reaffirmed his consent to it. We commend the
Governments of Ethiopia and Rwanda for successfully
coordinating all aspects of the deployment of their
contingents to the regional protection force. We
also hope that as part of the ongoing negotiations
between the Government and some of the other troopcontributing countries, the remaining procedural issues
will be finalized in a timely manner. We welcome the
Government of Kenya’s decision to join the regional
18/21

Children continue to be severely affected by
the unprecedented violence of the ongoing conflict.
Hundreds of them have been killed, maimed, raped,
abducted or recruited in the conflict, which has now
spread throughout the country. The United Nations
estimates that nearly 16,000 children have been
recruited since the conflict began in December 2013.
The Security Council must therefore provide its
full support to Special Representative Shearer and
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict in their efforts to get the Government and other
stakeholders to take serious steps to close security,
legal and logistical loopholes and end the inhumane
treatment of children.
In conclusion, we would like to commend Special
Representative Shearer and the UNMISS personnel
for the work they are doing in such a difficult
environment on the ground in support of the people
of South Sudan. We would also like to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Fodé Seck, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, for his exemplary
commitment to pursuing such a difficult assignment.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I want to welcome
Special Representative Shearer to the Security Council
today and to assure him of Ukraine’s full support to
his and his team. I also thank Ambassador Ciss for
his briefing. We appreciate Senegal’s leadership of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan.
My delegation is extremely concerned about the
continuing deterioration of the security situation in
Wau and the other areas of South Sudan where fighting
is taking place between the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) and the SPLA in Opposition and their
allied militias. It is alarming that these armed clashes
continue to result in civilian casualties, significant
17-11126

25/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

displacement and food shortages. Ukraine firmly
condemns the fighting and calls on the parties to
conduct a comprehensive investigation designed to
ensure that those responsible for killings, violating
international humanitarian law and undermining peace
are held accountable.
We continue to believe that if we are to change the
logic of the deplorable developments in South Sudan,
it is crucial to put more pressure on the parties to end
their hostilities and to create conditions conducive
to the delivery of humanitarian aid. That brings
me to my second point, which is about the obstacles
that have been put in the way of the freedom of
movement of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). We are particularly disappointed
that despite the Government’s numerous promises, its
forces have continued their restrictions — which are
in fact systematic — on UNMISS’s movements and
their interference with UNMISS’s implementation of
its mandate. The Mission’s ability to implement its
mandated tasks therefore remains extremely limited.
It should be recalled that the Transitional
Government of National Unity is required to fulfil
its commitments both under the joint communiqué of
4 September 2016, signed last year during the Security
Council’s visit to Juba, and under the status-of-forces
agreement. UNMISS and the humanitarian actors must
have unhindered access to the affected areas if they are
to help those in need, especially in Wau. We cannot
stress enough that freedom of movement for UNMISS
and humanitarian organizations is not a privilege to be
granted or taken away on a whim but rather a right,
on which their ability to carry out their mandated
tasks depends.
Given the deteriorating security situation in South
Sudan, including where it has been the result of the
rise of militias, UNMISS should be ready to respond
to any scenario. In that regard, Ukraine, as one of the
countries contributing troops and police to the Mission,
welcomes the significant efforts that have been made
to enhance its ability to protect civilians, improve its
planning of its response to crisis situations and increase
the safety and security of its staff. We also look forward
to the start of the regional protection force’s operations
in South Sudan, as envisaged in resolution 2304 (2016).
We call on the Government to provide all the necessary
assistance, including by accelerating customs clearances
and granting visas for participating units.

S/PV.7930

Lastly, I want to stress that an inclusive political
dialogue is the only way to settle the conflict in South
Sudan. It is important that external actors, in particular
those in the region, exercise leverage to encourage the
parties to sit around the negotiating table. It is also
crucial to ensure that the region and the United Nations
speak with one voice and send coordinated messages.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I want to thank Mr. Shearer for his briefing. I
also thank Ambassador Seck for his leadership and
Ambassador Ciss for his briefing today.
The BBC recently ran a report with a headline that
asked the question: Why are there still famines? It is a
good question. The United Nations has declared that
we are facing the biggest humanitarian crisis since the
Second World War due to famines in Africa and Yemen.
Twenty million people are at risk of starvation in South
Sudan; 5.5 million face life-threatening hunger if
nothing changes soon. That is fully half the population
of that young and troubled country. How can so many
people be facing starvation, given the technological and
humanitarian capabilities we have today?
Last month in the Council (see S/PV.7906),
Ambassador Sison gave the best answer there is to
famine in South Sudan. The famine is not the result
of drought; it is the result of leaders more interested
in political power and personal gain than in stopping
violence and allowing humanitarian access. The famine
in South Sudan is man-made. It is the result of ongoing
conflict in that country. It is the result of an apparent
campaign against the civilian population. It is the result
of killing humanitarian workers — 16 this year alone.
It is the result of denying starving people access to the
food and medicine that will save their lives. That is the
reason there is famine in South Sudan.
I commend the United Nations for continuing to
shelter over 200,000 South Sudanese civilians at sites
across the country. It is thanks to that effort and the
dedication of aid workers that there is at least some
relief for the people of South Sudan. The United Nations
has also made some progress with our peacekeeping
mission there. In response to failures by the mission
last year, we are doing a better job protecting civilians.
The mission has succeeded in establishing weaponsfree zones around civilian protection sites in Juba,
contributing to a significant drop in reported crime and
violence, including sexual violence against women.

17-1112619/21

S/PV.7930

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In contrast, the parties to the conflict in South
Sudan have little to no progress to report. Last month,
we issued presidential statement S/PRST/2017/4, calling
on all parties to take several urgent steps. As we meet
here today, none of these steps has been taken — not
one. We called on the warring parties to immediately
adhere to a ceasefire. There is no ceasefire in South
Sudan today; instead, there are reports of serious
human rights violations and abuses, and of violations
of international humanitarian law, many at the hands of
Government forces. Thousands of civilians continue to
pour out of the country to escape the conflict. So many
people have fled the violence that Uganda is now home
to the world’s largest refugee camp.
We called on South Sudan to allow our peacekeepers
to do their job — a job that includes protecting civilians,
monitoring and investigating human rights, and creating
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian aid. We
called on the warring parties to allow humanitarian
organizations to do their job. Neither of these things
has happened. The Government continues to obstruct
the peacekeeping mission from reaching those most in
need. Aid workers continue to be killed trying to help
the victims that the fighting has created. In fact, South
Sudan is the most dangerous country in the world for
aid workers today. More people have died trying to help
in South Sudan than in any other country. It is not even
close. In addition, the Government has still not taken any
meaningful action to punish the soldiers responsible for
the July 2016 attack on aid workers at the Terrain Hotel
in Juba. Finally, we called on the parties to the conflict
to support the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to reach a political settlement. That, too,
has not happened.
It is obvious that our presidential statement now
joins the long list of other statements and resolutions
of the Council that have been ignored by the warring
factions in South Sudan. We have shown patience, and
our patience has been rewarded with continued fighting
and the deepening suffering of the South Sudanese
people. We have shown faith that certain steps, if taken
by the South Sudanese Government, would help end
the fighting and lessen the humanitarian crisis, but the
opposite has happened.
How long can we continue to make statements that
are ignored or issue calls to action that fall on deaf ears?
How many more selfless, dedicated aid workers can we
watch being murdered with impunity? It is clear that the
20/21

25/04/2017

warring parties do not have the political will to end this
conflict on their own, and so it falls to us to consider
our next steps carefully and without any illusions.
Once more, we call on all parties to stop the
violence, allow aid groups to address the humanitarian
crisis, and return to the negotiating table. We urge all
parties to seriously engage with the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the United Nations to achieve a ceasefire and
immediate humanitarian access. We ask our regional
and international partners to respond with appropriate
urgency to the situation in South Sudan, and we call
on the AU and United Nations envoys to put forward
an operational plan of active engagement for peace in
South Sudan. I call on the Council to move forward
with the tools available to it, such as further sanctions
and an arms embargo, or the violence and the atrocities
will continue. We must not wait for more death, more
displacement and more destruction before we have the
courage to act.
This is unacceptable. We must see a sign that
progress is possible. The first sign we must see is the
South Sudanese Government abiding by President
Kiir’s promise to fellow Heads of State one month ago
today to announce a unilateral ceasefire. We must see
that ceasefire implemented, with orders for the troops
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army to immediately
return to their barracks. We must see a dramatic
change in the treatment of humanitarian workers in
South Sudan since the outbreak of the civil war in
December 2013. We have all noted that 83 humanitarian
workers have been killed. On 10 April, Peter Alex, a
World Food Programme aid worker, was detained.
The Government should heed calls for his release.
Moreover, the Government must cease obstructions to
humanitarian assistance.
We cannot and should not continue on the path we
are on without some reassurance that South Sudan’s
leaders are willing to commit to the hard work of peace.
It is time for South Sudan’s leaders to show that they
are willing to put their people ahead of personal and
political self-interest, and it is time for the Council to
acknowledge that its requests have been disregarded
and ignored.
I have sat here and listened to the many statements
that have been given and the thanks offered to
Mr. Shearer. It was nice and they were genuine, but we
gave him no help whatsoever to do his job because we
17-11126

25/04/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

are allowing President Kiir to continue to do what he
is doing. We are continuing to talk about how sorry we
are for the people of South Sudan. We are continuing to
talk about how we wish there was national dialogue, but
yet there is no dialogue to be had. We talk about how we
wish we could get humanitarian workers in there, but
we are not doing anything to force the Government. We
talk about how much more needs to be done in South
Sudan, yet no one is stepping up and saying “Let us
do it”.
If we truly appreciate the work that Mr. Shearer is
doing and if we truly care for the people of South Sudan,
then we must tell the South Sudanese Government that
we are not going to put up with this anymore. If we care
about the leadership of the Security Council, we should
not allow a presidential statement to be totally ignored.

S/PV.7930

The entity that is benefiting from the division of the
Council is the South Sudanese Government, so if we
want it to continue to harass the people of South Sudan,
and if we want to continue to see starvation in South
Sudan, doing nothing is exactly what we need to keep
doing. But if we are going to stop it and if we are really
going to truly say we want to help the people of South
Sudan, that is not about dialogue. That is not about
hope. That is not about wishes. That is about action,
and I call on the Security Council to act.
I now resume my functions is President of the
Security Council.
There are no more speakers on the list.
The meeting rose at noon.

17-1112621/21
