S/2003/1027

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 October 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 23 October 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1457 (2003) of
24 January 2003, by which the Council renewed the mandate of the Panel of Experts
on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for a period of six months. The Council
requested the Panel to submit to it a final report at the end of its mandate. I also
refer to resolution 1499 (2003) of 13 August 2003, by which the Council further
extended the mandate of the panel until 31 October 2003.
I have the honour to transmit to you the final report of the Panel, which was
submitted to me by its Chairman, Mahmoud Kassem. I should be grateful if you
would bring the report to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-56736 (E)

241003

*
0
3
5
6
7
3
6
*

S/2003/1027

Letter dated 15 October 2003 from the Chairman of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and
Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
addressed to the Secretary-General
In accordance with the requirements of Security Council resolutions 1457
(2003) of 24 January 2003 and 1499 (2003) of 13 August 2003, the Panel of Experts
on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is pleased to submit its final report for
transmission to the President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Mahmoud Kassem
Chairman
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and
Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo

2

S/2003/1027

Contents
Paragraphs

Page

I.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1–8

4

II.

Reactions to the Panel’s last report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9–32

5

III.

Transmission of information for investigations by government authorities . . . . . . .

33–37

12

IV.

Information on actions taken by Governments in response to the Panel’s previous
recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38–42

13

V.

Exploitation, arms flows and conflict . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

43–47

14

VI.

Next steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

48–66

15

VII.

Impact of the Panel’s work and lessons learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

67–76

21

I.

Resolution overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

II.

Countries visited and representatives of Governments, organizations and private
entities interviewed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

Annexes

3

S/2003/1027

I. Introduction
1.
On 24 January 2003, the Security Council adopted its resolution 1457 (2003)
renewing the mandate of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Under that six-month mandate, the Panel was requested to verify, reinforce and
update its earlier findings and, as necessary, revise the annexes attached to its
previous report (S/2002/1146, annex) of 16 October 2002. In that regard, the Panel
was asked to pursue a dialogue with individuals, companies and States referred to in
the report, exchange information with those parties, assess actions taken by them
and compile their reactions for publication as an attachment to the report. The
resolution emphasized the need for Member States to take investigative action
regarding the Panel’s findings and called on the Panel to transmit, upon request,
relevant information and documentation to Governments. In addition, the Panel was
required to provide information on actions taken by Governments in response to the
Panel’s previous recommendations. The Panel was also mandated to develop
recommendations on measures that the Transitional Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other Governments in the region could take in order to
ensure that the resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are exploited
legally and fairly for the benefit of the Congolese people.
2.
The Panel reconvened for consultations in New York on 3 March 2003 and
proceeded to its offices in Nairobi on 24 March 2003, where it immediately
established a dialogue with the parties named in its last report. After several months
of intensive meetings, held in Nairobi and Paris, 58 reactions were received for
transmission to the Secretary-General and publication as an attachment to its report
(S/2002/1146/Add.1, enclosure 2) on 20 June 2003.
3.
At the request of the head of the Security Council’s mission to Central Africa,
Ambassador Jean-Marc de la Sablière of France, the Chairman and two members
travelled to Pretoria on 9 June to brief the mission on the Panel’s perspective on
recent developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 24 July, the
Chairman of the Panel presented an interim briefing to the Security Council in New
York.
4.
On 13 August, the Security Council adopted its resolution 1499 (2003)
extending the Panel’s mandate until 31 October 2003. In that resolution, the Council
provided the Panel with additional tasks and referred, inter alia, to how the Panel’s
work has heightened awareness of the illegal exploitation of natural resources and
other forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the context of
conflict and, in particular, its connection with the illicit trade of small arms and light
weapons.
5.
As resolution 1457 (2003) sets forth, the Panel is not a judicial body. It has
operated under a “reasonable standard” of proof and obtains information, including
documentation, entirely on a voluntary basis from a variety of sources. The Panel
draws on its experience in the region and expertise to evaluate information collected
in an objective and fair manner.
6.
During the course of its work, the Panel has closely followed the evolution of
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement of 1999 (S/1999/815, annex) has served as an important point of
reference. The Global and All-Inclusive Agreement on the Transition in the

4

S/2003/1027

Democratic Republic of the Congo, signed on 17 December 2002, and other
subsequent and intervening peace agreements have also informed the Panel’s work.
7.

The Panel was composed as follows:
• Ambassador Mahmoud Kassem (Egypt), Chairman
• Mr. Andrew Danino (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
• Mr. Alf Görsjö (Sweden)
• Mr. Mel Holt (United States of America)
• Mr. Bruno Schiemsky (Belgium)
• Mr. Ismaila Seck (Senegal).

8.
Two part-time technical advisers, Mr. Christian Dietrich (United States of
America) and Mr. Patrick Smith (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland), also served with the Panel. In addition, three political officers, an
administrator, an archivist, a secretary and a security officer assisted the Panel.

II. Reactions to the Panel’s last report
9.
As Council members are aware, the publication of the annexes in the Panel’s
last report (S/2002/1146) created strong reactions by entities named therein. The
annexes brought together two groups of companies and individuals. First, annexes I
and II comprised individuals and companies that were involved in natural resource
exploitation in a way which could be linked directly with funding the conflict and
the resulting humanitarian and economic disaster in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Many of the parties were either members of one of the elite networks
described in the Panel’s last report or enjoyed close business relations with them.
Even where business activities involved the payment of taxes to rebel
administrations and therefore might seem to be legitimate, none of those funds were
used to benefit the communities in which mineral exploitation was occurring.
Instead the taxes went to fund the elite network’s military activities. Secondly, there
were those parties that, while having only indirect commercial ties to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, still bore a responsibility to ensure that those
links did not, albeit inadvertently, contribute to funding and perpetuating the
conflict. They comprise annex III of that report.
10. A specific example is that of the export of the mineral columbo tantalite
(coltan), from which the metal tantalum is extracted. Tantalum is used, inter alia, in
the production of electronic components. In 1999 and 2000 a sharp increase in the
world prices of tantalum occurred, leading to a large increase in coltan production in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Part of that new production involved
rebel groups and unscrupulous business people forcing farmers and their families to
leave their agricultural land, or chasing people off land where coltan was found and
forcing them to work in artisanal mines. As a result, the widespread destruction of
agriculture and devastating social effects occurred, which in a number of instances
were akin to slavery. While the processors of coltan and other Congolese minerals in
Asia, Europe and North America may not have been aware of what was happening
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Panel’s investigations uncovered such
serious concerns that it was decided to raise the awareness of the international

5

S/2003/1027

business community to those issues through annex III in the context of the OECD
(Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises. The purpose was to bring to the attention of the
companies listed in annex III their responsibilities vis-à-vis the source of their raw
materials.
11. The publication of the Panel’s report in October 2002 also raised a great deal
of interest in the media and among observers of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. The international business
community in particular acknowledged that companies could not avoid their
responsibilities in a country suffering from conflict, such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Investors and financiers took a keen interest in the activities
of corporations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with which they were
dealing. Companies themselves commented that their responsibilities extended
further than they had previously acknowledged. Supply chains for raw materials, in
particular, came into sharp focus and prompted some of those named to reassess
their activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
12. It is also important to note the significant difference between those companies
and individuals listed in annexes I and II to the Panel’s last report and companies
listed in annex III. Annexes I and II list companies and individuals about which the
Panel had information indicating that their commercial activities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo had contributed, either directly or indirectly, to funding
conflicts, especially in the eastern and northeastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Companies listed in annex III, however, were included because of apparent
breaches of the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, a non-compulsory
code of business ethics. It was also a means of characterizing their involvement in
exploitation activities that were less directly linked to conflict and therefore
involved more indirect ties to the main protagonists. Such companies appear to have
benefited from the chaotic environment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through, for example, the acquisition of concessions or other contracts from the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on terms that were more
favourable than they might have received in countries where there was peace and
stability.
13. In discussing the work that the Panel has undertaken in respect of the
companies and individuals named in the annexes to its October 2002 report, it is
noteworthy that a total of 157 parties were involved. Of those, reactions from 119
were received, representing three quarters of the total. Meeting those parties was a
major logistical and time-consuming undertaking, especially in view of the limited
time of the Panel’s mandate, its small size and the complex nature of the issues
involving a number of the parties. In the interest of due process, each party was
allocated as much time as was necessary to ensure that the dialogue with the Panel
covered in detail all the issues involved, thereby maximizing the possibility of
achieving a resolution satisfactory to both sides. When necessary, follow-up
meetings were held.
14. Prior to starting its substantive work, the Panel sought guidance from the
Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat on handling reactions and responses from
individuals and entities. The Office subsequently issued a note that guided the Panel
in all its exchanges with such parties. One of the key issues on which the Office
provided guidance to the Panel was the release of information to companies and

6

S/2003/1027

individuals, as required by paragraph 12 of resolution 1457 (2003). It recommended
that information and documents could be handed over provided that such release did
not place at risk the safety of Panel members, its staff or its sources, did not violate
a duty of confidentiality owed to a source or did not compromise the Panel’s internal
decision-making. Accordingly, the Panel was very careful to take full account of the
security of its sources and the issue of confidentiality when it was selecting what
information and documents it could release. In following the principle of due
process, the Panel strove to provide as much information as possible to parties in
discussions and communications with them.
Standard of proof
15. The Panel is an independent fact-finding body established by the Security
Council, which reports and provides recommendations to it. As the Panel has no
judicial recourse, it can only gather information from voluntary sources. Over the
course of the last three years, it has established an extensive network of information
sources both in the Great Lakes Region and in countries with links to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It does not have the legal powers available to a
Government, for example, in a criminal or civil investigation. Consequently, when
assessing whether the behaviour of an individual or company was inappropriate and
therefore warranted inclusion in the annexes, a standard of proof based on
“reasonableness” or “sufficient cause” was applied. In essence, for any particular
party the Panel has acquired information indicating that, prima facie, a party has
been engaged in conduct related to business dealings linked to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, either directly or indirectly, that do not meet generally
accepted international standards of corporate behaviour or governance. The Panel
used its judgement in assessing the importance and relevance of that information to
come to considered views and opinions. In the case of the companies listed in annex
III, the Panel has used the principles of the OECD Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises as appropriate benchmarks.
16. The information acquired by the Panel during its mandates has taken various
forms, but has mainly comprised documents, the results of interviews with
interested parties including non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and other civil
society representatives and sources within companies, Governments, political
organizations and militia groups. While on occasion information on a particular
party has clearly implicated it in improper behaviour that may well be illegal, in
most instances it is indicative of such behaviour or a breach of international norms
of corporate governance and business ethics. The nature of the Panel and the various
mandates that it has been given preclude it from determining the guilt or innocence
of parties that have business dealings linked to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Accordingly, the Panel has restricted itself to the narrower issue of
identifying parties where it has information indicating a prima facie case to answer.
Dialogue with the parties
17. At the start of its mandate the Panel contacted those parties listed in the
annexes to its October 2002 report from which reactions had been received, inviting
them to meet with it. In addition, the Panel issued a press release explaining its new
mandate and inviting reactions from all parties for publication as an addendum to
the report. As a result of the press release there was a large increase in the number

7

S/2003/1027

of parties contacting the Panel, bringing the overall total to more than a majority of
those listed in the annexes.
18. To facilitate the most efficient use of its limited time, the Panel first invited
parties to meet with it in Nairobi, starting in April, and then Paris in May. During
those meetings with companies and their owners or managers and directors, the
Panel explained that the purpose of any dialogue was to achieve a mutually
satisfactory resolution and to look forward instead of focusing on the past. It was
made clear that the Panel was not a judicial body, but a fact-finding one, set up by,
and reporting directly to, the Security Council. The Panel also explained to parties
that the purpose was to raise the standard of corporate behaviour and governance in
conflict areas in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and that foreign companies
in particular could play a major role by operating in accordance with the same
corporate norms that they would follow in their home countries or elsewhere in the
world. Moreover, the links between their business dealings, whether direct or
indirect, in fuelling conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo were
explained and the consequent responsibility that the corporate sector had was
stressed. The Panel drew the attention of companies to the disastrous situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the human tragedy occurring in conflict
areas. The link between business activities in those areas and the continuation of
hostilities was highlighted. With respect to annex III companies, the Panel discussed
the need for a fairer, more transparent exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which they could help foster. During meetings
with many individuals and company representatives, a large number of them
expressed their appreciation of the role the Panel had played in raising their
awareness of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
responsibilities that companies have when operating in such an environment.
19. Subsequent to those meetings, a total of 58 reactions from companies and
individuals were submitted for publication in accordance with resolution 1457
(2003) and the note by the President of the Security Council of 24 March 2003
(S/2003/340). Fifty-four of those reactions were from individuals and corporate
entities, while four were received from Governments. They were published in an
addendum to the October 2002 report (S/2002/1146/Add.1).
OECD liaison and cooperation
20. Shortly after the Panel reconvened in March, it re-established contact with the
OECD Committee on International Investment and Multinational Enterprises
(CIME), which is responsible for monitoring compliance with the OECD Guidelines
for Multinational Enterprises. CIME is made up of representatives (or National
Contact Points (NCPs)) of the 34 countries subscribing to the Guidelines. The Panel
was invited to a meeting of CIME in Paris in April, at which there was a round table
to discuss the Panel’s 2002 report and, more specifically, the applicability of the
Guidelines to the developing world and conflict-ridden countries or regions.
21. Following a very constructive dialogue, there was general agreement that the
OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises should be applicable across the
world, from the most industrialized countries to the least developed. Prior to the
Panel’s contact with OECD, only one case in Africa had been referred to an NCP.
One participant said that the round table would be seen as a wake-up call for CIME
and NCPs. Moreover, the positive or negative role that multinational enterprises can

8

S/2003/1027

play when they invest in countries or regions that are in a state of war or conflict
was well appreciated. Subsequent to the Paris meeting, the Panel and the Chairman
of CIME developed a modus operandi, whereby the Panel would pass over to NCPs
information (subject to protecting the security of its sources) on companies
incorporated in their jurisdictions.
Results of dialogue and work with parties
22. The overarching goal of the dialogue was to achieve a resolution of the issues
that led to parties being listed so that they can be removed from the annexes. What
constitutes resolution is set out below. As the Panel has reached the end of its
mandate, it was important to ensure that there are no unresolved cases left in its
files. In those cases where resolution has not been possible, either because of a lack
of time or because an agreement could not be reached despite strenuous efforts by
the Panel, they have been referred to Governments of the countries under whose
jurisdiction they fall for follow-up. It should be noted that the countries indicated
alongside the names of companies in annexes I and III do not necessarily refer to
their country of incorporation. In some instances, the countries shown refer to where
companies active in the Democratic Republic of the Congo operated from, which
might have been different from the countries of their parent companies. In
presenting the results of its work, the Panel has put the parties listed in the annexes
into five categories according to the results of its dialogue. Category I comprises
those parties that have been resolved. Categories II, III and IV list those parties that
have been referred to OECD National Contact Points or Governments for
monitoring or follow-up. Category V encompasses those parties that did not react to
the Panel’s report despite having had the opportunity to do so. The following
paragraphs describe in detail how the categories were compiled.
Category I — Resolved
23. In working with companies and individuals to update its findings and, if at all
possible, to find a solution to the issues that led to their being listed in the October
2002 report, the Panel entered into in-depth discussions that involved, inter alia, the
exchange of both information and views. During those discussions and the related
communications, it became clear that each case had to be considered on its own
merits. As a result, what constituted resolution varied widely, according to the
particular features of each situation. It should be noted that resolution should be
seen in the context of a win-win outcome both for the parties involved and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in terms of a reduction in the conditions or
environment that have fostered the illegal exploitation of natural resources. In all,
the dialogue with 61 of the 119 parties that reacted to the Panel’s report resulted in a
resolution whereby there are no outstanding issues. Consequently, the parties listed
in category I may be viewed as having been removed from the annexes. Annex I to
the present report contains that list. It should be stressed that resolution should not
be seen as invalidating the Panel’s earlier findings with regard to the activities of
those actors. Rather, it signifies that there are no current outstanding issues, the
original issues that led to their being listed in the annexes having been worked out to
the satisfaction of both the Panel and the companies and individuals concerned.
24. While not prescriptive, the following are the main types of resolution that were
achieved. The most straightforward and clear-cut is where a party acknowledges that
the issue cited by the Panel entails instances of business behaviour that are

9

S/2003/1027

inappropriate. They have either taken action to remedy them or given firm, timebound commitments to do so. Particular examples of that were seen with companies
buying minerals from the Democratic Republic of the Congo that acknowledged that
their controls or scrutiny over the origin of those minerals had been weak and might
have resulted in their purchasing them from conflict areas, thereby funding the
conflict, albeit often inadvertently. In the case of banks listed by the Panel, there
were instances where the Panel brought to their attention accounts that had been
opened by individuals or companies that had been implicated in illegal activities.
The banks concerned subsequently closed those accounts and thanked the Panel for
having brought the matters to their attention. In addition, they pledged to tighten up
their customer account opening procedures.
25. There are also companies with tangential or indirect links to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They do not trade directly with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, but are at least one step removed. They include, for example, companies
providing analytical services to mineral exporters or companies buying finished
tantalum powder produced from raw materials that may have come from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but which were processed outside the country.
The Panel’s dialogue with such companies raised their awareness about operating in
areas of conflict and how they can be a force for the fair and transparent exploitation
of natural resources by dealing with reputable companies only.
26. Another clear-cut type of resolution is where a company has ceased operations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo or transactions with Congolese parties.
Examples of that included a number of diamond importers in Europe and North
America. They ceased doing business with Congolese companies that could not
meet international standards of business ethics, specifically in ensuring that conflict
or blood diamonds were not involved in their commercial transactions. Moreover,
there were instances of individuals named in annex II ceasing to hold positions or
engage in business transactions that led to their being listed.
27. Improving the transparency in the way companies operate in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in business transactions with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was another form of resolution. In such cases, the Panel was able to show
the companies concerned that their behaviour was widely perceived to be suspect.
That was particularly evident in projects involving the granting of mineral
concessions and the further processing of waste materials, especially piles
containing cobalt and copper, where there was widespread debate over the terms.
Often those terms appeared particularly generous for the foreign investors involved
and at prices below what might have been obtained had different methods been
followed to market the opportunity more widely. In discussions with the Panel, such
foreign investors often admitted that they had been less than effective in explaining
the benefits of the project to their Congolese partners and the Congolese State and
the financial risks that they had taken. There were also instances where foreign
mining firms hired former politicians and government officials with reputations of
being corrupt to assist them in gaining the necessary licences and regulatory
approvals. They subsequently cancelled those consultancy contracts when they
became aware of the damage such people could do to their firms’ reputations.
28. Also included in that category are those companies that have operated in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for many years, at least since before the outbreak
of the current conflict in 1998. Since they had been operating in areas that until

10

S/2003/1027

recently had been controlled by rebel or opposition groups, their activities may have
appeared to be illegal or illicit. As a result of their dialogue with the Panel, however,
it became apparent that their business practices could be viewed as acceptable in
that they make positive contributions to their communities in providing goods and
services, as well as jobs for local people. Specifically, the Panel was able to
establish that they run their businesses in a responsible manner and have not directly
funded activities contributing to conflict.
Category II — Provisional resolution
29. Category II comprises companies, together with their owners or proprietors,
that have reached provisional resolutions with the Panel that are dependent on the
companies fulfilling commitments on corporate governance that will only occur
after the end of the Panel’s mandate. All the matters of substance have been
resolved. It is only a matter of going forward with improved controls and procedures
that is required. As a result, the Panel has asked the NCPs responsible for
implementation of the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises in the
countries concerned to monitor compliance. A total of eight parties comprising two
business groupings have been referred to NCPs in Belgium and the United Kingdom
(see annex I to the present report).
Category III — Referred for updating or further investigation
30. Category III comprises companies, together with their owners or proprietors,
which have been referred to NCPs for updating or further investigation. They are
cases where the Panel has been unable to achieve resolution for one of several
reasons. The most frequent reason is that the company concerned has rejected the
Panel’s contention that there are issues that need to be addressed relating to its
activities in or with the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For example, a company
has refused to accept that it has a responsibility to do what it can to avoid providing
support, even inadvertently, to rebel groups in conflict areas where it may be
operating or have business interests. The category also includes companies that do
not appear to have met their own self-imposed best practice principles. Given that
the OECD Guidelines are codes of good business ethics, the Panel believes it is
important for such apparent failures or lapses to be investigated further. In addition,
there are companies that are involved in legal actions the outcome of which is very
unlikely to be known before the end of the Panel’s mandate. During such legal
processes, information may come into the public domain that may be relevant to an
assessment of the concerned companies’ involvement with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Consequently, the open files have been referred to the NCPs of the
countries where they are incorporated. A total of 13 dossiers, covering 18
companies, have been referred to the OECD NCPs in Belgium, Germany and the
United Kingdom (see annex I to the present report).
Category IV — Referred for further investigation
31. Category IV comprises companies and individuals that have been referred to
Governments for further investigation or about which Governments have asked the
Panel for information so that they can conduct their own enquiries. As well as
referring companies to Governments for reasons similar to category III companies,
there were also instances where it was not logistically possible to meet some
companies based in countries far from both Kenya and France. As a result, the Panel

11

S/2003/1027

has asked their Governments to carry out enquiries (see annex I to the present
report).
Category V — Parties that did not react to the Panel’s report
32. Finally, there are those parties that have not sent reactions to or contacted the
Panel. Those 38 parties represent almost a quarter of the total parties listed in
annexes I, II and III of the Panel’s previous report. While they had adequate time to
make contact and meet with the Panel, they chose not to, as is their right.
Accordingly, the Panel is not commenting on those parties other than to list them in
category V (see annex I to the present report).

III. Transmission of information for investigations by
government authorities
33. Paragraphs 12 and 15 of resolution 1457 (2003) requested that the Panel
establish a dialogue, inter alia, with States mentioned in its report and urged all
States to conduct their own investigations in order to clarify the findings of the
Panel. In paragraph 16 of the same resolution, the Security Council noted with
satisfaction that the Prosecutor General of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
had begun a preliminary inquiry into the Panel’s findings and that the former
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo had decided to suspend
momentarily the officials named in the Panel’s reports pending further inquiry. The
Council also requested the Panel to cooperate fully with the Office of the Prosecutor
General and provide information to the Office that may be needed for conducting an
investigation. In paragraph 17, the Council also noted with satisfaction the decision
by the Ugandan Government to establish a Judicial Commission of Inquiry. In the
same paragraph, the Council again urged all States, in particular Zimbabwe and
Rwanda, to cooperate fully with the Panel and investigate further the Panel’s
findings.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
34. During November 2002, following the publication of its report (see
S/2002/1146), the Expert Panel met with the Prosecutor General of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at Headquarters. Following those meetings, the Panel
transmitted information on investigative leads to be used in a preliminary inquiry
that had been opened into the report’s findings. After reconvening on 3 March 2003,
the Panel maintained regular contacts with the Office of the Prosecutor General,
until the swearing-in of a new Prosecutor General in June. During its visit to
Kinshasa, the Panel met on 3 September with the new Prosecutor General and
discussed what type of cooperation was needed from the Panel, in light of the fact
that the preliminary inquiry launched last year into the Panel’s findings had been
completed and a report submitted to President Joseph Kabila on 20 March. In a
follow-up telephone conversation during the week of 17 September, the Prosecutor
General informed the Panel that his Office would consider requesting additional
information and documentation in light of the decision to be taken by the Parliament
on the question of establishing a commission to review and revise all concessions
and contracts signed since 1997. That was recommended in the Panel’s last two

12

S/2003/1027

reports. The Prosecutor General also informed the Panel that his Office would await
the publication of the Panel’s final report before making its final decision.
Rwanda
35. During a visit to Kigali, the Panel provided the Deputy Prosecutor General of
Rwanda, on 16 September 2003, with documents on economic exploitation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and additional links to Rwanda, the Rwandan
Patriotic Army or individual Rwandan military personnel. Those issues were further
discussed during follow-up meetings with the Rwandan Minister for Foreign Affairs
and with the Special Envoy of President Kagame for the Great Lakes, on 17
September.
Zimbabwe
36. In May and June 2003 the Government of Zimbabwe forwarded to the Panel
the responses of three Zimbabwean individuals named in its October 2002 report. As
the Panel considered that a number of outstanding issues remained, it provided
information and documentation to Zimbabwean authorities to enable them to
examine the Panel’s findings and take the appropriate corrective action.
National Contact Points
37. As mentioned earlier, the Expert Panel also provided National Contact Points
of Belgium, Germany and the United Kingdom, with all available information and
documentation on a number of individuals and companies under their jurisdiction,
which were named in the Panel’s last report. The cases of those individuals and
companies, which are listed in categories II and III of annex I to the present report,
require additional monitoring or updating.

IV. Information on actions taken by Governments in response
to the Panel’s previous recommendations
38. In fulfilment of paragraph 9 of resolution 1457 (2003), the Expert Panel was
requested by the Security Council to include in its report, inter alia, information on
actions taken by Governments in response to the Panel’s previous recommendations,
including information on how capacity-building and reforms in the region are
affecting exploitation activities.
39. The Panel identified 12 States in the region through which goods originating in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo may be passing. They include Burundi,
Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe as well as other regional States, such as Angola,
the Central African Republic, Kenya, Mozambique, the Congo, Tanzania and
Zambia.
40. The Panel submitted questions to all 12 countries and enquired, in particular,
about measures taken to assist in curbing illegal exploitation of natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the expected impact of those measures and
confidence-building measures to be recommended to ensure that resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are exploited legally. Of those 12 countries, only
Rwanda, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe responded.

13

S/2003/1027

41. Uganda indicated that the establishment of the Porter Commission and
Uganda’s positive role and participation in the peace process in the Great Lakes
region constituted the most significant step that that country had taken towards
curbing illegal exploitation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Rwanda
underlined that the withdrawal of its forces from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo may be considered as its most significant step, but declined to volunteer
recommendations, as it has neither the mandate nor the expertise to do so.
Zimbabwe noted that it was “in no position to take any measures … as neither itself
nor its nationals were or are involved in any illegal deals in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo”. As for Zambia, no additional significant measures over and
above the existing administrative and security border controls have been taken.
42. In terms of confidence and capacity-building measures, Uganda underscored
the need to enhance conflict resolution in the region and re-establish effective
government institutions, in particular effective control of trade and revenue, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

V. Exploitation, arms flow and conflict
43. Since the Panel’s last report of 16 October 2002, a number of significant
developments have taken place in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Following
the withdrawal of foreign forces, the Congolese parties signed in December 2002 the
Global and Inclusive Agreement, which provided for the establishment in July 2003
of the Government of National Unity. The new Congolese Parliament convened for
the first time on 22 August. At the same time, that period also witnessed intensified
fighting in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, notably in the Ituri
district.
44. Illegal exploitation remains one of the main sources of funding for groups
involved in perpetuating conflict, especially in the eastern and northeastern regions
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Over the last year, such exploitation has
been characterized by intense competition among the various political and military
actors as they have sought to maintain, and in some instances expand, their control
over territory.
45. In that connection, the power vacuum caused by the withdrawal of the
Rwandan Defence Forces (RDF) and later by the Ugandan People’s Defence Forces
(UPDF), spurred the proliferation of militias. Those militias have vied for control
over strategic zones where lucrative resources are located, and which were formerly
held by the foreign forces. The Panel is of the opinion that the deteriorating security
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, which resulted from
intensifying armed confrontations among the militias, has had a direct impact on the
level and nature of resource exploitation, compared to previous years. Overall, the
transition of control from foreign forces to the armed groups has led to a temporary
reduction in the volume of illegally exploited resources.
46. Fact-finding and field inquiries into the actual situation on the ground were
hampered by the fighting in the most bitterly contested areas. The Panel,
nonetheless, understands, based on information from a variety of sources, that
during the current period, much of the resource exploitation has concentrated on
gold and diamonds. Those minerals have a high revenue yield per unit weight, are
easily transported and can be used in lieu of hard currency in transactions. Sites for

14

S/2003/1027

artisanal mining of those precious minerals remain active in many regions: Ituri,
other parts of Oriental province, North and South Kivu and Maniema. Combined
with moneys raised at customs border posts, political and military actors have been
able to fund their military activities, including the supply of arms, as illustrated in
the diagram below.

Exploitation

Insecurity
Impunity
Conflict

Arms Trafficking

47. The Panel’s fact-finding indicates that those relationships, which were
analysed in detail in its earlier reports, continue to be as important as ever. In
breaking that cycle, it is very difficult to stem or halt illegal exploitation without
also tackling the issue of arms trafficking. Accordingly, the focus of the Panel’s
fieldwork and fact-finding has been on the patterns and trends in arms trafficking
and the groups involved, including an analysis of their strategies and plans. The
Panel has gathered detailed information and documents showing how those groups
have been, and are adjusting to recent political developments, especially the
establishment of the Government of National Unity. It is clear that they are
developing strategies to build and extend their political and economic control in
various parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular the east and
north-east. The details on exploitation and arms trafficking have been made
available to the President and members of the Security Council. The Panel’s
information and documentation could be useful for an arms monitoring mechanism,
should the Security Council decide to establish one.

VI. Next steps
48. While it has intensified during the recent conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the exploitation of natural resources that does not benefit the majority
of the Congolese people is not a new phenomenon. It did not start with the
establishment of the Panel three years ago, nor will it end with the conclusion of its
mandate. In the absence of a strong, central and democratically elected Government
that is in control of its territory, illegal exploitation will continue and serve as the
motivation and the fuel for continued conflicts in the region, to the detriment of the
Congolese people, who have suffered too much for too long.
49. The establishment of a transitional Government and institutions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a significant step in the right direction.

15

S/2003/1027

However, and for the reasons highlighted above, the process is not yet irreversible.
Major obstacles will continue to be faced as the country moves from a state of
conflict and division, to that of reunification, peace, security and economic recovery.
There should be no illusion that the Congolese people will be able to carry out that
colossal task on their own. Without the active engagement of the international
community, the chances of success will be minimal. The international community
has already demonstrated its political resolve and commitment with the adoption of
resolution 1493 (2003) of 28 July 2003, which strengthened the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), as well as with the rapid deployment of the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force to Bunia last June. However, the time has now come for the
international community to demonstrate the same commitment by providing in a
coordinated manner urgently needed technical and financial assistance in support of
the transitional process. The Panel has consistently highlighted the need in its earlier
reports for a strengthened national capacity to assume control and regulate the
exploitation of the natural resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Now
is the time to pursue that objective.
50. Ensuring that a Central Government is in control of its natural resources for
the benefit of the population will be a complex process with different phases. One of
the most significant challenges is enabling the timely extension of the transitional
authority throughout the national territory, in particular in such problematic areas as
Ituri and the Kivus. The transitional Government, with the assistance of the
international community, should consider that a high priority. Where possible,
bringing the existing administrative structures in former rebel-held areas back under
the management of the central authorities of the Government of National Unity
could be a starting point. The extension of government authority should also be
accompanied by a reform of the rule of law sector and the re-establishment of a
criminal justice capacity in all its components: police, judiciary and corrections.
MONUC and the international assistance will be vital in that regard, inter alia, by
providing technical assistance in the reform of the legislative instruments, including
the penal system and the penal procedure codes, with a view to tailoring those
instruments to the needs of courts that function effectively and in harmony with the
international legal instruments to which the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
party. Material support will also be required for the training of a national integrated
police force and the rehabilitation of criminal justice facilities.
51. The most important factor in ensuring the reunification of the national territory
will be the effective integration of the new armed forces. While the transitional
partners have reached agreement on the command structure of those forces, its
actual integration has yet to take place. In addition to the will of the parties, which,
as demonstrated earlier, continues to be lacking, the success of that exercise will
also require a national strategy for the armed forces that determines the size and
structure of the forces as well as the national military headquarters to take effective
control over all armed militias in order to create the new integrated forces. Again,
the support of the international community will be vital for the training of the new
forces as well as in the effective and timely demobilization and reintegration of the
excess personnel.
52. Parallel to the extension of government authority, there are a number of
institutional reforms that have to be initiated immediately in order to allow the
democratically elected Central Government — once in place — to ensure the legal

16

S/2003/1027

exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They
include the following recommendations:
• Effective control of the national borders is a prerequisite if the flow of illegally
extracted natural resources and arms is to be stemmed. While the unified
national army and police will have a major role in that regard, an effective
customs administration can bring many benefits, including higher tax revenues
and a reduction in smuggling. A comprehensive diagnostic review should
therefore be undertaken of the customs service (Office des douanes et accises)
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, preferably with the assistance of
recognized international consultants. Following that review, a comprehensive
strategy, covering the medium-term, to upgrade the agency should be
developed and implemented. Such a strategy would address training,
equipment and, in particular, sound management issues
• The Democratic Republic of the Congo has traditionally been plagued with, at
best, an inefficient accounting and auditing system. Strengthening and
enlarging the government auditing function, the Cour des comptes, is required
so that it has the capacity to undertake regular auditing of all government
departments and agencies throughout the country. Auditing of natural resource
revenues should also be undertaken by the Cour des comptes with the
publication of annual and other more frequent reports. In that regard,
accounting systems must be developed for the provinces, especially for
conflict areas in the Kivus and Ituri, so that transparency of both revenues and
expenditure can be established. Such transparency is necessary to ensure that
all provinces receive their fair share of the revenues from national resources,
as well as from mineral developments in their areas. Moreover, such disclosure
should make local administrations more accountable for the management of
public funds. Measures should also be taken to ensure that amounts due to the
regional government administrations, including the Entités administratives
décentralisées, from the Central Government in Kinshasa are paid on time.
Spending that is not in the budget approved by Parliament should immediately
come to a halt
• Serious consideration should be given to the break-up of the large State-owned
mineral resource enterprises, such as Gecamines and MIBA (Société minière
de Bakwanga). Those grossly inefficient entities have traditionally been the
vehicles by which the wealth generated from Congolese resources has been
channelled away from the rightful owner, the Congolese people. In that
connection, the Panel assesses that overhauling and restoring sound
management to many of those enterprises will not be cost-effective in view of
the enormity of the task and the obstacles that they face. With the assistance of
the international community, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should therefore consider selling off enterprises either as they
currently are or in parts that are likely to be of interest to potential investors.
Widening the benefits from natural resource exploitation
53. Disclosure of revenues earned from the natural resource sector is an important
step towards transparency in that highly lucrative sector. The “publish what you
pay” initiative should be implemented in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That would involve:

17

S/2003/1027

• Natural resource companies, both domestic and foreign, to disclose all the
payments that they make to the Government (e.g. concession fees, taxes, fees
and royalties)
• The Government to disclose what it has received from those companies and
also how the receipts have been used, including amounts paid into the
proposed natural resource fund (see below). It will be necessary to develop
reporting/disclosure guidelines that are both as comprehensive as possible but
at the same time streamlined. Within the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
disclosure should not only be at the Central Government level, but also at the
provincial level so that amounts accruing to each province/district, in
accordance with mining and codes can be tracked. Responsible companies
should benefit from a more level playing field in their activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
• The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to consider making the
implementation of the “publish what you pay” initiative a condition for further
funding to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
• International stock exchanges to consider including in their listing
requirements the mandatory disclosure of payments by companies involved in
extractive industries in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
• The capacity of civil society should be enhanced through funding, training and
partnerships to monitor the collection and expenditure of government revenues
from the extractive sector. International donors and NGOs can probably play
an important role in building such capacity among Congolese NGOs and
associations.
54. One step in ensuring a more equitable distribution of the wealth generated
from the exploitation of natural resources could be to establish a natural resources
fund into which a portion of natural resource proceeds are paid. The fund would use
its revenues in social and economic infrastructure projects, including job creation
programmes and diversification initiatives to help regions reduce their dependency
on natural resources. The fund should be managed by an autonomous government
agency, with international technical assistance and monitoring that would be
independent of the established ministries responsible for raising and spending
government moneys.
55. Similarly, where a natural resource company operates in an area where local
infrastructure is underdeveloped, and where the capacity to build schools and
hospitals and other public facilities does not exist, consideration could be given to
allowing the company to build such facilities in return for receiving tax credits. That
could enable the local community to enjoy more quickly the benefits generated by
the company’s presence. To avoid abuse, it would be necessary to ensure that such
facilities had been sanctioned as necessary and what level of tax credit was
appropriate.
56. Large international mining and oil companies have been shown to contribute
more to the countries in which they operate than their smaller competitors. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the artisanal mining carried out by rebel groups
and militias has been particularly bad in the way local communities have been
mistreated, land has been stolen for exploitation and environmental damage has
been caused. Moreover, many workers have been forced to work in slave-like

18

S/2003/1027

conditions. Large mining companies have been shown to be generally much better
employers than small or medium-scale mining firms. There may be very sizeable
multiple effects in the jobs they can create both directly and in subcontracted firms
that supply goods and services.
57. Backward linkages from foreign multinationals to domestic firms are
important channels through which direct and indirect employment can be created.
Foreign mining and oil companies operating in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should be encouraged to subcontract the provision of as many support
services as possible to Congolese companies.
58. The measures outlined above will require substantial and coordinated
assistance from the international community. In that connection, donors may wish to
consider establishing a donor coordination mechanism that could identify with the
Government of National Unity and MONUC the priority needs and allocate the
required resources. The coordination mechanism could subsequently monitor the
expenditure of those allocations to ensure its most effective use.
Immediate steps
Arms monitoring
59. The Panel realizes that the foregoing measures cannot be fully implemented in
the immediate future and will require the sustained efforts over a long period of time
of both the Congolese and international stakeholders. Immediate interim measures
should therefore be considered to stem the illegal exploitation of natural resources
until such time when a strong Government could assume that role. As elaborated
earlier in the present report, the flow of arms, exploitation and the continuation of
the conflict are inextricably linked. Each of those three elements thrives on the other
two. Without the wealth generated by the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
arms cannot be bought, hence the conflict, which almost always involves grave
human rights abuses and large-scale population displacement, cannot be
perpetuated. Without arms, the ability to continue the conflict, thereby creating the
conditions for illegal exploitation of resources, cannot be sustained.
60. Breaking that vicious cycle will be key to ending both the conflict and the
illegal exploitation of natural resources. Emphasis should therefore be placed on
stemming and, if possible, halting the flow of illegal arms to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That is the weakest element in the cycle, and the area where
the international community can play an effective role. The Panel feels that the
international community is cognizant of the threat posed by the illegal flow of arms,
as demonstrated by the arms embargo imposed on Ituri and the Kivus by the
Security Council in its resolution 1493 (2003). In that connection, the Council may
wish to consider establishing a monitoring mechanism, as envisaged in paragraph 23
of its resolution.
61. Such a mechanism could complement the role entrusted to MONUC in the
monitoring of compliance of the arms embargo by tracking the full scope of the
arms flow supply chain, from manufacturer or supplier to the final beneficiary,
including the financing of the process through the illegal exploitation of resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The high risk of exposure that such a
monitoring mechanism could create would contribute to deterring arms trafficking
and curbing arms flows. It would serve to cut the links between exploitation, arms

19

S/2003/1027

flows and continued conflict by directing actions at all parties in the chain from
manufacturing, brokering, financing and transporting to end-users and training.
62. Such a mechanism would provide a greater degree of mobility, flexibility and
adaptability in monitoring the arms embargo compared with today, since having
human resources on the ground would complement any air surveillance and
interdiction capability. MONUC should have the capacity to make seizures on the
ground. Undoubtedly, the success of the proposed monitoring mechanism will
depend on close collaboration with MONUC.
Peace dividend
63. If the hearts and minds of the people living in conflict areas in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are to be won over, they will need to be quickly convinced
that peace is better than conflict. It is vital to break the dependency link between
armed groups carrying out natural resource exploitation and the local communities if
their activities are to be brought to an end. Specific quick impact projects need to be
undertaken to convince people of the advantages of peace. Hospitals, clinics and
schools need to be reopened and local policing re-established. Massive job creation
schemes involving the repair of roads, sanitation systems and public buildings
should be devised to get adults back into the workforce. Farmers need to be
encouraged to return to their fields and start farming again to produce food again.
That requires a major reduction in the level of banditry.
64. Given that the population is spread out over large rural areas, projects are
required that go down to the village level in conflict areas. They need to be designed
to restore basic social services and security rapidly. Specially trained teams of civil
servants with local knowledge should be tasked to undertake those projects
supported by security personnel, as circumstances dictate.
Regional cooperation and confidence-building measures
65. None of the above recommendations can be sustained in the long term unless a
regional solution can be found. The legitimate concerns of all regional actors must
be addressed in a comprehensive manner to allow a culture of good neighbourly
relations to evolve. The Principles on Good Neighbourly Relations adopted by the
parties during the meeting convened in New York by the Secretary-General on
25 September is a step in that direction. In the immediate future, confidencebuilding measures are needed to take forward those principles. One such measure
should tackle the issue of the foreign-armed groups in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda, including the ex-FAR/Interahamwe.
Also to be addressed are the status of the Banyamulenge and other ethnic groups,
such as the Banyarwandans in North and South Kivu. In dealing with those issues,
the Government of National Unity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
require the cooperation of neighbouring countries and the support of the
international community.
66. Regional economic cooperation bodies, especially the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa, in which the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
immediate eastern neighbours, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda, are members, should
work to bolster legal trade and investment that benefits all the countries. They
should set up working groups to examine in detail how to enhance trade and
economic cooperation that will bring win-win results to trading among the four

20

S/2003/1027

countries, in particular between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours.

VII. Impact of the Panel’s work and lessons learned
Impact
67. The work of the Panel was useful because it set a number of precedents. It
developed a model that explains the links between illegal exploitation and the
funding of armed groups, which have fomented conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, including the arms they purchase. With the information provided by
the Panel, the international community was made much more aware of the scale of
the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
68. The international community now has a deeper understanding of the illicit
exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
the role of companies and business people involved. Moreover, there is an
appreciation of the need to assist countries in managing their natural resources for
the long-term development and welfare of their populations.
69. The Panel has made a major contribution to the progress of the peace process.
That was, for example, evident in its role in encouraging the various actors to
participate in the Inter-Congolese Dialogue and prompting the withdrawal of foreign
forces, in particular from Ituri and the Kivus.
70. The Panel has breathed life into the OECD Guidelines for Multinational
Enterprises and drawn attention to their applicability in developing countries and,
especially, in conflict areas. A number of cases have been referred by the Panel to
OECD National Contact Points in Belgium, Germany and the United Kingdom.
71. The Panel’s work has spurred Governments, NGOs and other organizations or
associations to pursue their own investigations into the plundering of resources.
That has taken place within the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as
internationally. In Uganda, following his implication in exploitation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by a government commission, the head of the
defence forces, General Kazini, was relieved of his post. In Belgium, a number of
diamond dealers have been indicted in connection, inter alia, with their activities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard, it is important for the
international community to support and strengthen the monitoring capacity of civil
society, in the form of NGOs and other groups, so that they can play a greater and
more effective role.
72. The enactment of the Forestry Code and the Mining Code benefited from
recommendations included in the Panel’s reports. Its reports also spurred reform of
the diamond sector, including the fact that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has become a member of the Kimberley Process.
73. Consideration is being given in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the
establishment of a government body or commission to review and possibly revise all
natural resource concessions and contracts signed since 1997. That was
recommended in the last two Panel reports.

21

S/2003/1027

Lessons learned
74. There have been several instances of the Panel’s sources having to leave the
region after being uncovered. Given the sensitive and vital nature of information
they can provide, for future panels, some form of a witness protection programme
should be established at the outset with the support of the Office of Legal Affairs of
the Secretariat.
75. Panels have served as very valuable contributors to the Security Council’s
work on peace and security issues. There is, nevertheless, a need to analyse and
institutionalize and make available, as appropriate, the experiences and lessons
learned from the investigations and findings of successive panels mandated by the
Council on Afghanistan, Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Somalia.
76. To be effective, monitoring activities concerning arms and revenue flows in
conflict situations should be institutionalized and cover longer periods. That would
require high levels of expertise, flexibility in conducting fieldwork and adequate
support of the relevant United Nations bodies and Secretariat.
(Signed) Ambassador Mahmoud Kassem
Chairman
(Signed) Andrew Danino
(Signed) Alf Görsjö
(Signed) Mel Holt
(Signed) Bruno Schiemsky
(Signed) Ismaila Seck

22
