United Nations

S/PV.4563

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4563

rd meeting
Sunday, 30 June 2002, 5 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wehbe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Syrian Arab Republic)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Tidjani
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Koonjul
Ms. Lajous
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Mahbubani
Sir. Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2002/618)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-45008 (E)

*0245008*

S/PV.4563

The meeting was called to order at 5 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2002/618)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany
and Italy, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr.Kusljugić
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2002/618).
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2002/712, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Bulgaria, France,
Germany, Ireland, Italy, Norway, the Russian
Federation and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.

2

Mr. Negroponte (United States): The longstanding commitment of the United States to peace and
stability in the Balkans is beyond question. We have
also been clear and consistent about our concerns on
the question of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
in particular the need to ensure our national jurisdiction
over our personnel and officials involved in United
Nations peacekeeping and in coalition-of-the-willing
operations.
As you are well aware, this is not the first time
we have raised this issue with the Council. I explained
these concerns when we dealt with the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) in May.
The United States voted in favour of the East Timor
resolution with the expectation that the Council would
address our concerns before the ICC came into effect
on the first of July. In East Timor only three United
States soldiers participate in the United Nations
peacekeeping mission; we intend to withdraw them
absent a solution to this question.
It is with great regret that the United States finds
itself on the eve of that date, and despite our best
efforts, without a solution.
The United States has contributed — and will
continue to contribute — to maintaining peace and
security in the Balkans and around the globe.
Contributing personnel to peacekeeping efforts
demonstrates a commitment to international peace and
security that, as you all know, can involve hardship and
danger to those involved in peacekeeping. Having
accepted these risks by exposing people to dangerous
and difficult situations in the service of promoting
peace and stability, we will not ask them to accept the
additional risk of politicized prosecutions before a
court whose jurisdiction over our people the
Government of the United States does not accept.
Some contend that our concerns are unwarranted.
With our global responsibilities, we are and will remain
a special target and cannot have our decisions secondguessed by a court whose jurisdiction we do not
recognize.
With the court coming into being, this problem
must be resolved — but in a way that takes into
account two hard facts: the United States wants to
participate in international peacekeeping, but the
United States, a major guarantor of peace and security
around the globe and a founding member of the United
Nations, does not and will not accept the jurisdiction of

S/PV.4563

the ICC over the peacekeepers that it contributes to
operations established and authorized by the United
Nations.
The failure of the Security Council to act to
preserve an appropriate legal status for United States
and other non-ICC party peacekeepers can only end in
damage to international peacekeeping generally. We
believe that none of this is of our making. We have
offered a practical solution to this problem that would
preserve everyone’s interests, protect international
peacekeeping and strengthen the hand of this Council
to maintain international peace and security.
We have scrupulously sought to find a way
forward that is consistent both with others’ obligations
to the Rome treaty and with United Nations
peacekeeping practice. Furthermore, we have accepted
the principle that this solution should apply only to
States that are not party to the ICC.
Let me repeat: there is no inherent reason why
States that have signed or even ratified the Rome
Treaty cannot also support our proposed solution. Our
proposal calls for establishment of immunity for United
Nations peacekeeping. It builds on immunities that are
already recognized in the United Nations system and
reflected in status of forces and status of mission
agreements. The Rome Treaty itself recognizes the
concept of immunity. If the Security Council decides
that its ability to maintain international peace and
security will be enhanced by providing immunity to
United Nations peacekeeping, it may provide such
immunity. The framers of the ICC Treaty surely could
not limit the authority of the Security Council in that
regard. The consequence of providing United Nations
peacekeepers with such immunity would be the
creation of a legal obligation on States to observe that
immunity. Pursuant to article 98 of the ICC Treaty, the
compliance of ICC parties with such obligations is
entirely consistent with the Treaty.
It strikes us as more than perplexing that others
that are parties to the ICC can use the provision of the
Treaty to exempt their forces for an extended period
from the purview of the Court for war crimes and then
suggest that our attempt to use other provisions of the
Treaty similarly to provide protection for our forces
either violates their Treaty obligations or does
unacceptable damage to the spirit of the Treaty.
The United States will vote against this draft
resolution with great reluctance. This decision is not

directed at the people of Bosnia. We will stand by them
and by our commitment to peace and stability in the
Balkans. The fact that we are vetoing this draft
resolution in the face of that commitment, however, is
an indication of just how serious our concerns remain
about the risks to our peacekeepers.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now put to the
vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/2002/712.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Cameroon, China, Colombia, France, Guinea,
Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Bulgaria
The President (spoke in Arabic): The result of
the voting is as follows: 13 votes in favour, 1 against
and 1 abstention. The draft resolution has been not
adopted owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council.
I should like, before calling on those members
who wish to make statements following the voting, to
welcome the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr.
Kofi Annan, and to give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: Today, the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) comes to an abrupt end for reasons that are
unrelated to the vitally important work that it is
performing to implement the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The United Nations Mission has made a universally
recognized contribution to the re-establishment of the
rule of law and political stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by transforming a 40,000-strong wartime
militia into a 14,000-strong professional police force.
But the State and its institutions are still fragile
and are under pressure from nationalist forces. Unless
an agreement can be reached on an orderly wind-down
of the Mission, the police in Bosnia will be left
unmonitored,
unguided
and
unassisted.
Key
programmes, including the control of the borders by a
professional State Border Service — a key instrument

3

S/PV.4563

for fighting contraband activities and illegal
immigration — will be left uncompleted. Further, the
long-planned handover to the European Union Police
Mission scheduled to take place at the year’s end, when
UNMIBH would have successfully completed its
mandate, will be severely compromised.
I take this opportunity to express my sincere
gratitude to all men and women in UNMIBH for their
exemplary work, and to the nations which have
generously contributed their civilian police officers to
this critical and complex mandate.
The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
beginning to reap the fruits of the international
community’s assistance after the country was ripped
apart by war from 1992 to 1995. It would be most
unfortunate if the premature termination of UNMIBH’s
mandate were to set back that process. It would be
perceived throughout the Balkans as a diminution of
the international community’s commitment to stability
in the region.
More generally, I remain convinced that United
Nations peacekeeping is an indispensable tool for the
international community’s promotion of global peace
and security. I appeal to members of the Security
Council to intensify the high-level negotiations,
including in capitals, of the past weeks so as to find a
solution acceptable to all concerned that respects the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
treaty obligations of Member States. The world cannot
afford a situation in which the Security Council is
deeply divided on such an important issue which may
have implications for all peace operations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I wish
to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for the
statement he just made. I endorse every word of it. He
was right to focus his statement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina — a new, fragile State in South-Eastern
Europe, which has experienced very difficult times, as
we all know, and which does not deserve that. Bulgaria
has frequently expressed its appreciation and support
for the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a stabilizing factor not only for that
country, but for the region as a whole. We take this
opportunity to confirm our support and to thank the
men and women who have done such excellent work.

4

I also wish to emphasize that, as a State party to
the Rome Statute, Bulgaria strongly supports the
principles and values applied therein and will work to
strengthen the International Criminal Court so that it
can become an effective organ for the international
community to combat the most serious crimes and
immunity and for justice against war criminals.
At the same time, my country wished to abstain
in the vote on the draft resolution, not because we do
not support the principle of a United Nations presence
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. To the contrary, we do. We
wanted to draw attention to a very serious situation to
which the Secretary-General referred, which is the lack
of unity in the Council on this issue. That is a very
serious situation. We trust that the disappearance of a
United Nations presence from Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be temporary.
As I said during our closed consultations, we
appeal to all Security Council members to seek
compromise. As the members of the Council are aware,
during informal contacts in the past few days, my
delegation proposed various formulas to get out of the
situation in which we find ourselves today. However,
we did not succeed. That is why my country abstained
in the vote on this draft resolution.
In conclusion, I wish to express once again the
hope that Council unity will be restored very soon.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
deeply regrets the present situation. Intensive
negotiations were held this past week in the Security
Council and among our various capitals. Despite the
efforts made, no solution reconciling the various
interests was agreed.
The veto of the United States is a threat to the
existence of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), a Mission remarkably led by
an American, Mr. Jacques-Paul Klein, and a Mission
whose impressive achievements in restoring law and
order and combating organized crime and terrorism
have just been noted by the Security Council and the
Secretary-General. The Mission was about to end in a
few months anyway, to be replaced by a police mission
under the auspices of the European Union.
The decision of the United States to oppose the
extension of UNMBIH is difficult to understand in
many respects. UNMIBH has existed for several years
now. It was set up — as was the International Criminal

S/PV.4563

Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia — by a unanimous
Security Council resolution that had the full support of
the United States. At no point did the existence of that
Tribunal — before which, in principle, UNMIBH
participants could have been called — pose any
problems for the United States.
Tomorrow, 1 July 2002, the Statute of the
International Criminal Court will enter into force. The
United States chose not to ratify the Rome Statute. We
respect its position, even if we do not agree with it. In
the same spirit, we call on the United States to respect
the choice made by States that ratified the Rome
Statute or that intend to. That is the case particularly
with 15 member States of the European Union, which
have all not only ratified the Statute, but have also
committed themselves to promoting its universality.
Does the problem we face today not have a
solution? Obviously, the answer clearly is no.
Certainly, no Security Council member accepted the
solution proposed by the United States in paragraph 4
of its text. The American approach would in fact have
called into question the commitments made by States
that ratified the Rome Statute. I recall that many States,
including France, have made constitutional revisions in
order to take into account the provisions of the Statute,
including the one on immunity. The approach proposed
by the United States was therefore not practicable.
Are there any other solutions? The answer clearly
is yes. The simplest thing for the United States to do is
to withdraw the 46 United States police from the 1,586
that make up the UNMIBH international police
component, so that they could then be removed from
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court in
the very unlikely situation that one of those unarmed
American policemen commits genocide, a war crime or
a crime against humanity that falls within the
restrictive provisions of the Rome Statute. There is
simply no reason to kill UNMIBH in order to protect
the 46 policemen and other United States civilian
citizens.
However, there is another path, that of the law,
which would allow us to take into account the
American concern. Two legal solutions could be
considered. The first would be to use paragraph 2 of
article 98 of the Rome Statute, which would enable the
United States and any other State not a party to the
International Criminal Court to conclude with the host
country of a United Nations force a bilateral agreement

whereby the consent of the United States would be
required in the event that the Court required the
transfer of an American national member of that force.
The second solution would be, as France and the
United Kingdom proposed, to use article 16 of the
Rome Statute in order to enable the Security Council to
request the International Criminal Court on a case-bycase basis, through a resolution, to not be seized for a
one-year renewable period, in the case of an ongoing
investigation on a member of a force who is a citizen
of a State that is not a party to the Rome Statute.
For France and several Council members, those
two options would make it possible to respond to a
great extent to the United States concern, in full
accordance with the letter of the Rome Statute. Those
two possibilities are still before us today.
Together with its partners in the Security Council,
France is willing, in coming days, to seek, through a
constructive dialogue, a sensible solution that is
acceptable to all. What is at stake, as the SecretaryGeneral has stressed, is the very capacity of the United
Nations to continue its peacekeeping operations —
operations that provide irreplaceable services to the
international community as a whole.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
very much appreciate the Secretary-General’s presence
and what he said to us.
The United Kingdom is firmly committed to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and will continue to
work for an effective Court, in accordance with our
legal commitments under the Statute and with the
European Union’s Common Position.
While we understand United States concerns
regarding the Court, we do not share them. As the
Secretary-General has pointed out, the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) has come to an end for reasons unrelated to
its substantive presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We believe that the risk of peacekeeping
personnel appearing before the Court is extremely
small. Under the so-called complementarity principle,
the ICC will take over only if States are unwilling or
unable to investigate. Allegations of crimes will thus,
in most cases, continue to be investigated by the
authorities of the State with jurisdiction. In the United
Kingdom, our authorities would launch
an
investigation into any allegations that a British soldier

5

S/PV.4563

had committed a crime which fell within the ICC
Statute, so that we can be as certain as it is possible to
be that no British soldier will ever come before the
Court.

We believe that progress has been made in the
deliberations and in the various consultations that have
taken place. We believe that progress can be made
towards achieving unanimity on this crucial subject.

We believe also that the international
community’s forces in Bosnia, including those of the
United States, are doing an important job and need to
be allowed to complete their role. We therefore very
much regret the United States veto, the reasons for
which do not appear fully clear when the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
continues to have jurisdiction in the former Yugoslavia
regardless. Like France, we very much hope that we
shall soon be able to find a mutually acceptable
solution.

We believe in particular that the principle of
complementarity which is present throughout and
informs the Statute, as well as other provisions of the
Rome Statute taken as a whole — such as, for example,
the status of forces agreement (SOFA), which was
mentioned by Ambassador Negroponte, among other
things — provide broad guarantees for nationals of
those countries that are not members of the Treaty. In
sum, we know that these interpretations are not entirely
satisfactory, even though they are being reaffirmed and
emphasized by the Council.

The United Kingdom pays tribute to the Special
Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to his
whole team in UNMIBH for the superb work that they
have performed to date.

The third aspect concerns the fact that the
Council must, first and foremost, take into account the
potential implications of such a decision for
peacekeeping operations. Such operations are perhaps
the most effective and widely used means of
maintaining international peace and security. For that
reason, we reaffirm our position, which we believe is
constructive, and we join in the appeal of the
Secretary-General to continue efforts even more
intensively than in weeks past, with a view to
achieving a common position.

Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Given the impossibility of extending the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), my delegation would like to make the
following statement.
Colombia has participated in this process with a
constructive attitude, taking into account three aspects.
The first aspect concerns our relationship to the
Rome Statute as a signatory country whose Congress,
besides approving the constitutional reform, has
already begun the process of considering the law to
approve the Treaty. That law is currently being
reviewed by the Constitutional Court prior to
ratification, which will definitely take place very soon.
This circumstance imposes obligations on us, the first
of which is that the State must act in a way that is
compatible with the Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
A second aspect — which we have consistently
highlighted — is the position of the United States, a
country that has put forward a well-known position,
which we understand and which we have contributed to
analysing in a realistic manner, with a view to
achieving agreement in order to preserve the
cohesiveness of the Council and in particular to
safeguard the instruments available to the Council to
guarantee international peace and security.

6

These efforts are even more necessary in a world
threatened by terrorism. These threats can be dealt with
only if there is political will, which requires robust
actions based on resolute agreements among those of
us who have the obligation to meet the challenges
posed by terrorism.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to begin my statement by thanking the
Secretary-General for his presence and for his
statement.
China deems it regrettable that the draft
resolution on the extension of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) was
not adopted. China is in favour of the extension of
UNMIBH. We appreciate the contribution it has made
to stability and peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
we therefore voted in favour of the draft resolution.
I listened attentively to the explanatory statement
made earlier by Ambassador Negroponte of the United
States. China understands the concerns of the American
delegation with respect to the International Criminal

S/PV.4563

Court (ICC). The Council also held several rounds of
consultations on this problem. Regrettably, however,
the parties concerned failed to reach an agreement. We
hope that the interested parties will continue their
consultations on the relevant issues, so as to ensure that
this problem will not stand in the way of United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and other regions; that it will not
adversely affect the stability of the regions concerned;
and that it will not jeopardize the efforts made and the
achievements registered over the years by the United
Nations and by the international community at large.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): First of all, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
Norway deeply regrets that the Security Council
could not agree on the draft resolution just voted on.
The international community is intensively engaged in
the vital process of establishing a viable post-war order
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There can be no doubt
about the key role played by the United Nations in
post-conflict peace-building in that area. This includes
support for refugee returns and the promotion of the
rule of law, including free and democratic elections.
Needless to say, the international community has not
given up on Bosnia and Herzegovina through this vote.
It must redouble its efforts to carry out the work on the
basis of the Dayton Accords.
We would be remiss if, on the very eve of the
entry into force of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), we did not renew,
in this Chamber, our full commitment to the new
reality of international criminal justice. Norway
continues to be a staunch supporter of the Court, which
will be formally established tomorrow. That is a
historic turning point.
We are convinced that the Statute contains
sufficient safeguards against unwarranted or arbitrary
prosecutions. It is worthwhile recalling that it can be
triggered only when impunity has been demonstrated
through lack of genuine national prosecution of mass
atrocities. The ICC thus gives total priority to national
courts.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We, too, would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the statement that he made.
The Russian delegation, guided by its consistent
support for the peacekeeping activity of the

international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
voted in favour of the draft resolution in order to
ensure the implementation of the Dayton Agreements.
We regret that the draft resolution was not adopted, for
reasons which, as has been noted today, are not directly
related to the settlement in Bosnia. The reasons relate
to the problem of the relationship between the United
States and the International Criminal Court. We
understand those problems. Over the past few days,
working together with other members of the Security
Council, we have made real efforts to try to find a
solution within the norms of current international law
that would also meet the concerns of the United States.
We believe it necessary for the Security Council to
continue its efforts in order to find consensus very
soon.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland supports absolutely
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
authorization of the Stabilization Force. We therefore
voted in favour of the draft resolution. We understand
the concerns of the United States with regard to the
International Criminal Court, in particular its concerns
relating to United States personnel serving in United
Nations missions. However, we cannot agree with the
decisions at this point on the part of the United States
regarding these concerns. We have said all along that
we will work with others pragmatically to address
these concerns, and that remains our position. We
regret very much that this has not proved to be possible
today due to an absence of agreement in the Council.
Ireland has ratified the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, and is therefore bound by
its provisions. Ireland amended its constitution so that
it could ratify the Rome Statute. We are also strongly
committed to the Common Position of the European
Union in relation to the International Criminal Court.
The implications of the vote that was taken earlier are
extremely serious — for the United Nations and this
Council; for United Nations peacekeeping; and for the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, we
welcome Ambassador Negroponte’s reiteration today
of the United States commitment to peacekeeping in
the Balkans and elsewhere. We note carefully that
unambiguous commitment.
We, the members of the Council, in meeting the
situation that has now arisen, must seek to move
forward urgently as best we can. I convey my
Government’s strongest support for the concerns

7

S/PV.4563

expressed so succinctly and unequivocally by the
Secretary-General in this regard.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers on my list.

8

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.
