S/2018/429

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 May 2018
Original: English

United Nations Support Mission in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2376
(2017), covers political and security developments in Libya, provides an overview of
the human rights and humanitarian situation in the country and outlines the activities
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) since the issuance of my
previous report on 12 February 2018 (S/2018/140).

II. Political and security-related developments
2.
My Special Representative for Libya, Ghassan Salamé, continued his efforts
under the United Nations action plan to support an inclusive political process to
conclude the country’s prolonged transition. Consultations continued between
representatives of the House of Representatives and the High Council of State on
forming a new executive authority to reach an agreement on limited amendments to
the Libyan Political Agreement. In parallel, a series of meetings were held throughout
the country to build momentum towards the national conference by encouraging
dialogue and broad participation in the political process. The process is aimed at
responding to the interest of Libyans in taking part in the political process and at
providing a basis for solid participation in future electoral processes and acceptance
of election results. Progress towards holding national parliamentary and presidential
elections was made through the conclusion of the voter registration update, within
Libya and abroad.
3.
To support the political process, the United Nations continued to work with
various communities to peacefully resolve the roots of their grievances through local
reconciliation. These initiatives contributed to renewing contacts and reaching
reconciliation agreements in southern and western Libya. Significantly,
representatives of Misratah and Zintan progressed towards reconciliation, agreeing at
the end of March on the need for a comprehensive national reconciliation and the
peaceful transfer of power in Libya. They committed to working towards the
unification of military and security institutions. With preparations proceeding for
holding municipal elections during the course of 2018, mayors and heads of local
councils representing all parts of the country convened for the second time since the
start of the year. They urged the leadership of the House of Representatives and of
the High Council of State to agree on establishing a new Government.

18-06813 (E)

100518

*1806813*

S/2018/429

4.
The overall security environment remained poor. Southern Libya witnessed an
escalation of tensions in early March between militias from communities in conflict.
Intermittent fighting in and around the city of Sabha continued to result in civilian
casualties and the displacement of thousands of civilians. In Tripoli and its environs,
a string of high-profile kidnappings occurred. Deadly bombing attacks on security
checkpoints, including some for which the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
claimed responsibility, took place in central and eastern Libya.
Implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement
5.
During the period under review, there was an increase in engagement between
members of the House of Representatives and the High Council of State to agree on
a potential mechanism for electing a new executive authority. In mid-February, 54
members of the High Council of State issued a statement calling on the House of
Representatives to move forward on the process that had begun in September 2017.
In response, in late March, 49 members of the House of Representatives called for
closer collaboration between the two assemblies to agree on a new Presidency
Council. Discussions started on a joint meeting between these substantial
constituencies from both houses. Following an internal run -off election on 8 April,
Khaled al-Meshri succeeded Abdulrahman al-Sweihli as the President of the High
Council of State.
6.
Progress was achieved on technical preparations for the holding of elections in
2018. The process for updating voter registration, which was launched o n 6 December
2017 and concluded at the end of March 2018, resulted in the addition of about 1
million new registrants.
International and regional engagement
7.
International and regional engagement continued to play a vital role in support
of United Nations efforts to address the crisis in Libya. The African Union, the
European Union and the United Nations task force continued efforts to address the
issue of migration. The tripartite task force held several political and technical
meetings during the reporting period. It undertook a joint assessment mission to Libya
on 21 February to review progress in achieving the voluntary return of migrants and
the evacuation of refugees and asylum seekers out of Libya. It also conducted a
mission to Tripoli on 22 February, during which it visited a detention facility and met
with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and other authorities. The task force encouraged
the Government to close down the detention facilities and to improve the process for
repatriation, including by ending the need for exit visas. It also created an operational
cell in Tunis, which continued to meet regularly. Discussions are ongoing on the
possibility of extending the mandate of the task force, which expires in May 2018.
8.
Notable achievements of the task force include the return of 11,859 migrants to
29 countries of origin between 28 November 2017 and 14 April 2018, through the
Voluntary Humanitarian Returns programme of the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), with the support of the African Union, the European Union and the
Government of Libya.
9.
On 15 March, UNSMIL and IOM participated in the sixth ministerial
coordination platform on Sahel strategies, hosted by the Government of Chad in
N’Djamena. The forum discussed the impact of the situation in Libya on the situation
in the Sahel for the first time. On 3 April in Niamey, Chad, Libya, the Niger and the
Sudan agreed to establish a mechanism of cooperation in the areas of border security
and the fight against transnational organized crime.
10. My Special Representative attended the meeting of the Ad Hoc High -Level
Committee on Libya in Addis Ababa held on 17 April, which provided an opportunity
2/16

18-06813

S/2018/429

to renew the African Union-United Nations partnership on issues concerning Libya.
In addition, on 30 April the Quartet on Libya convened its fifth meeting at the League
of Arab States headquarters in Cairo. The four organizations of the Quartet — the
African Union, the European Union, the League of Arab States and the United
Nations — discussed the situation in the country and renewed their support for the
United Nations action plan.
Situation in the western region
11. The security situation in the western region remained precarious during the
reporting period, with bouts of localized low-level conflict between rival armed
groups. On 21 February, members of the Special Deterrence Force militia raided the
Sahara Bank in Warshafanah with the aim of allegedly arresting criminal gang
members. During the course of the raid, indiscriminate fire by the Force led to the
killing of the group’s commander and at least four civilian casualties. Clashes
between the Force and the armed group continued in the area for two days, which
caused a portion of the coastal road into Warshafanah to be blocked for a limited
period. The coastal road connecting Warshafanah to the centre of the capital, and the
area close to Tripoli International Airport, is now secured by the special operations
forces, which are under the control of the Presidency Council’s commander of the
western military region. On 2 May, ISIL claimed responsibility for an attack on the
High Commission for National Elections in Tripoli, in which more than 15 people
were killed.
12. There were continued reports of theft, carjackings, attacks and kidnappings
during the reporting period. Several high-profile kidnappings occurred. On 14 March,
the convoy of the President of the High Council of State was attacked in the Qawalish
district while en route from Gharyan to Yafran; two members of the convoy were
injured. UNSMIL condemned the attack, rejecting the use of violence to reach
political objectives. On 15 March, the military prosecutor general, Brigadier General
Masoud Erhuma, was seized by unknown armed groups in Tripoli. On 28 March,
Central Tripoli Mayor Abdel-Raouf Beitalmal was kidnapped from the Old City of
Tripoli by a brigade aligned with the Ministry of Interior, but was later released.
13. Small, contained popular protests also occurred during the repo rting period. On
10 March, a demonstration took place at Tripoli’s Algeria Square to demand an
improvement in living conditions and accountability for officials accused of financial
corruption. On 30 March, Referendum First, a consortium of non -governmental
organizations and other civil society organizations, formed the “30 March” movement
and held demonstrations in Martyrs’ Square in Tripoli, making political and economic
demands.
Situation in the eastern region
14. In Darnah, the siege by the Libyan National Army continued, adversely
affecting the delivery of humanitarian assistance and access to adequate health care.
Increased shelling and use of heavy artillery by the Libyan National Army was
reported on several occasions in March, targeting the eastern parts of the city and
injuring several civilians. On 4 March, two civilians were injured, reportedly from
shelling by the Army. Subsequent Army activities and retaliatory attacks by the
Darnah Mujahedeen Shura Council on 8, 11 and 19 March resulted in two people
being killed and nine others injured from both sides. On numerous occasions, the
Army publicly announced that it would launch a military offensive in Darnah, which
had yet to materialize.

18-06813

3/16

S/2018/429

Situation in the southern region
15. During the period under review, intercommunal conflict increased in and around
the city of Sabha between tribal armed groups and militias. The Libyan National Army
moved military equipment into the area. On 6 March, after weeks of periodic clashes,
violence escalated in Sabha between armed groups from the Tebu and the Awlad
Sulayman communities. During the month of March, clashes resulted in seven persons
being killed and more than 20 injured, most of whom were civilians. Approximately
720 families were displaced. By early April, more than 1,500 families in total had
been displaced as a result of the fighting.
16. On 17 February, the Libyan National Army issued an ultimatum to foreign
armed groups present in the Libyan territories to depart to their countri es, threatening
to resort to force by air and land. On 23 March, the Army deployed new forces and
armoured vehicles to the Tamanhint airbase (approximately 30 km north of Sabha)
and to the Birak al-Shati’ airbase (100 km northwest of Sabha) to further enha nce its
presence in the region.
17. On 16 March, 16 suspected members of the Nusrah Front were arrested in
Kufrah after having reportedly entered Libya from the Sudan. On 24 March, two
individuals reportedly affiliated with Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb were killed in
Awbari city in a drone strike carried out by forces of the United States Africa
Command (AFRICOM) in coordination with the Government of National Accord.
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya
18. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continued activities around its former
stronghold of Sirte, as well as in other areas of Libya. On 21 February, ISIL claimed
responsibility for a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device which detonated at a
Libyan National Army checkpoint on the road leading to the city of Jufrah. As a result,
five Army members were killed and seven injured. Five suspected ISIL members were
arrested on 3 March by the Special Deterrence Force in Qasr al-Qarahbulli and Zlitan.
Subsequently, publicized statements suggested that ISIL sleeper cells existed in
Tripoli and surrounding areas. On 9 March south of Ajdabiya, a suicide vehicle -borne
improvised explosive device targeted an Army checkpoint (gate 60), injuring three of
its members. Similarly, on 29 March in Ajdabiya, a vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device detonated at the eastern security gate manned by the Army, resulting
in 6 of its members being killed and 10 others injured, including a civilian. In both
incidents, media reports stated that ISIL had clai med responsibility.
19. On 2 April, anti-terrorism forces intercepted an ISIL convoy of six armed
vehicles, reportedly seizing two of the vehicles while the other four escaped in an
area between Zlitan and Bani Walid. On 2 April the Presidency Council lau nched a
military operation against ISIL in the area stretching from Misratah in the east, Bani
Walid in the south, Tarhunah and Msallata in the west, and Khums and Zlitan in the
north.
Economic situation
20. During the reporting period, oil production was sustained at more than 1 million
barrels per day, which in combination with higher international oil prices increased
optimism about the country’s economic outlook. Nonetheless, efforts to further
increase oil production were hampered by insufficient financial resources for
maintenance and investment in oil facilities and by blockades by armed militias and
local communities. The El Feel oil field in the south-west remains closed, despite
ongoing negotiations between representatives of the National Oil Corporation and

4/16

18-06813

S/2018/429

remnant forces of the Petroleum Facilities Guards over delays in salary payments,
resulting in substantial financial losses.
21. Four months into the new fiscal year, Libyan authorities have still not agreed on
the budget framework for 2018. Deliberations continue on raising total expenditures
from the proposal of 42.5 billion Libyan dinars (about $31.8 billion), as compared
with the 2017 budget proposal of 37.5 billion Libyan dinars (about $28 billion).
Despite optimistic projections for oil revenues, the excessive public expenditures
would generate a fiscal deficit of over 10 billion Libyan dinars (about $7.5 billion).
The budget process stalled as a result of an outstanding agreement by the Central
Bank of Libya to finance the fiscal deficit through withdrawals from foreign reserves
and efforts to integrate the public expenditures of the “interim Government” in the
East.
22. Following a sudden gain in value on the parallel market in January, the Libyan
dinar depreciated to 6.25 Libyan dinars to 1 United States dollar as of 5 April,
compared with the official exchange rate of about 1.39 Libyan dinars to 1 United
States dollar. However, the value of the Libyan dinar on the black market stabilized
at around 6.00–6.60 Libyan dinars to 1 United States dollar.
23. To overcome the liquidity crisis, Libyan women adopted coping strategies, such
as selling jewellery, using savings and relying on social networks. However, women
continued to face difficulties in sustaining and operating small and medium -sized
enterprises, owing mainly to high production costs and reduced purchasing power.
24. The relative improvement in macroeconomic stability has been offset by
emerging reports alleging rampant mismanagement of public funds. For instance, in
reports of 13 March, the Office of the Attorney General charged that illegal fuel
smuggling over the past three years had generated an estimated $750 million. Other
reports indicated that corruption related to the issuing of letters of credit had
contributed to the financing of armed militia groups.

III. Constitution-making process
25. Efforts to establish a constitutional framework for the end of the country ’s
transitional period continued. On 14 February, the Supreme Court established a legal
principle which will facilitate the end to litigation against the Constitution Drafting
Assembly filed in administrative courts, thereby effectively removing the legal
obstacles to a national referendum on the constitutional proposal endorsed on 29 July
2017. Members of the House of Representatives started to discuss the legislation
necessary for a referendum. The Constitution Drafting Assembly has since increased
outreach activity on the constitutional proposal and engaged with other key Libyan
institutions to promote the holding of a referendum ahead of parliamentary and
presidential elections.

IV. Other activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
A.

Electoral support
26. UNSMIL and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) continued
to provide advice and support to the High Commission for National Elections and
other Libyan counterparts. Following the conduct of the voter registration update
exercise by the High Commission, the total number of registered Libyans reached

18-06813

5/16

S/2018/429

2,434,654, of which 1,033,777 were women and 6,630 belonged to the out-of-country
electorate.
27. Efforts have been focused on supporting the High Commission in enhancing its
preparedness for future balloting events by providing advice and assistance in the
areas of general management, data management, training and procedures, nomination
of candidates and political entities, logistics and field operations, including
backstopping support from headquarters. In addition, some technical assistance and
support is also being provided to the Central Committee for Municipal Council
Elections in its preparations for the 2018 local elections.
28. Three working groups, established in October 2017 by UNSMIL, led efforts to
provide electoral assistance with a view to coordinating internationa l support for
voter registration, public outreach and electoral legislation. Further to a series of
workshops held with international experts in January and February 2018, three sets
of recommendations were developed in support of a referendum on a draft
constitution, as well as a legal framework for presidential and parliamentary elections.
The first two-day workshop was held beginning on 29 March with members of the
legislative committee of the House of Representatives to promote discussions on
referendum legislation.
29. In close consultation with the High Commission for National Elections and
UNSMIL, the UNDP electoral assistance project entitled “Promoting elections for the
people of Libya” finalized its workplan and started the implementation of its activities
in Libya. The project received contributions of almost $10 million from the European
Union, France, Germany, Italy, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland.
30. On 7 March, UNSMIL received a request from the Central Committee for
Municipal Council Elections to provide support in the 2018 municipal council
elections. In 2018, 75 of the 92 municipal councils that were elected in 2014 and 2015
will reach the end of their four-year-mandates. In the light of the municipal elections
due to be held in Zawiya on 28 April, UNSMIL supported the Central Committee with
outreach efforts during the reporting period and approved continued support through
the development of a project on local elections, through UNDP, to be signed soon.

B.

Human rights, transitional justice and the rule of law
31. During the period under review, all parties to the conflict committed violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law.
32. Ongoing fighting continued to claim civilian casualties. During the reporting
period, UNSMIL documented a total of 43 civilian casualties: 16 deaths, including 3
children, and 27 persons injured, including 9 children. Leading causes of casualties
among civilians included explosive remnants of war, gu nfire, shelling and vehicleborne improvised explosive devices.
33. Civilians bore the brunt of intermittent clashes in southern Libya between the
Awlad Sulayman and the Tebu tribal armed groups and their allies. The use of
indiscriminate fire in densely populated areas led to civilian casualties, while snipers
also apparently targeted civilians and civilian vehicles. Victims included civilians of
Arab, Tebu and Tuareg origin. An estimated 1,500 families were displaced as a result
of fighting, finding shelter in schools or with relatives and host communities in the
towns of Awbari and Murzuq, as well as in Sabha neighbourhoods farther away from
the conflict zones.

6/16

18-06813

S/2018/429

34. The Libyan National Army continued to impose restrictions on the freedom of
movement of Darnah residents and on the entry into the city of certain prohibited
goods, such as petrol, as well as humanitarian aid, such as medical supplies.
Abduction and unlawful deprivation of liberty
35. Armed groups on all sides continued to take hostages or to otherwise unlawfully
deprive civilians, including children, of their liberty. Civilians were targeted for
financial or political gain, on the basis of their tribal origin or family identity, or for
their perceived political affiliations and opinions.
36. During the reporting period, Tripoli witnessed a rise in unlawful deprivations of
liberty of government officials and other high-profile figures. The fate and
whereabouts of the military prosecutor general, Masoud Erhouma, his driver and his
security guard remain unknown following their disappearance from Tripoli on
15 March. On 17 March, unidentified gunmen in Tripoli took another member of the
judiciary hostage. He was released three days later without charges or referral to
judicial bodies.
37. On 20 March, Jumaa al-Usta, the former owner of the al-Assema television
channel, which was closed down in 2014, together with three of his brothers, was
taken from his home by armed men affiliated with the Tripoli Revolutionary Brigade.
While his brothers were released after a few hours, Jumaa al -Usta was detained until
26 March at a location controlled by the Brigade.
Detention and torture
38. Across the country, arbitrary detention and torture continued to be widespread
in both prisons and detention facilities, with 6,400 individuals held in 26 official
prisons under the Ministry of Justice, and an estimated 75 to 80 per cent of whom
were being held in pretrial detention. Thousands of others were held in facilities
nominally under the control of the Ministry of Interior or the Ministry of Defence, as
well as facilities directly run by armed groups. Those held had little opportunity to
challenge the legality of their detention or seek redress for violations suffered.
39. UNSMIL conducted eight visits to prisons and detention facilities in western
Libya, including in Gharyan, Misratah, Tarhunah and Tripoli. Despite repeated
requests, UNSMIL has not been able to visit the Mitiga detention facility, which is
controlled by the Special Deterrence Force and where an estimated 2,600 people are
allegedly held, most without charge or trial. On 28 February and 29 March, UNSMIL
was not permitted to interview male and female detainees in private at a detention
facility controlled by the Central Security/Abu Salim armed group.
40. In relation to detention facilities, UNSMIL continued to receive credible reports
of prolonged and arbitrary detention, torture and other ill -treatment, enforced
disappearance, poor detention conditions, medical neglect and the denial of visits
from families and lawyers. During the reporting period, UNSMIL gathered credible
information on torture and other ill-treatment at a number of official prisons,
including Ayn Zarah, Jawwiyah, Judaydah and Kuwayfiah prisons. Torture was also
documented in detention facilities operated by the Special Deterrence Force, the
Tripoli Revolutionary Brigade, the Central Security/Abu Salim brigade, the Nawasi
and Fursan Janzur armed groups in Tripoli and the central branch of the Criminal
Investigations Department (previously known as the Department for Combating
Crime) in Misratah.
41. In one notable example, the Special Deterrence Force continued to detain a
married couple and their three children, aged between 2 and 5 years, who were seized
from Zlitan on 3 February. The father appeared in a video recording posted on the
18-06813

7/16

S/2018/429

Facebook page of the Special Deterrence Force on 2 March “confessing” to having
carried out terrorist acts.
42. In eastern Libya, UNSMIL documented that medical professionals, both women
and men, over the age of 70 are among those held in the Gernada and Kuwayfiah
prisons, or directly by armed groups allied to the Libyan National Army on account
of their family links to the Benghazi Revolutionaries Shura Council and their allies
or their alleged lack of support for the Libyan National Army.
Groups in vulnerable situations
Migrants
43. Migrants, including children, continued to be vulnerable to unlawful deprivation
of liberty and arbitrary detention in official and unofficial places of detention, torture,
abduction for ransom, extortion, forced labour and unlawful killing. Perpetrators
included State officials, armed groups, smugglers, traffickers and criminal gangs.
44. During the reporting period, UNSMIL visited three detention centres overseen
by the Department for Combating Illegal Migration. Detained migrants were held in
substandard conditions, characterized by overcrowding and poor lighting and
ventilation. In some detention centres, detainees had no or limited access to sunlight
and the outdoors, and were denied communication with their families. Detainees,
including survivors of trafficking and rape, were exposed to further violations and
were not provided with adequate access to legal aid, medical care, and mental health
or psychosocial support.
45. On 14 March, the head of investigations in the Office of the General Prosecutor
announced that 205 arrest warrants had been issued in relation to smuggling and abuse
against migrants. No further details were made available.
Women and girls
46. Women and girls were arbitrarily detained, at times on the basis of their family
affiliation or for “moral crimes,” such as engaging in consensual sexual relations
outside of wedlock. Many were held in facilities without female guards, heightening
the risk of sexual abuse. Women were strip-searched by or in front of male guards and
some were subjected to intrusive cavity searches. Migrant women and girls were
particularly vulnerable to rape, forced prostitution and other forms of sexual violence
at the hands of State officials, members of armed groups, smugglers and traffickers.
The situation in the Judaydah Women’s Prison deteriorated during the reporting
period. During inspections of prisoner cells by the Special Deterrence Force, which
has been in charge of securing the prison’s perimeter since November 2017, Force
members beat women, including with water pipes and the backs of rifles, and placed
them in solitary confinement for prolonged periods. UNSMIL is also concerned about
reports indicating that the acting prison director, a judicial police officer, is directly
involved in the beating of detainees.
Transitional justice and national reconciliation
47. UNSMIL continued supporting national reconciliation through a comprehensive
and inclusive programme, with assistance provided by the Peacebuilding Fund and
UNDP. In early February, delegations from Ghadamis and the Tuareg communities
displaced in Awal met for the first time since the displacement of members of the
Tuareg community from Ghadamis. They agreed on a road map for reconciliation in
Ghadamis, which included measures to document human rights violations committed
during the conflict and to evaluate the destruction of properties and houses, with the
goal of ensuring future accountability and reparations mechanisms. Two follow -up
8/16

18-06813

S/2018/429

committees were established to supervise and monitor the implementation of the road
map.
48. On 21 February, representatives from the Tebu and Zway tribes of Kufrah
District signed a reconciliation agreement after a two -day meeting in Tunis. The
agreement sets out key principles for reconciliation, including freedom of movement,
individual accountability for crimes and equal access to services without
discrimination. The Tebu and Zway tribes agreed to form a high commission for peace
and reconciliation in Kufrah which, once established, will receive technical support
from UNSMIL.
49. On 14 March, technical experts and representatives of the Institution for the
Care of Families of Martyrs and Missing Persons, the Ministries of Justice, Interior
and Social Affairs, the Office of the Attorney General, families an d civil society
organizations agreed on a set of recommendations to address the issue of the filing of
missing persons cases as a cornerstone for national reconciliation in Libya.
Participants discussed ways to establish a national body on missing persons and to
ensure the independence of such a body from any political or institutional divisions.
They also requested more technical and financial support from specialized
international organizations, the majority of such organizations having withdrawn
from Libya in 2014.
50. UNSMIL continued to engage with the Misratah and Tawurgha ’ communities.
The return of the displaced members of the Tawurgha’ community, estimated at
around 40,000 people, continued to be blocked by armed groups from Misratah,
despite the announcement by the Presidency Council that they would be able to begin
to return to their city on 1 February. An estimated 450 families who attempted to
return on 1 February remain at a makeshift desert camp in Qararat al -Katif and in
temporary accommodations in the town of Harawah, under difficult living conditions.
On 27 March, the technical committee of the “Towards national reconciliation”
project, supported by UNSMIL and composed of members of both communities and
the Minister of State for Internally Displaced Persons Affairs, agreed on an eightpoint plan to end the deadlock over the implementation of the agreement between
Misratah and Tawurgha’ on returns and reparations signed on 31 August 2016. The
plan included a renewed commitment to comply with the Misratah-Tawurgha’
agreement and called on the Presidency Council to put in place security measures to
enable the return of those who had been forcibly displaced.
51. At the national level, the preparatory committee for national reconciliation,
established by a decree of the Presidency Council on 14 May 2017, has yet to be
activated. The national reparations fund for all conflict -related victims since 2011,
decreed in October 2017, has also not been formed.
Judicial and penal system
52. Prosecutors, judges and other judicial staff continued to operate in a difficult
security environment. Following the 15 March abduction of the military prosecutor
general, military prosecutors organized a protest against attacks targeting members of
the judiciary and called on the Presidency Council and UNSMIL to secure his release.
53. During the reporting period, the Office of the General Prosecutor reportedly
agreed to establish a court inside the Mitiga detention complex, which is controlled
by the Special Deterrence Force, amid concerns about the possible impact of such a
move on the independence of the judiciary and fair trial guarantees. Plans are under
way to reopen a facility for detained children in Tripoli, under the Ministry of Social
Affairs. Children in Libya continued to be detained together with the adult prison
population.

18-06813

9/16

S/2018/429

54. Violations of international human rights and humanitarian law were carried out
with continued impunity. Despite regular announcements of investigations into
allegations of war crimes and other violations by the Presidency Council and the
Libyan National Army, no member of an armed group was brought to justice for
committing crimes under international law, to the best of the Mission ’s knowledge.
In one recent example, on 1 January a detainee held at the Ayn Zarah (B) prison
reportedly died as a result of torture following a hunger strike by detainees protesting
detention conditions and delays in the judicial process. No official was held to account
pending investigations in relation to this incident.
55. The exact legal status and whereabouts of a field commander with the special
forces under the Libyan National Army, Mahmoud al-Werfalli, who is subject to an
arrest warrant issued on 15 August 2017 by the International Criminal Co urt for the
crime of murder for his alleged involvement in summary executions, remain unclear.
56. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), in cooperation with
an Algerian school for penitentiary management, organized a two -month in-depth
training in Algeria for 13 members of the Libyan judicial police, which concluded in
February. The training took place under the UNODC regional prison project to
strengthen prison management and foster the social reintegration of offenders. While
encouraging South-South cooperation through this approach, UNODC received an
official request from the Libyan judicial police to continue its support for the reform
of prison systems in Libya in partnership with Algeria.
Human rights due diligence policy
57. The United Nations system in Libya continued its efforts towards the
implementation of the United Nations human rights due diligence policy on United
Nations support to non-United Nations security forces (A/67/775-S/2013/110, annex).
UNSMIL and the United Nations country team are currently reviewing their support
for Libyan security forces, with a view to mitigating identified risks of grave
violations of international humanitarian law, human rights law or refugee law being
committed by recipients of United Nations support.
58. A risk assessment and mitigating measures with respect to United Nations
support for the Department for Combating Illegal Migration are currently under
consideration.

C.

Security sector
Support for Libyan planning for interim security arrangements
59. UNSMIL continued efforts to support the creation of more cohesive and unified
Libyan security institutions that are responsive to civilian control. On an institutional
level, UNSMIL and UNDP formally launched the Policing and Security Programme
with the Ministers of Interior and Justice. As part of the process to professionalize the
police, 1,500 police officers for Tripoli were selected to participate in a training -oftrainers programme. The Mission is also supporting efforts by the Ministry of Interior
to engage with armed groups in Tripoli who are nominally a part of the ministry to
progressively strengthen its authority. These efforts complement efforts to
operationalize the greater Tripoli joint operation centre.
60. Nevertheless, efforts to strengthen institutional capacity are becoming more
complicated as a result of ongoing competition between security actors. A case in
point was the Presidency Council’s appointment on 13 March of the new Tripoli
military zone commander, Major General Abdul Abdul Basset, who, while favourable
to the Tripoli armed groups, is viewed with suspicion by those in Zintan, including

10/16

18-06813

S/2018/429

the commander of the western military zone, Major General Juweili, who sent a force
into Tripoli in March to take over strategic points on the coastal road west of Tripoli,
heightening tensions.
61. UNSMIL increasingly engaged with actors beyond Tripoli. At the end of March,
a series of meetings were held with security actors in the eastern region, including the
police in Benghazi, as a first step towards engaging the Policing and Security
Programme and the model police station in the east. The Mission also continued to
engage with the Presidential Guard and the counter-terrorism unit set up by the
Government of National Accord.
62. From 19 to 21 March, the Government of Egypt convened the sixth Libya n
military unification meeting in Cairo. The meeting included delegations of military
representatives appointed by both Prime Minister Serraj and Libyan National Army
General Haftar. Meeting participants intended to finalize a draft agreement and work
out implementation mechanisms. However, although there was general agreement on
the need for the army to be under civilian control, there were several outstanding
disagreements on the roles and responsibilities of senior positions, as well as
opposition from security actors who were not involved in the talks.
Arms and ammunition management
63. The uncontrolled proliferation of arms and ammunition remains a threat to
stability and security in Libya. In collaboration with the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS), UNSMIL continued to assist Libyan authorities in their efforts to
address threats posed by arms and ammunition stockpiles, and contamination by
explosive hazards as a result of conflict. In Misratah, UNMAS completed a project
for the clearance and destruction of 200 tons of explosive remnants of war. The second
phase of the project, for the clearance and destruction of an additional 200 tons,
commenced in February.
64. In order to assist the national security organizations in addressing the inc reased
threat from improvised explosive devices, during the reporting period UNMAS
completed the development of technical operating procedures for high -threat search
and high-risk disposal.
65. The national standards for mine action, developed in support o f the Libyan Mine
Action Centre, are now in force. For the first time in four years, UNSMIL and
UNMAS were able to celebrate the International Day for Mine Awareness and
Assistance in Mine Action on 4 April in Libya, at an event organized by the Libyan
Mine Action Centre.

D.

Women’s empowerment
66. Since the launch of the United Nations action plan, UNSMIL has strongly
encouraged the meaningful participation of women, including in conservative
communities, during its discussions on next steps in the political transition process.
Dedicated efforts were undertaken to ensure the participation of women during the
preparatory process leading up to the national conference. On International Women ’s
Day on 8 March, my Special Representative addressed more than 250 women and
encouraged stronger representation of women in leadership positions and in
governance structures.
67. Recruitment commenced for the new Women’s Support and Empowerment Unit,
which is to be located within the Presidency Council. Once operatio nal, the Unit will
be the focal point for promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women in
Libya. With funding from the Governments of Germany, the Netherlands and

18-06813

11/16

S/2018/429

Switzerland, UNSMIL, in cooperation with UNDP, facilitated the participation of fiv e
Libyan women from civil society organizations and academia at the sixty-second
session of the Commission on the Status of Women, held in New York in March 2018.
Two side events were organized on the margin of the session, in cooperation with
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), the delegation of the European Union and the Permanent Mission of
Finland.

E.

Young people, peace and security
68. During the reporting period, 180 Libyan youth participated in a series of
workshops promoting “positive peace”, organized by the United Nations Children’s
Fund through the Voluntary Humanitarian Returns programme of IOM and the
Institute for Economics and Peace, through funding from the Government of Italy.
Participants were asked to think about and develop innovative community
development projects that reflect the values of positive peace, including not only the
absence of violence but also a set of attitudes, structures and institutions that underpin
and sustain peaceful societies. Participants returned to their communities and were
encouraged to start campaigning to overcome adversity and conflict, and to build
lasting peace.

F.

Coordination and international assistance
69. Consultations continued on the United Nations strategic framework for the
period 2019–2020, which will be finalized in due course. Ahead of the planned
meeting in May or June of the Senior Policy Committee, which is the overarching
body of the coordination framework for international technical cooperation with the
Government of Libya, UNSMIL and the Ministry of Planning co -chaired a meeting
in Tripoli on 27 March. The meeting stressed the importance of advance work on
finalizing respective national priorities by sectoral working groups.

G.

Humanitarian, stabilization and development assistance
70. The humanitarian situation remained fragile, with protracted political conflict
and economic hardship. Periodic escalations of armed conflict resulted in small -scale
displacements, while support for return movements remains hampered by a lack of
systematic access for humanitarian actors.
71. The Libya Humanitarian Response Plan for 2018 remains poorly funded, with
only 2 percent of the required $313 million, imperilling lifesaving and basic
assistance for more than 1 million of the most vulnerable Libyans and risking an
increase of community tensions as interventions to improve access to basic services
are undermined. Increasing respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights law remains a key priority, which requires the implementation of a wide range
of protection interventions for all vulnerable groups.
72. There were over 704,000 migrants in Libya, including women (11 per cent of
identified migrants) and children (10 per cent), near ly half of whom came from Chad,
Egypt and the Niger. Between 1 January and 3 April, 6,161 migrants arrived in Italy
from Libya. During the same period, 3,479 migrants were returned to the shores of
Libya by the Libyan Coast Guard, of which 1,410 were retur ned during the reporting
period. There were 359 deaths by sea registered on the central Mediterranean route.
Almost all migrants who were returned received direct emergency assistance from
IOM and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refu gees

12/16

18-06813

S/2018/429

(UNHCR). By 3 April, IOM had assisted with the voluntary repatriation of 5,240
migrants to 28 countries of origin since the beginning of 2018.
73. There are 51,519 refugees and asylum seekers registered with UNHCR in Libya.
Since the beginning of 2018, UNHCR has registered 6,860 individuals, of which
2,462 were registered in the month of March alone, mostly Syrians, followed by
Palestinians and Sudanese. This represents a 70 per cent increase compared with the
same period during the previous year. The vast majority of these registered refugees
and asylum seekers are not in detention in Libya but could face the risk of detention
and arbitrary arrest in the prevailing environment in the country.
74. Migrants, refugees and asylum seekers continued to be subjected to arbitrary
detention. There are currently an estimated 4,440 migrants in detention, of which
2,000 are refugees and asylum seekers. This figure refers to the individuals detained
in official facilities and does not include detention centres main tained by militias. In
March, the Libyan authorities reported the closure of 18 detention centres. The United
Nations continues to call for the closure of detention centres and the respect of human
rights for those who are detained.
75. United Nations agencies, including IOM, UNFPA, UNHCR and the World
Health Organization (WHO), provided assistance, including protection screenings,
medical psychosocial assistance and non-food items. They continued to improve
living conditions to minimum standards through long-term interventions. IOM
facilitated the release of 3,012 migrants from detention centres and supported the
establishment of medical clinics in four detention centres. United Nations agencies
provided medical assistance and material support to migrants and refugees who had
been detained. UNHCR and implementing partners also undertook more than 335
monitoring visits to detention centres throughout Libya. In 2018, over 980 refugees
were released from detention following advocacy by UNHCR. A large majority of the
persons released were individuals who were evacuated to the emergency transit
mechanism in the Niger and to Italy.
76. In response to the blocked return of the Tawurgha’ community in early February,
the humanitarian community provided assistance related to water, sanitation and
hygiene, health, food and shelter to the internally displaced persons; however,
protection concerns and needs remain. Demining teams have not been able to assess
the contamination by explosive remnants of war in Tawurgha ’, owing mainly to lack
of access. An accurate assessment of the extent of the contamination is important in
preparation for a safe and dignified return. In response to the escalation of conflict in
and around the southern city of Sabha, the humanitarian commun ity provided health
and food assistance, hygiene items and non-food items to the families.
77. WHO and UNFPA also supported the training of nurses and midwives from the
rural area of Takinse in eastern Libya. UNFPA and the Bureau of Statistics and Census
trained 154 Libyan enumerators on methodological framework and data collection
tools in preparation of the forthcoming multisectoral Libyan household survey, which
will cover 7,000 households (including those of non-displaced and internally
displaced persons, and returnees) in various cities, notably Benghazi, Sabha and Sirte.
This exercise will provide data on the impact of the crisis on the Libyan people, their
priority needs and their coping strategies. Thus far in 2018, the World Food
Programme has also distributed food to 65,488 people in need, primarily internally
displaced persons, including 3,000 members of the Tawurgha ’ community.
78. Despite the fragile political and security situation, the UNDP Stabilization
Facility for Libya delivered results in all regions of the country, extending the reach
of the Government to citizens across Libya. By the end of the reporting period, the
programme had received contributions amounting to $51.7 million, including
$5 million from the Government of National Accord. The programme contributed to
18-06813

13/16

S/2018/429

the rehabilitation and equipping of hospitals, including prefabricated medical centres,
and delivered 14 ambulances. Sixteen schools were rehabilitated or re -equipped and
municipalities benefited from rehabilitation and re-equipping, along with
improvements to the performance of electrical substations, water pumping stations
and the sewerage system.
79. In the south, IOM continued to provide support to Sabha by starting the process
of procuring olive seedlings to promote far mers’ livelihoods and providing support to
the Water and Waste Water Company of Sabha with essential water, sanitation and
hygiene services to conflict-affected communities. IOM also finalized the
construction of a wastewater tank in Tadamun, a marginalized neighbourhood of
Sabha, which hosts 2,500 internally displaced persons and has suffered for years from
wastewater leakages. In addition, IOM handed over the rehabilitated primary health care unit in Al-Manshiyyah to the local health office in Sabha to support improved
health services. UNDP is working with municipalities to strengthen the service
delivery capacity of local authorities through the provision of equipment and the
rehabilitation of public infrastructure in six municipalities: Bani Walid, Bengh azi,
Sabha, Kufrah, Sabratah and Tripoli.
80. During the reporting period, many United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes reassigned their duty stations from Tunis to Tripoli and employed new
staff. As of March 2018, United Nations coordination meetings were being held
primarily in Tripoli.

V. Deployment of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and security arrangements
81. Following the lifting of the evacuation status for Libya on 7 February, the
presence and activities of the United Nations continued to gradually expand in Libya,
including to locations outside Tripoli, particularly to Benghazi, where the United
Nations intends to establish an office in the near future. United Nations agencies also
finalized agreements with UNSMIL on the use of common premises.
Security and safety of staff members and operations
82. United Nations personnel in Libya continued to work in a high-risk security
environment. Restrictions continued to be imposed on the movement of personnel in
the country and on international staff travelling by air to Tripoli and other destinations
within Libya.

VI. Observations
83. I welcome the progress made on the principal elements of the United Nations
action plan aimed at facilitating the conclusion of the protracted transition in Libya.
84. I am encouraged by the high turnout in the recently completed voter registration
update as a strong indication of a popular desire by the people of Libya to participate
in electoral processes. The United Nations remains committed to continuing to
support the electoral process. I reiterate the importance of creating a conducive
environment for the holding of elections, including by putting in place an appropriate
legal framework. In this regard, I urge the House of Representatives, in consultation
with the High Council of State, to finalize the necessary electoral legislation
expeditiously. I underline the importance of establishing a constitutional framework
in order to provide the necessary architecture for the elections, end parallel
institutions and establish a clear governance structure to end the transitional period.
14/16

18-06813

S/2018/429

85. I welcome the launch of the national conference process, with a multitude of
events hosted across Libya. These meetings are a vital catalyst to encourage Libyan
citizens to come forward and have their thoughts and opinions reflected in the public
sphere. These efforts are fundamental to the re-establishment of a unified national
polity. The meetings will prepare for a large national conference event later in the
year and contribute towards a conducive environment for elections.
86. I welcome the progress made in different community reconciliatio n initiatives
led by Libyan actors across the country. The reconciliation dialogue processes
contribute to strengthening national unity in Libya and knitting together its social
fabric. These Libyan-led efforts are crucial in alleviating tensions and averting further
conflict through dialogue about the root causes of the differences between
communities. The United Nations remains committed to providing support through
the Peacebuilding Fund project. I express my gratitude to the donors who enable such
support to continue.
87. I note positively the direct engagement between the House of Representatives
and the High Council of State to agree on a mechanism to form a new executive
authority. An inclusive and representative executive authority remains an importa nt
body for improving the daily conditions of the Libyan people, preparing for national
elections and encouraging participation and acceptance of the election results.
88. It remains essential that all members of the displaced communities be able to
return to their places of origin in a voluntary, safe and dignified manner. I commend
the efforts made by my Special Representative to address the process of return for the
Tawurgha’ community. The return of this community and all others displaced since
2011 should not be delayed any further. I stress the importance of Libyan ownership
of this issue and encourage the further efforts of the Government of National Accord
to proactively work to implement reconciliation initiatives capable of allowing the
return of the displaced.
89. Continued and active participation of Libyan women in key political and
reconciliation processes is an encouraging sign of the advancement of gender equality
and the participation of women in political life. I continue to urge all Libyan political,
social and economic actors to engage fully to ensure the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000).
90. I am encouraged by the significant decrease in civilian casualties sin ce the start
of the year; however, I remain concerned about the insecurity in areas across Libya.
I am dismayed at the repeated escalation of tensions and violence in and around the
city of Sabha in particular, which has resulted in the loss of life and di splacement of
thousands of civilians. I call on all parties to respect international law, cease all acts
of violence and commit to dialogue to address the root causes of grievances. While
there are also growing concerns about the alleged presence and activ ities of ISIL and
other terrorist groups in the south, I underline the urgent need to establish the rule of
law in the area to ensure the cessation of hostilities among the warring factions and
introduce more effective border control. I am also concerned b y the high-profile
kidnapping incidents, mainly in Tripoli, that occurred during the reporting period.
The widespread proliferation of arms in the country also needs to be addressed owing
to the threat they pose to law and order and to the extension of Sta te authority.
Reforming and unifying the military and security forces of Libya under civilian
leadership is critical for the country’s stabilization.
91. I note the important role of Libyan municipalities in delivering services at the
local level and welcome efforts to hold municipal elections during 2018. The United
Nations stands ready to provide further support as necessary to both endeavours.

18-06813

15/16

S/2018/429

92. I am concerned by the deteriorating humanitarian situation across parts of Libya.
I am grateful to Member States for their contributions to the Libya Stabilization Fund
and encourage further funding for the Libya Humanitarian Response Plan, which is
aimed at supporting 1.1 million people in need.
93. I remain concerned by the ongoing human rights violatio ns and abuses in
detention, and prolonged arbitrary detention without due process. Such violations
harm attempts to create a stable Libya that abides by the rule of law. Authorities must
prioritize the release of all men, women and children detained arbitr arily, provide
humane treatment and conditions for those detained lawfully and ensure that all are
afforded due process rights. Releasing those unlawfully detained would enhance
reconciliation efforts, while at the same time it would solve practical proble ms faced
by the penitentiary system. I also encourage Libyan authorities to fully cooperate with
the International Criminal Court, in accordance with Security Council resolution 1970
(2011), to help bring about justice and accountability for crimes under international
law in Libya.
94. I am deeply disturbed by the continuing reports of human trafficking in Libya.
I encourage the Libyan authorities to spare no effort to identify and prosecute those
responsible for such heinous crimes. I call on all actors to cooperate with and support
the efforts of the Libyan authorities to bring perpetrators to justice. The plight of
migrants and the abuses they suffer in Libya and as they attempt to cross the
Mediterranean continue to call for joint, concerted and urgent action. I am hopeful
that the recently established African Union, European Union and United Nations task
force will help to address the issue of migration in a comprehensive manner. I
commend recent efforts by countries of origin to address the plight of their citizens.
I also commend countries that have agreed to host migrants who are unable to return
to their countries of origin and are in need of asylum. Nevertheless, more needs to be
done and more resettlement spaces need to be made available for vulnerable refugees
and asylum seekers.
95. The unity of the international community in supporting a peaceful resolution to
the Libyan crisis remains critical. In the months ahead, there is an opportunity to be
seized of the best interests of the Libyan people. I therefore urge continued, positive
collaboration with the United Nations to end the country’s protracted transitional
period and work together to establish new unified institutions based on the principl es
of democracy and the rule of law. I wish to express my gratitude for the strong support
that Member States have shown to my Special Representative and to the important
role of regional organizations and our Quartet partners. I encourage them to ensure
that the United Nations is able to maintain the momentum generated over the past few
months.
96. I wish to reiterate my sincere appreciation to the Government of Nepal for
providing the personnel of the United Nations Guard Unit. I also wish to express my
gratitude to my Special Representative for Libya, Ghassan Salamé, and to the staff of
the United Nations system in Libya for their dedication and hard work in support of
a peaceful end to the transition in Libya and the establishment of stable and effectiv e
governance that responds to the legitimate aspirations of the Libyan people.

16/16

18-06813
