S/PV.7050

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7050th meeting

Monday, 28 October 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mammadyarov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Squeff
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Ms. Bouaida
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Strengthening the partnership synergy between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Letter dated 3 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/588)

13-53191 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1353191*

S/PV.7050

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

and I count on your leadership and commitment to
peace and security in the Council presidency.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Strengthening the partnership synergy between
the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation
Letter dated 3 October 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/588)
The President: I wish to welcome the SecretaryGeneral and other representatives participating in
today’s meeting. Their presence is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject to be addressed.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ekmeleddin
İhsanoğlu, Secretary-General of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/588, which contains a letter dated
3 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, containing a concept paper on the
item to be considered.
I now have the honour to give the floor to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Let me begin by
recognizing Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), and thanking him for his many years of
leadership and service. I congratulate his successor, the
incoming OIC Secretary-General, Mr. Iyad Madani,
who also joins us today. Last year, I was honoured to
be the first United Nations Secretary-General to visit
the OIC headquarters. I look forward to building on our
partnership in the years to come.
Mr. President, I really appreciate your taking the
time to preside this very important Council meeting,

2/22

28/10/2013

The challenges of peace and security are too complex
and interlinked for any country or organization to
address alone. To be successful, we must join forces and
craft joint strategies that draw on respective strengths.
The United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation are working closely on issues ranging from
conflict prevention and conflict resolution to counterterrorism, from human rights and humanitarian affairs
to intercultural dialogue and sustainable development.
I shall touch on a number of specific issues where our
work continues to be critical.
With regard to Syria, our ongoing cooperation
includes humanitarian and political efforts. The United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons are making progress in dismantling
and destroying Syria’s chemical weapons programme.
But we must spare no effort to reach a comprehensive
political agreement, one that reflects the will of the
Syrian people. The war has also heightened tensions
between Sunni and Shia communities. We have seen
tragic and violent manifestations of those divisions in
many parts of the Muslim world. That is profoundly
worrying. I believe the OIC could be uniquely placed
to launch a major initiative, working with the United
Nations and others to help bring an end to this upheaval
that has caused the loss of so many civilian lives and
represents such a threat to wider security. I urge the OIC
and all leaders to do everything possible to repair rifts
and rebuild confidence between Muslim communities,
as well as to stem the influence of radical armed groups
and violent extremists.
On the Middle East peace process, direct talks have
resumed, but Israelis and Palestinians must quickly see
visible peace dividends. The status quo in the occupied
Palestinian territory is not sustainable, and in the long
run, the occupation is deeply damaging to Israelis
and Palestinians alike. The OIC can help forge a way
forward within the agreed time frame.
As Myanmar continues on the path of reform,
a key challenge will be to address the underlying
factors of communal tensions, including the question
of citizenship for the Rohingya population. Myanmar
must act firmly against the dissemination of hate
literature, and instigators must be punished. I urge the
Government and other key opinion leaders to address
those fundamental issues. I am pleased that an OIC

13-53191

28/10/2013

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

delegation will soon visit Myanmar, and I welcome its
constructive engagement to reduce tensions.
In Afghanistan, efforts to enhance regional
cooperation and build trust are crucial at this time of
transition. I appreciate the efforts of the OIC, including
through its presence in Kabul and its support for an
Afghan-led reconciliation process.
In Mali, following the milestone presidential
election, the United Nations, the OIC and other partners
should work together to help Mali promote dialogue and
reconciliation, improve governance, undertake security
sector reform, re-establish State authority in the north
and protect human rights.
In the Sudan, I commend the OIC’s continued
efforts, especially those facilitated by the State of
Qatar, to bring peace to Darfur. I count on the ongoing
cooperation with the OIC to encourage the Government
of the Sudan to reach out to all stakeholders.
We must also continue to work for progress on
issues that extend beyond regional boundaries.
Terrorism is not associated with any particular
religion, culture or peoples. However, in recent years,
terrorist violence has disproportionately affected
countries that are members of OIC, from the Sahel
and North Africa to the Middle East and South Asia.
The OIC and its member States have been making
significant efforts to mitigate the terrorist threat,
particularly in countering incitement to commit
terrorist acts motivated by extremism and intolerance.
I stress the importance of addressing the conditions
conducive to the spread of extremism and terrorism,
including by strengthening efforts to resolve conflict
peacefully, promote the rule of law, protect human
rights and ensure good governance.
Intercultural dialogue between and within faiths is
more important than ever. Let us keep working together
to foster a culture of peace and co-existence, through
efforts such as the Alliance of Civilizations.
Looking ahead, the United Nations and the OIC
must continue to deepen their strategic dialogue. We
have made significant progress, including through
formal partnership agreements and joint workplans,
staff exchanges and joint mediation deployments. We
were also proud to assist the OIC in establishing its new
Peace, Security and Mediation Unit. Let us together
pledge to work from this foundation of progress to build
a better world for all.

S/PV.7050

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. İhsanoğlu.
Mr. İhsanoğlu (Organization of Islamic
Cooperation): At the outset, I would like to express
our thanks and appreciation to the Government of
Azerbaijan for taking the initiative of organizing
this unique and timely meeting. The fact that the
SecurityCouncil has accepted to convene today’s
debate on cooperation between Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the United Nations
shows the importance it rightly attaches to it. I should
also like to highlight the importance of the excellent
ideas contained in the concept paper prepared by the
delegation of Azerbaijan (S/2013/588), which further
develops that important issue. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate Azerbaijan for
its outstanding performance during its tenure as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council and in
the chair for this month.
I wish to express my gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his tireless efforts
in bringing increasing significance to the existing
relations and cooperation between the United Nations
and the OIC. I personally would like to thank him for
his kind words just now. We share his vision about the
strategic cooperation between the two organizations.
During my term in office as OIC SecretaryGeneral, I have established an important working
relationship with Mr Ban Ki Moon. We have discussed
on a regular basis many issues that also top the agenda
of the Security Council, such as the Middle East, Syria,
Somalia, Mali and Afghanistan.
In his recent statement before the OIC Annual
Coordination Meeting of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs on 27 September, on the sidelines of the general
debate of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General
requested that the OIC strengthen its partnership with
the United Nations in all areas of mutual concern and
interest. From our part, we attach great importance
to the relationship with the United Nations and stand
ready to develop an effective partnership with it to
promote peace, justice, human rights and development.
Based on our firm belief that the critical role
the international organizations play, we have made
tremendous efforts to build and sustain a network of
close cooperative relationships with the United Nations

13-531913/22

S/PV.7050

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and other international, regional and subregional
organizations in order to secure an inter-organizational
platform for the benefit of global peace, security and
economic development.
International peace and development are now
faced with many difficulties and challenges, and it
is imperative to respond to them collectively at the
national, regional and international levels. In a rapidly
changing world, strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and the OIC will both promote
multilateralism and boost the international collective
security mechanism.
Proceeding from its new vision and mission of
moderation and modernization, the OIC has continued
to play an important role in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts, promoting post-conflict
reconstruction,
defusing
humanitarian
crises,
combating terrorism and promoting socioeconomic
development in its member States as an important
contribution to global efforts in the promotion of
international peace and security. In that regard, the
OIC has expressed on many occasions that it stands
ready today to develop an effective partnership with
the United Nations to enhance cooperation in all fields
and to evolve early responses to disputes and emerging
crises.
As the second-largest political intergovernmental
organization, with 57 member States and five observers,
and with a mission to defend the interests and just causes
of its member States, the OIC, based on its charter, was
established on the noble principles of peace, harmony,
tolerance, brotherhood and the equality of all human
beings, as preached by Islam. The preamble of its charter
reaffirms the commitment of its member States to the
Charter of the United Nations. It has therefore, since
its establishment, set for itself as a primary task the
realization of the principles and purposes of the United
Nations, and it has striven to play a positive role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
perceptions of the member States of the organization,
all of which are also Members of the United Nations,
are identical to those of the vast majority of the United
Nations membership on important international issues.
The OIC charter stresses the importance of all
member States adhering to the principles of the
maintenance of international peace and security and
representing the national sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of other member States. An
OIC road map document, adopted in December 2005
4/22

28/10/2013

and entitled 10-year programme of action to meet the
challenges facing the Muslim Ummah in the twenty-first
century, which parallels the Millennium Development
Goals, is one that we consider to be a blueprint for
reform, promoting moderation and modernization
in the Muslim world. It calls for strengthening OIC
activities in conflict prevention, confidence-building,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and post-conflict
rehabilitation in cooperation with international and
regional organizations, the United Nations being the
first among them.
The OIC General Secretariat has made sustained
efforts to increase the role of the organization in the
maintenance of peace and security, conflict prevention
and conflict resolution. Under its programme and
agenda for reform, the Peace, Security and Mediation
Unit; a centre for the development of women; the
Independent Permanent Human Rights Commission;
and the International Cooperation and Humanitarian
Affairs Department have been established. Those
significant steps also indicate our understanding of
the importance of socioeconomic development, human
rights and humanitarian assistance in promoting peace
and security.
In that regard, the OIC has made valuable
contributions to the work of the United Nations in
the fields of conflict prevention, crisis management,
mediation, humanitarian assistance, the promotion
of human rights, the rule of law and sustainable
development through the many political, economic
and social instruments available to it. Accordingly, the
OIC has hosted at its headquarters in Jeddah a number
of international contact groups, such as those for
Afghanistan and Somalia, as well regional organizations,
mediation meetings and counter-terrorism workshops.
The United Nations-OIC general biannual consultation
meeting provides an excellent opportunity for both
organizations to identify all areas of cooperation with a
specific time frame for implementation.
We are also in the process of preparing a promising
joint action to support human development in Somalia.
The United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation
and the OIC General Secretariat are developing a project
for capacity in education, health care and sustainable
livelihoods in Somalia.
We look forward for more engagement with the
United Nations to enhance the capacity of the OIC on
the basis of its needs and strategic priorities to enable
it to act as an effective United Nations partner in
13-53191

28/10/2013

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

addressing the immediate and future challenges that
face the Muslim world. The United Nations-African
Union example of partnerships in the areas of peace,
security and development are good examples to be
followed in that regard.
Many of the issues on the agenda of the Security
Council relate to the Muslim world, and the OIC is
naturally seized of them. That fact demonstrates the
importance of having strong links of cooperation and
coordination between the OIC and the United Nations
in order to benefit from global and local approaches
to addressing those issues. At the same time, I would
like to emphasize the need of expediting the reform of
the Security Council by promoting its transparency,
accountability, adequate representation and full
democratization so as to enable it to play its full role in
the maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. Our
principled position is that any reform of the Security
Council must ensure adequate representation for OIC
member States in any category of membership, given
that our organization represents 57 member States and
1.6 billion people.
While a period of extraordinary challenges is still
evolving in the Middle East, a credible peace process
towards a two-State solution remains a core priority for
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. I would like
to reaffirm that the international community and this
organ in particular have a special responsibility to do
its utmost to solve the Palestinian question, according
to the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Israeli-Palestinian agreements
reached within the framework of the Middle East peace
process.
The OIC believes that the key to reaching a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
lies in ending the Israeli occupation that started in
1967 and by establishing an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State. Therefore, we believe that the
ongoing direct Palestinian-Israeli peace negotiations
provide a valuable window of opportunity that should
not be missed. Creating conditions conducive to peace
also requires that all illegal and harmful acts, including
the construction of settlements, should be immediately
stopped.
At the same time, we remain committed to
assisting the Palestinian people in improving their
socioeconomic life. Therefore, the OIC is ready to build

S/PV.7050

a constructive partnership with the United Nations to
improve the socioeconomic life of the Palestinians in
the Palestinian territories, including occupied East
Jerusalem. The development agencies of both the OIC
and the United Nations can cooperate in creating a
better life for the Palestinians.
The OIC remains deeply concerned by the ongoing
conflict in Syria. We welcome all efforts aimed at
convening the “Geneva II” conference. However, we
believe that the Security Council needs to assume its
responsibility to do its utmost to protect the Syrian
people and to find a peaceful solution to the Syrian
conflict through political dialogue.
We are also concerned by Armenia’s continued
occupation of the Azerbaijani territories of Nagorno
Karabakh, and we call for a resolution of that conflict
based on respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and inviolability of the internationally
recognized borders of the Republic of Azerbaijan, in
line with Security Council resolutions in that regard.
Non-implementation of the Council’s resolutions
undermines its authority and people’s belief in justice
and in the possibility of peaceful political settlement.
While I commend the leading role played by the
United Nations and other partners in the restoration of
peace to two troubled OIC member States, Somalia and
Mali, we must continue to build on that partnership in
order to achieve durable stability in those two African
countries.
On the humanitarian front, the OIC and United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs conducted a joint needs assessment mission
in Syria in 2012 that resulted in a comprehensive
humanitarian response plan. Likewise, a similar
mission in the Sahel was conducted by our two
organizations, which visited the Niger, Burkina Faso
and Mali. Another joint mission was visited Mindanao
and the Philippines. Furthermore, several appeals have
been launched and some OIC member States have come
forward to alleviate the suffering of the vulnerable
and needy people in Mali. Our cooperation is also
continuing in Somalia. We have done our best to help
meet the humanitarian needs in Myanmar by facilitating
the provision of assistance from OIC member States
and civil society. We will discuss the matter with the
authorities of Myanmar during the expected visit of
myself and a group of Ministers of Foreign Affairs
from the OIC member States to the country next month.

13-531915/22

S/PV.7050

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Under the mandate of its Charter, the OIC aims
to play a constructive role in helping non-member
countries with Muslim minorities to resolve any issues
with those minorities in order to strengthen their role
as bridges of friendship between their nations and the
Muslim world, in full respect for the national unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the countries
hosting those minorities.
Polio eradication in affected OIC member States
continues to be a critical challenge for the OIC. We
are engaged in close cooperation with the World
Health Organization and the Global Polio Eradication
Initiative, as well as with the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, in a wide campaign to eradicate polio in
our affected countries. We are involved in advocacy
and in mobilizing high-level political support for polio
vaccination programmes. We believe that more work
needs to be done before we are able to claim total polio
free-status in the OIC region. In that regard, we are
concerned by the recent spread of polio in the Horn of
Africa.
Due to the increase in the number of humanitarian
disasters in OIC member States, the OIC General
Secretariat has felt that there is a vital ned to establish
an OIC humanitarian emergency response fund in order
to promote collective humanitarian relief to the most
vulnerable segments of our populations whenever a
disaster strikes one of our member States.
One of the most daunting challenges facing the
international community is the radicalization of
communities based on religious faith and belief. The
religious and intercommunal hatred propagated by
some motivated and extremist individuals encourages
marginalization, negative stereotyping and racial
discrimination, posing a serious threat to global peace
and security. The OIC has been vigilant in exposing the
dangerous agenda of extremist elements and in raising
global awareness to combat religious intolerance,
stigmatization and negative stereotyping.
I would also like to emphasize the importance of the
political engagement and support of world leaders for
dialogue, mutual recognition, respect and cooperation
among the representatives of cultures, civilizations and
religions, as this issue has recently acquired greater
significance due to its implications for international
peace and security. The consensual passage of Human
Rights Council resolution 16/18 on combating religious
intolerance, which codified the eight points I identified
in my address to the fifteenth session of the Human
6/22

28/10/2013

Rights Council, has been widely acknowledged as a
positive development and a triumph of multilateralism.
I would like to assure the Council that the OIC
will continue to work with its member States and the
international community as a whole to combat the
radicalization that leads to violent extremism and
terrorism. We believe that confronting that menace
requires political will and commitment on the part not
only of Governments but all segments of society.
The OIC has also been focusing on key development
issues, including the empowerment of women, children,
youth and civil society, in order to benefit from their
roles and contributions in the search for local remedies
to the challenges of conflict, underdevelopment and
radicalization. We also encourage all initiatives that
promote the positive contribution of religious and
traditional leaders to meeting those challenges.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the OIC
is strongly committed to an active partnership with
the United Nations in promoting peace, security and
development. We have achieved a great deal together,
but I believe that more work remains to be done. With
the Council’s support, both organizations can make our
world a much better place.
The President: I thank Mr. İhsanoğlu for his very
informative briefing.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2013/16.
I will now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan.
Today, the Security Council is considering for
the first time the question of cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) in a special meeting. That fact
speaks for itself. The OIC is not only the organization
that represents all Muslim nations; it is the secondlargest intergovernmental organization after the United
Nations, with 57 member States and five observers
from four continents. The beginning of cooperation
between the United Nations and the OIC goes back to

13-53191

28/10/2013

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

1975, when the General Assembly adopted resolution
3369 (XXX). Since then, the OIC has proved to be an
important partner of the United Nations in promoting
peace and security and fostering a culture of peace at
the global level.
Many of the issues on the Security Council’s agenda
relate to the Islamic world, and the OIC is naturally
seized of them. This fact necessitates closer cooperation
and coordination between the Security Council and the
OIC in order to benefit from global, regional and local
approaches in addressing those issues.
A just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East and the comprehensive resolution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict remain among the most pressing
issues on the agenda of both the United Nations and
the OIC. Azerbaijan welcomes efforts aimed at the
resumption of direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine. It is imperative that the parties demonstrate
a sense of responsibility in sustaining international
efforts towards achieving the two-State solution and
avoid actions that would undermine this objective, with
the ultimate goal of restoring and enhancing peace,
security and sustainable development in the entire
region.
In June, Azerbaijan hosted the Conference of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation on the establishment of an Islamic
financial safety net in support of Palestine and a donors
conference in support of the city of Al-Quds. The
OIC member States and international organizations
that attended the conferences pledged to contribute to
improving Palestine’s economy, infrastructure, health
care and education.
With regard to Syria, we hope that the unanimous
and strong position demonstrated recently by the
Security Council will contribute to finding a political
solution to the conflict in that country, putting an end
to the suffering of the Syrian people and ensuring
compliance by the parties concerned with their
obligations and commitments under international law.
Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council is conferred with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Therefore, as a matter of priority,
apart from the Council’s credibility and effectiveness,
special attention should be given to the implementation
of its resolutions, in particular those related to the
prevention and settlement of conflicts.

S/PV.7050

Twenty years ago, in 1993, the Security Council
adopted four resolutions in response to the use of
force against Azerbaijan and the occupation and
ethnic cleansing of about 20 per cent of Azerbaijan’s
internationally recognized territory by neighbouring
Armenia, which resulted in the emergence of almost
1 million refugees and internally displaced persons.
This means that every ninth person among the 9 million
Azerbaijanis is either a refugee or a displaced person.
These resolutions — 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874
(1993) and 884 (1993) — reaffirmed respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan
and the inviolability of its international borders, and
demanded the immediate, full and unconditional
withdrawal of the occupying forces from all the
occupied territories. Unfortunately, key Security
Council demands have still not been implemented, and
the mediation efforts conducted for more than 20 years
within the framework of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe have yet to yield results.
Since the eruption of the conflict, the OIC, on the
basis of the aforementioned resolutions of the Security
Council, has explicitly determined the actions of
Armenia on the territory of Azerbaijan as aggression.
A series of OIC decisions aimed at the implementation
of Security Council resolutions have been instrumental
in the occupation of the territories of Azerbaijan being
addressed by the international community, including in
particular within the Security Council and the General
Assembly.
Armenia’s annexationist policy has absolutely no
chance of success. Nagorno Karabakh is a historical,
inalienable and integral part of Azerbaijan. The only way
to achieve a settlement of the conflict and to establish
civilized relations between the two neighbouring States
is for Armenia to de-occupy the Azerbaijani territories,
fully re-establish the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Azerbaijan, and immediately provide for
compliance with the inalienable right of refugees and
internally displaced persons to return to their homes. It
is therefore important that in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/16, adopted today, the Security Council
emphasizes the common objectives shared by the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
in fostering solutions to conflicts in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
Here, there is a need to emphasize the fundamental
contribution that the Islamic culture has made to global

13-531917/22

S/PV.7050

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

civilization, world science and education. Islam is the
religion of moderation, and by its very name, which
means “peace”, it advocates and implies tolerance and
respect for other religions and faiths. Misperceptions
about Islam and Muslims have become the most
persistent and virulent sources of the phenomenon of
Islamophobia, resulting in prejudicial practices and
incitement against Muslims without distinction.
Attempts to create a conceptual link between Islam
and terror are unacceptable. The war on terrorism
should not be used to target or label any particular
religion or culture. The current state of affairs confirms
a vital need for joint efforts and dialogue to counter
instances of defamation and misconceptions. It is
therefore critical to persistently stress the importance
of respect and understanding for religious and
cultural diversity throughout the world. The common
commitment of both the United Nations and the OIC to
foster a global dialogue for the promotion of tolerance
and peace and their enhanced cooperation to that end
are indispensable for promoting better understanding
across countries, cultures and civilizations.
The problems that the world is facing today are
so numerous and compound that peace and security
have become not only a military concept, but also an
economic, social, development and multicultural one.
In December, Azerbaijan will complete its
membership of the Security Council. It has been two
years of outstanding experience and great collective
work. I assure all Council members that Azerbaijan will
further remain a reliable partner and genuine friend.
I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floors to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Bouaida (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank the delegation of Azerbaijan for
having organized this debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC). We thank Secretaries-General Ban
Ki-moon and Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu for their effective
action in strengthening and giving renewed momentum
to cooperation between their two organizations.
I also welcome Mr. Iyad bin Amin Madani, who
will shortly become the new Secretary-General of the
OIC.

8/22

28/10/2013

Morocco is proud of having been the country
chosen to host the headquarters of the OIC when it
was established 44 years ago. Since then, Morocco
has worked tirelessly to strengthen the organization
and to ensure that it became a tool for cooperation and
dialogue that would strengthen the synergy of Islamic
cooperation. We are gratified to see cooperation
between our two organizations, pursuant to Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, and the
coordination of their activities in addressing common
threats and challenges.
We welcome the fact that the two organizations
are implementing the commitments determined and
defined at the OIC-United Nations general meeting held
in Geneva from 1 to 3 May 2012. Both organizations are
working to strengthen peace and security in Somalia,
Afghanistan and the Sudan. The OIC maintains offices
in Mogadishu and Kabul in support of the work of the
United Nations. We also support the dialogue between
the Government of the Sudan and the rebel movements
in Darfur.
In the humanitarian sphere, and in the light of the
problems in the Sahel, a joint mission of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and our organization is working to ease the
suffering of the people of the region, especially in Mali.
We support such cooperation, which must continue
in order to assist Mali during the transition and
reconstruction period launched following the elections
and the restoration of peace and security in the country.
The vision of His Majesty King Mohammed VI,
following the inauguration of His Excellency President
Keita, aims at strengthening peace and security and
Mali’s territorial integrity and is a reflection of the
King’s wish to strengthen peace and security. Following
orders given by His Highness, a local hospital was set
up and 500 imams were sent from Morocco, in line with
the fraternal relations of mutual assistance that have
always existed between our two people.
Palestine is of critical importance to the OIC.
It is the very raison d’être for the establishment of
the organization. The OIC has always supported the
cause of the Palestinian people in various ways. In
that regard, cooperation is essential and of primary
importance in the different areas in which we work,
including the mechanisms for cooperation between
the two organizations, both aimed at a lasting, fair and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian issue.

13-53191

28/10/2013

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I welcome the efforts of the Administration of the
United States, especially of Secretary of State Kerry,
aimed at resuming direct negotiations. We hope those
negotiations will lead to a two-State solution, with the
Palestinians creating an independent State with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
Within the framework of those efforts, the OIC
has continued its assistance to the Palestinian people,
including through the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
the assistance provided for new construction in Gaza
through the Al-Quds Committee, chaired by His
Highness King Mohammed VI, as part of concrete
efforts carried out with Al-Quds funds.
We cherish the hope of seeing a common partnership
between our two organizations, based on a long-term
perspective of strategic cooperation that takes into
account all the needs of our two Organizations and the
complementarity between them. The OIC also needs
support to ensure that we are in a position to act in
areas where we have easier access than others. That
should take place in a similar manner to its cooperation
with other regional organizations. It should be done to
expand the field of cooperation, and therefore achieve a
greater level of cooperation through annual discussions
and debates.
We urge both organizations to strengthen dialogue
among civilizations and to act with respect for cultural
and religious diversity. International peace and
security hinge on such respect, which helps to prevent
conflicts, extremism, religious hatred and other types
of discrimination. The Kingdom of Morocco, which
is wedded to that concept of dialogue, stands ready
to support such cooperation among all peoples of the
planet and to work against narrow-minded ideas in a
firm and clear way.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate and thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. We
are particularly pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over
this informative meeting and I take this opportunity to
acknowledge the leadership of your country at the head
of the Security Council.
I want to also extend my appreciation to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and to the Secretary-General
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC),
Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, for their briefings. They
have both provided important contributions in assessing

S/PV.7050

the ongoing cooperation between the two organizations
and how to continue strengthening it.
Finally, we recognize the presence of the SecretaryGeneral-elect of the OIC, Mr. Iyad Madani, and the
Minister Delegate for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of the Kingdom of Morocco, Ms. M’Barka Bouaida.
The role of regional organizations is key today in an
international system that has evolved since the creation
of the United Nations from an Organization comprising
51 countries to one with 193 countries. It is therefore
not surprising that the weight of and the differences
between different regional realities are reflected
in the creation and increasing participation of new
organizations. In that sense, the focus on integration
is an effective way to build regional consensus in this
globalized world.
On 6 August, during the Argentina’s presidency
of the Security Council, we addressed the issue of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security (see S/PV.7015). We agreed to ask
the Secretary-General to include recommendations
on ways to strengthen such cooperation in his next
biennial report to the Security Council and the General
Assembly.
That opportunity allowed us to share recent
developments in different regions of the world. In
the context of Latin America and the Caribbean, the
pro tempore Chair of the Union of South American
Nations clearly illustrated the constructive willingness
of South American societies, which is reflected in the
primary role that the young organization assumed in
successfully carrying out various mediation exercises,
enabling the peaceful resolution of disputes that have
arisen between our peoples as a result of circumstance.
We were also able to hear the President pro tempore
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States expound upon his work to reach a solution to one
of the most serious bilateral crises in recent years in
Latin America and the Caribbean.
It became clear that each regional or subregional
organization had its own level of development and
reflected different realities and needs. We therefore
consider it important that the United Nations establish
the forms and extent of cooperation with each of those
regional organizations in accordance with that diversity.
In that regard, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, which has members on four continents, is

13-531919/22

S/PV.7050

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

destined to have a major role in the peaceful settlement
of disputes. That is clear in the developments in recent
years with regard to peace and safety, as reflected
in the 10-year programme of action through 2015
adopted by the Extraordinary Session of the Islamic
Summit Conference in 2005 and the new Charter
of the organization in 2008. It is also clear that the
organization of Islamic Cooperation can play a role
as facilitator in promoting the peace process in the
Middle East, so that the parties and the countries of
the region can reach the ultimate goal of establishing
a just and lasting peace — the goal long sought by the
international community.
Therefore, as expressed in resolution 67/264,
adopted by consensus in the General Assembly and by
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, we strongly
support the continuing cooperation between those bodies
with the common goal of seeking solutions to global
problems. This includes areas such as disarmament,
self-determination, the promotion of a culture of peace
through dialogue and cooperation, decolonization,
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the fight
against international terrorism, capacity-building,
the fight against pandemics and endemic diseases,
environmental protection, climate change, emergency
relief and rehabilitation, and technical cooperation.
The President of my country, Mrs. Cristina
Fernández de Kirchner, stated at that same meeting
of 6 August that peace and security are not simply a
military concept. There are many examples throughout
the history of humankind that assure us that what really
builds societies and builds stability are the values and
ideals that a society and its millions of global partners
uphold. We understand that these values are shared by
all. Therefore, strengthening the cooperation between
the United Nations and the other entities of the United
Nations system and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and its organs and institutions contributes
to promoting the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. Therefore we call on the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation to strengthen
the cooperative ties and channels between them and
with other regional organizations.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I wish to start by
thanking His Excellency Mr. Elmar Maharram oglu
Mammadyarov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Azerbaijan and President of the Security Council today,
for the initiative to hold this debate. I congratulate him
for the presidential statement that was just adopted

10/22

28/10/2013

(S/PRST/2013/16). I would like to also thank His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Secretary-General,
and His Excellency Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, the
Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), for their respective presentations.
As previously stated in the Council, debates
of this nature present opportunities to reflect on
ways of reinforcing cooperation in areas of common
interest between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in relation to the maintenance
of international peace and security. In accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
the United Nations has recognized the need to work
together with regional organizations for reasons such as
geographic proximity, expediency and burden-sharing.
It is now a fact that partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations have been leading to positive
outcomes in the maintenance of peace and security,
given the advantage of local knowledge, proximity
and the capability to mobilize and respond quickly. We
believe that the OIC should also be understood in this
context.
At its thirty-eighth ministerial meeting, held in
Astana in July 2011, the OIC — which, I recall, is a
viable organization with 57 member States, representing
1.6 billion Muslims around the world — reflected on
its intention to engage more seriously with the growing
number of international stakeholders, including in its
growing role in conflict prevention and the promotion
of dialogue and tolerance.
The OIC has a track record of mediation and
peacekeeping in conflict zones. We recognize its
efforts, in partnership with the United Nations and
other regional and subregional organizations, to
restore peace and security in Somalia, Afghanistan,
the Sudan and the Middle East. We also commend its
member States that are already contributing troops to
peacekeeping missions in Africa and around the world
and recall that half of the ten top United Nations troopand police-contributing countries are members of the
OIC.
Despite those significant developments, however,
and as is the case with most other regional organizations,
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
OIC has yet to reach its full potential. That cooperation
should therefore be substantially streamlined, mainly
in the areas of mediating and resolving international
conflicts. We believe that the OIC can do more.
Indeed, building partnerships with other international
13-53191

28/10/2013

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

organizations such as the African Union, the European
Union, the League of Arab States or the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and reforming its process
through capacity-building and other means will
improve its ability to contribute to the resolution of
the seemingly intractable conflicts that are affecting
the Middle East, including the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, as well as to the fight against terrorism and
the promotion of intercultural and religious dialogue
around the world.
We believe that the OIC has special expertise
with which it can tackle the cultural components that
have always been driving factors of conflict in its
member States. Those cultural and linguistic skills
are invaluable in conducting knowledge-based and
culturally sensitive mediation. The OIC’s cultural
competency gives it access to specific conflict zones
that would have otherwise remained unreachable to
other organizations, including the United Nations.
For instance, in Somalia, due to its rigorous
understanding of local Somali culture, the OIC was
allowed by Al-Shabaab to intervene in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in their areas of control. That
comparative advantage could be used in other complex
situations, including in Syria. It is therefore important
that the United Nations maintain this partnership with
the OIC, not only to strengthen cooperation in areas
of mutual interest, but also to keep open channels of
communication in difficult areas where the United
Nations and other, regional organizations do not enjoy
full access.
Of the 57 OIC member States, 27 are members of
the African Union, 22 are members of the League of
Arab States and 7 are members of both the African
Union and the League of Arab States. That is why we
make the call for the OIC to partner with other regional
organizations in order to enhance coordination and
avoid duplication of efforts. It is only through synergies
between all those organizations that the OIC will have
greater potential to achieve success in the maintenance
of peace and security in our regions.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having taken the initiative to convene, during
Azerbaijan’s presidency of the Security Council, this
first informational meeting on the partnership between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC). I also thank the Secretary-General

S/PV.7050

of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the
OIC, Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, for their statements,
which have so well illustrated the links that are
developing between the United Nations and the OIC. I
also welcome the presence among us of the SecretaryGeneral-elect of the OIC, Mr. Madani.
Luxembourg recognizes the contribution of the OIC
and its member States to the activities and objectives
of the United Nations. Regional and subregional
organizations have an important role to play in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts,
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Strengthening the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations is
thus not only desirable, but also necessary. The meeting
held in Geneva in May 2012 between the secretariats
of the United Nations and the OIC showed the great
potential that exists for cooperation in many areas of
common interest, including conflict prevention and
mediation, human rights, humanitarian assistance,
intercultural dialogue and the fight against terrorism.
It is undeniable that the activities of the OIC and its
members in support the goals of the United Nations are
crucial in many crisis areas around the world, whether
in Afghanistan, the Sahel, Somalia, Syria or in Yemen.
In the field of preventive diplomacy, we encourage
the OIC to continue and step up its practical cooperation
with the United Nations, especially in supporting
Department of Political Affairs mediation teams.
In the area of conflict resolution, it is important
for the OIC and its member States to remain fully
committed to promoting a just, comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
while direct negotiations between the parties aimed
at reaching the two-State solution were resumed this
summer under the decisive leadership of the United
States.
In the area of post-conflict peacebuilding, the
contribution of the OIC and its member States is also
appreciated, especially as religious authorities often
play a leading role in national reconciliation. I have
experienced that first-hand in my capacity as Chair
of the Guinea configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Following my field visits and exchanges
of views with religious leaders in the country, I am
convinced that cooperation between the United Nations
and the OIC could only benefit peacebuilding and
national reconciliation in Guinea. Moreover, we note

13-5319111/22

S/PV.7050

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

with interest the intention of the Republic of Guinea to
host the fortieth session of the OIC Council of Foreign
Ministers, from 9 to 11 December in Conakry.
Finally, in the field of humanitarian assistance,
we welcome the cooperation that has been developed
in recent years between the OIC and the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. The OIC and its member States show their
solidarity by providing assistance to the Palestinian
and Somali peoples. They are also coming to the aid
of war-affected populations in Syria and, by extension,
in the neighbouring countries of Lebanon, Jordan,
Turkey and Iraq. Last Friday, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. Valerie Amos, asked the Security
Council to put the greatest possible pressure on the
parties to the conflict in Syria to promptly facilitate
free and unhindered humanitarian access to those
populations affected, especially to the civilians trapped
for months in besieged towns in Syria (see S/PV.7049).
As winter approaches, all parties, especially the Syrian
authorities, must give effect to the provisions of the
presidential statement adopted by the Security Council
on 2 October (S/PRST/2013/15). In that context, we count
on the active support of OIC and its member States. In
parallel, we must work together to achieve a political
solution in Syria through a political transition based on
the full implementation of the Geneva communiqué of
30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).
In conclusion, I would like to thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for having prepared the
presidential statement adopted today (PRST/2013/16).
We look forward to receiving the recommendations of
the Secretary-General in his next report with regard
to strengthening the cooperation between the United
Nations and the OIC in the interest of maintaining
international peace and security.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for having convened this debate, for your presence
here today and for Azerbaijan’s strong leadership of the
Council this month.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. I also
thank Mr. İhsanoğlu and welcome him to the Council,
not for the first time, but as the first Secretary-General
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) to
brief us under this important agenda item. The OIC
makes a valued contribution to fostering international
peace and security, as its own Charter mandates.
Today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/16)
12/22

28/10/2013

rightly encourages the benefits of deeper cooperation
between the Council and the OIC.
Australia recognizes the OIC’s particular role in
adopting with the Organization last year a cooperation
agreement to underpin our own closer engagement,
including on political and humanitarian issues. As we
know, the partnership between the United Nations and
international and regional organizations is a crucial
instrument in our collective efforts to maintain peace
and security, and, as Mr. İhsanoğlu notes, many of the
issues on the Council’s agenda relate to the Muslim
world.
The OIC has unique strengths and distinct
comparative advantages in different regions, born of
its deep knowledge of context, cultural understanding
and moral authority. The United Nations can and should
draw upon those to help shape responses to threats to
peace and security. We see those strengths manifestly
through the very substantial contribution of OIC member
States to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
It is also evident in the OIC’s invaluable mediation
efforts in Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, the Philippines
and Thailand. The OIC’s newly established peace,
security and mediation unit offers new opportunities
for cooperation on the peaceful settlement of disputes,
the prevention of relapse into conflict and on conflictresolution initiatives, which we should fully embrace.
We acknowledge and welcome the OIC’s growing
role in responding to humanitarian crises, from drought
in the Horn of Africa to floods in South Asia. The
OIC’s humanitarian work is also demonstrated by its
rehabilitation programmes in the Palestinian territories
and reconstruction efforts in Darfur. In Somalia
and Yemen, the OIC has negotiated better access for
humanitarian actors. We also welcome the forthcoming
visit by the OIC to Myanmar to examine ways to help
meet humanitarian needs and Muslim community
needs there.
The joint needs assessment conducted by the OIC
and Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) in Syria, which culminated in a
comprehensive humanitarian response plan, was
important, and Australia was pleased to support
OCHA’s provision of technical training to the
OIC’s department of humanitarian affairs and its
non-governmental organization partners to participate
in coordinated international humanitarian efforts.
I note Mr. İhsanoğlu’s comment this morning on the
OIC’s concerted campaign against polio and I have to
13-53191

28/10/2013

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.7050

note that polio has now resurfaced in Syria for the first
time in 14 years.

thank the Secretary-General and the Security Council
for reaching out to the OIC to forge strong partnerships.

My own country shares the OIC’s deep concern
about the conflict in Syria, which has precipitated
an enormous humanitarian crisis and is destabilizing
neighbouring countries in the Middle East region. We
agree that the Council could and should do more to
protect civilians caught up in the fighting and to ensure
humanitarian access and assistance.

We pay tribute to Mr. İhsanoğlu who, on his watch,
has moved the OIC to a higher plane of performance
and engagement. He has made the OIC a mainstream
international organization focusing on issues of peace
and security, human rights, economic development,
education and scientific and technological exchange.

Australia fully supports the OIC’s call for an
immediate cessation of violence and a process of
peaceful transition through the “Geneva II” process.
We also agree with the OIC that the current peace
negotiations between the Palestinians and Israel are an
opportunity to achieve the two-State solution that we
must not miss.
Australia welcomes the OIC’s efforts along with
the United Nations to foster a global dialogue for the
promotion of tolerance and peace, and we were pleased
to sponsor the OIC-supported General Assembly
resolution 67/178, on combatting intolerance due
to religion or belief. We strongly support enhanced
cooperation to improve understanding across countries
and cultures, as evidenced by Australia’s role in
co-chairing over the past decade the regional interfaith
dialogue in Southeast Asia with our close partner and
OIC member Indonesia.
We look forward to examining the practical
recommendations to enhance cooperation between the
United Nations and the OIC in the next report of the
Secretary-General. Our focus should be in areas where
the United Nations and the OIC share common objectives
and complementarities: mediation, conflict-prevention
and -resolution and post-conflict rehabilitation.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
incoming Secretary-General, Mr. Madani, and to pay
tribute in particular to Mr. İhsanoğlu for his vision
in leading the OIC over the past nine years and for
enhancing the partnership with the United Nations. He
leaves behind an important legacy for us to build on.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We are pleased
to see you preside over this meeting, Sir. Pakistan
appreciates Azerbaijan’s initiative to hold this debate
on ways to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC). We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
OIC Secretary-General Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu for their
participation and briefings today. I would also like to

With 57 Member States in Asia, Africa, Europe
and Latin America with a combined population
of 1.6 billion, the OIC is the second-largest
intergovernmental organization after the United
Nations. Most significantly, the 2008 OIC Charter
enshrines the purposes of international peace and
security and understanding and dialogue among
civilizations, cultures and religions. Because of the vast
geographical expanse of the OIC, which straddles many
regions and subregions, it is only natural that the OIC
and the United Nations should collaborate closely for
the realization of the purposes and principles set forth
in the United Nations Charter. Both organizations have
cooperated productively to advance their shared agenda
on preventive diplomacy, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, human rights, humanitarian assistance
and refugees, counterterrorism and promotion of
tolerance, peace and intercultural dialogue.
The OIC itself is a natural partner and interlocutor
for the United Nations and the Security Council.
It works closely with the League of Arab States, the
Gulf Cooperation Council, the Economic Cooperation
Organization and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, all of which are partners of the United Nations.
It networks successfully with the African Union, the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe on a host of issues, including
conflict resolution, human rights and mediation.
Many issues on the Council’s agenda relate to the
States members of the OIC. Millions in OIC countries
continue to live in conflict and post-conflict situations
or under foreign occupation and alien domination.
Those conflicts and injustices pose a grave threat
to international peace and security and impede
socioeconomic development in affected countries and
regions.
The OIC has lent a helping hand by contributing
to the various mediation, humanitarian, peacebuilding
and reconstruction efforts in the Sudan, Somalia, Sierra
Leone and Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is working with

13-5319113/22

S/PV.7050

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the United Nations for the promotion of sustainable
peace and stability in Afghanistan, Iraq, Myanmar,
Libya, Somalia and Mali.
We thank the OIC for adopting year after year
resolutions on the realization of the right to selfdetermination of the people of Jammu and Kashmir.
It has established a contact group on Jammu and
Kashmir, appointed a special representative and called
for a ceasefire along the line of control.
The countries of the OIC, including Pakistan,
constitute the bulk and backbone of the United Nations
peacekeeping endeavour. In future, the Security
Council and the OIC need to work energetically and
cohesively on six issues.
First, the threat of terrorism has manifoldly
increased. It has now become much more amorphous
and lethal. We agree with the Secretary-General that no
culture or religion should be associated with terrorism
or extremism. Terrorism is now inspired and driven by
primeval brutality and extremism. It is an existential
threat to our zeitgeist. The OIC and the United
Nations can work to eliminate the menace through a
combination of deterrence, dialogue and development.
It is equally important to address root causes and
alleviate deprivation and exclusion.
Secondly, In collaboration with the United Nations
and the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, the
OIC should explore political tools, legal means and
cultural metaphors to address the tension between
incitement to hatred and violence and freedom of
thought and expression. We all need a harmonious
world, for us and for future generations.
Thirdly, a just, comprehensive and durable peace
in the Middle East is at the heart of the OIC-United
Nations agenda. There is a deep sense of disappointment
among the OIC countries and others at the inability of
the Security Council to implement its own resolutions
that have been crafted to provide the framework for
a lasting solution in the Middle East. Now that there
is renewed engagement between Palestine and Israel
for a two-State solution, the OIC should use its clout
and standing to help the Quartet and the United States
resolve that long-standing issue. If the issue of Palestine
gets resolved, we will all be living in a different, better
world.
Fourthly, within the OIC, there are influential
countries that can use their proven leverage to prod and
persuade the Syrian Government and the opposition
14/22

28/10/2013

to move to the negotiating table in Geneva to find a
diplomatic formula for national reconciliation and
transition that is acceptable to the Syrian people. In
fact, a formula already exists; the Geneva communiqué
of 30 June 2012 has all the essential ingredients for a
solution.
Fifthly, the Secretary-General and the Security
Council should involve the OIC more closely in the
Sahel region and the Horn of Africa on the issues
of asymmetric warfare and terrorism. The OIC’s
competencies for mediation can help in moving those
regions towards conflict resolution and political
stabilization.
Sixthly, there should be a closer interface between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation on social, economic, human rights and
environmental issues. In the coming years, as the United
Nations fashions its post-2015 development agenda,
it should work with the OIC and, through it, with its
members, for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals and the implementation of the
sustainable development goals as soon as they are
designed.
We are confident that the incoming SecretaryGeneral of the OIC, Mr. Iyad Madani, whom we
welcome here today, will build on the excellent work
done over the years by Secretary-General Ihsanoglu.
Finally, I would like to say to the wider audience
that the OIC as an organization has come of age. Its
importance should not be underrated.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, we thank you for convening today’s
ministerial briefing to discuss cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), as well as the concept paper
circulated by your delegation (S/2013/588). We also
appreciate your presence among us here today, Sir.
Allow me to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement, in which he gave us a broad vision of the
cooperation established between the two organizations.
Similarly, we express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation for
the information presented to us on the affinities of the
work of that organization and of the Security Council
in the general area of conflict prevention, including
mediation. We congratulate him on his constructive
management at the head of the organization.

13-53191

28/10/2013

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We come from a country and a subregion that
greatly value intraregional cooperation. Our delegation
has therefore always supported the Security Council
partnerships cited in Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. The core of such partnerships is
founded on the comparative advantages that each
party brings to the arrangement. The Security Council
represents the highest level of multilateral diplomacy
working to ensure international peace and security. The
regional and subregional organizations, for their part,
are more intimately acquainted with the countries they
are made up of, which makes them strategic partners in
conflict prevention.
The peculiarity of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation is that it is not a regional organization,
since its ranks include countries from various parts
of the world whose common bond lies in a vision and
values that are shared among its partners. It has already
accumulated valuable experience in cooperating
since 1969 with the United Nations throughout our
Organization’s various incarnations as an institution,
chiefly through the General Assembly and the Security
Council, as well as in the area of humanitarian
assistance.
We commend its performance in recent years and
at various levels in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and combating terrorism.
Its active participation in situations such as those in
Somalia, Afghanistan, Mali, Myanmar and Darfur
are proof of its invaluable work in pursuit of peace
as a noble ideal, sharing the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. We trust that those efforts can
also contribute to finding a solution to the conflicts in
the Middle East, which is the founding reason for the
existence of this Organization.
We believe there is always room to improve the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, so that regardless
of differences of opinion, the spirit whereby this
mechanism was included in the Charter of the United
Nations is not lost. In that context, we feel it is
important to remember that when it comes to conflict
prevention, we should prioritize partnerships with
those regional and subregional organizations that can
rely on a mandate for the maintenance of international
peace and security and that can be identified as crucial
stakeholders in conflict resolution. There is no doubt
that the Organization of Islamic Cooperation falls into
that category.

S/PV.7050

Finally, from our national perspective as a
multicultural nation, we recognize the valuable and
pertinent role that the OIC has played in helping to
promote respect and intercultural dialogue, within the
framework of the Alliance of Civilizations of the United
Nations, in order to combat religious intolerance. Its
worthy contribution is in step with respect for human
rights, which is a high priority of our own foreign
policy.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your presence here today and for
bringing us together on such a timely topic. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his thoughtful
remarks.
It is a particular pleasure to have SecretaryGeneral İhsanoğlu join us. I commend his pioneering
leadership, including the 10-year programme of action
that has modernized the activities of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), bringing them from
primarily political and economic issues to those
concerning human rights, science and innovation. I am
also pleased to greet Secretary-General-elect Madani
and congratulate him on his election.
It is entirely fitting that the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the world’s two
largest intergovernmental organizations, should consult
often and work together whenever possible. The United
States values the many contributions the OIC is making
on matters of global importance, and appreciates
the chance to discuss the prospects for even deeper
cooperation. I note at the outset that OIC members are
among the top troop-contributing countries to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and that they are
playing a critical part in promoting international peace
and security in many areas of conflict.
The OIC also provides humanitarian assistance
to Afghanistan, Somalia and the Sahel region, as
well as other areas in urgent need. In doing so, it
reinforces the work of many United Nations agencies
and helps to address concerns that are priorities on
the Council’s agenda. Last year, in recognition of
the central role played by the OIC as a representative
forum for more than 1.5 billion people, the United
States Agency for International Development (USAID)
signed an agreement with the OIC designed to increase
cooperation on such humanitarian issues as famine
in the Horn of Africa. In responding to emergency
situations, coordination is essential, and so is a broad

13-5319115/22

S/PV.7050

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

network of support. We hope to continue building on
the OIC-USAID partnership in years to come.
We also recognize the OIC’s creation of an
independent human rights commission, and its
attention to child marriage, gender-related issues and
other pressing human-rights concerns within OIC
member States. In the work of the Security Council,
we have noted our appreciation for the OIC’s effort to
foster a deeper sense of trust and cooperation between
Afghanistan and its neighbours, regional partners and
international organizations. We have also urged the
authorities in Mali to work closely with the OIC, as
well as with the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union, in order to enhance
that country’s capacity for effective mediation. And
on Somalia, we have commended the OIC for its keen
interest and steadfast backing for reconciliation and
recovery.
The United States also recognizes that the OIC
has become a strong and respected voice in the
international community’s collective effort to counter
violent extremism, which has caused suffering and
strife on every continent. We particularly commend
Secretary General Ihsanoglu for speaking out firmly
against attacks on religious minorities and denouncing
acts of terrorism. I note that the OIC recently co-hosted,
with the Council’s Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning Counter-Terrorism,
a meeting on implementing resolution 1624 (2005),
which is designed to curb actions that fuel hate and
incite terror.
No issue has been of greater concern to the Council
in the last few years than the ongoing crisis in Syria.
My Government welcomes the joint Arab League-OIC
statement expressing support for a “Geneva II”
conference and a peaceful solution to the crisis
based on the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/523, annex). It is in keeping with the Council’s
own position, as reflected in resolution 2118 (2013).
We also appreciate the Secretary General’s strong and
timely condemnation of the chemical weapons attack
in Syria on 21 August. More recent statements have
endorsed the international plan to dismantle Syria’s
chemical weapons programme and have called for
accountability for those responsible for the use of such
arms. I would also like to highlight the OIC’s continuing
campaign to increase international contributions aimed
at meeting the immense humanitarian needs resulting
from the Syrian civil war. Those needs are growing at

16/22

28/10/2013

an exponential rate, and my Government encourages
all to increase support for United Nations humanitarian
appeals.
Turning to Middle East peace efforts, I note that
in Cairo in February the OIC reiterated its support for
a just, peaceful and comprehensive settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. It is significant that the OIC, with
its 57 members, has endorsed the Arab Peace Initiative
as the basis of Middle East negotiations. The support of
the Islamic world for a comprehensive and negotiated
peace can be a vital contributor to the successful
outcome of talks between the parties. We interpret that
support as recognition that everyone in the region and
beyond has a stake in seeing that the negotiations go
forward in a positive and productive manner.
In conclusion, I note that the relationship between
the United Nations and the OIC is unique, not only
because of the OIC’s size and reach but because the OIC
is an organization centred around one of the world’s
largest religious faiths. The United States welcomes the
perspective of the OIC as a distinctive and leading voice
in the Muslim world, and looks forward to continuing
to work together, and with the Security Council as
appropriate, to address challenges to international
peace and security.
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and SecretaryGeneral Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu for their informative
briefings. I also appreciate Azerbaijan’s initiative in
organizing today’s meeting. The growing complexity
and multifaceted nature of recent conflicts highlights
the need for more vigorous and coordinated cooperation
and interaction between the Security Council and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation(OIC).
Many countries, from the Maghreb to the Levant,
now face daunting nation-building challenges following
the so-called Arab Spring. Social contracts may yet
emerge in many countries, but we are worried to see
that fundamentalism and extremism tend to fill the
vacuums created by political turmoil and transition.
Therefore, reaffirming genuine Islamic peace and
stability has become a significant task central to our
pursuit of international peace and security, human
rights and development. The fulfilment of that task
undoubtedly will serve global interests. We also believe
that this can be most effectively undertaken by the OIC
in close cooperation with the international community.
In the same vein, we believe that it is very timely for us
to take stock of the progress made in the cooperation
13-53191

28/10/2013

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

between the two organizations and to exchange views
on the way forward.
Since the OIC adopted its new Charter, in 2008,
it has worked closely with the United Nations in
restoring peace and security in various regions — inter
alia, Afghanistan, Somalia and Darfur. We commend
the OIC office of humanitarian affairs in Somalia for
helping those in need of humanitarian assistance. The
International Contact Group on Afghanistan meeting,
held in Jeddah in 2011, highlighted the essential role
of the OIC and its member States in the process of
Afghanistan’s transition into a stable, democratic and
prosperous country. On the Sudan, we commend the
support of the OIC financial institutions in helping the
country to overcome its economic difficulties.
Combating terrorism is another important area in
which the OIC contributes to the work of the United
Nations. While we commend the joint efforts thus
far, we hope that the close cooperation between the
OIC and United Nations organizations will be further
strengthened in diverse areas. In that regard, the
biennial joint meeting between the Secretariat and
the OIC provides a good opportunity to fine-tune
coordination and cooperation at the institutional level.
In that respect, we underscore the utility of the matrix
of activities within the framework of United NationsOIC collaboration, adopted in May 2012. We look
forward to the report on more concrete activities to be
presented at the next general meeting, in 2014.
In steering the way forward for closer cooperation
between the United Nations and the OIC, certainly
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
should be a guide post. At the same time, I would like
to mention the recommendations made by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon in his previous reports under the
agenda item “Cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations.”
First, the respective roles of the United Nations and
the OIC should be further elaborated with regard to the
scope of cooperation between the two organizations.
Secondly,
cooperation
between
the
two
organizations should be further encouraged on the
basis of the guidelines established through previous
high-level meetings of the Security Council. Those
include the primary responsibility of the Council
in international peace and security, and the need for
consistency and impartiality on the part of the United
Nations and its partner organizations.

S/PV.7050

Thirdly, it would be very useful if the OIC clarified
its own comparative advantage, not just vis-à-vis
the United Nations but also alongside other relevant
regional and subregional organizations. For instance,
we believe that the OIC could play a distinctive role in
promoting dialogue among civilizations. As the OIC 10year programme of action stresses, intercivilizational
dialogue based on mutual respect and understanding
and equality among peoples is a prerequisite for
international peace and security. We are confident
that the OIC can make valuable contributions to the
maintenance of international peace and security by
building on its areas of strength.
Lastly, I join others in thanking Azerbaijan
for drafting the presidential statement just adopted
(S/PRST/2013/16).
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
welcome you, Mr. President, to the Security Council
this morning. I would also like to thank the presidency
of Azerbaijan for organizing this timely briefing
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and OIC SecretaryGeneral Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu for their contributions.
I note that, last year, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
became the first United Nations Secretary-General to
visit the OIC headquarters. His presence at the start
of today’s debate was another reflection of his strong
commitment to ensuring that the United Nations and
the OIC cooperate closely.
The United Kingdom, too, is deeply committed to
further strengthening our relationship with the OIC.
In 2011, we were pleased to appoint our first special
representative to the OIC. We welcome the increased
dialogue between the United Kingdom and the OIC
under the tenure of Mr. İhsanoğlu, including our
constructive dialogue on promoting the freedom of
religion or belief and combating religious intolerance
throughout the world. We are committed to deepening
that relationshiop under the bilateral framework
agreement that was signed between the United Kingdom
and the OIC in 2012.
These meetings in which the Security Council
engages with regional and other outside organizations
are a vital part of our work. They enable the Council to
be outward-facing, to hear the important perspectives
of non-United Nations organizations and to identify
ways in which our efforts to enhance peace and security

13-5319117/22

S/PV.7050

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

28/10/2013

throughout the world can mutually reinforce each other.
It is in that spirit that I welcome today’s briefing.

will continue to strengthen during his future term in
office.

The OIC, consisting of 57 member States across
four different continents, has a unique perspective to
offer us. Its Charter, which stresses the determination
of its member States to contribute to international
peace and security and to promote friendly relations
and good-neighbourliness, clearly chimes with the
purposes and objectives of the Security Council. The
OIC can play an important role in bringing the voices
of its membership to bear on issues that concern us all,
Muslims and non-Muslims alike. The adoption of the
OIC’s 10-year programme of action in 2005 has given
a clear sense of direction for the organization. And we
commend the OIC’s commitment to peacekeeping and
conflict resolution.

Let me end by welcoming the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/16) adopted by the Council today. That
statement invites the Secretary-General to include
in his regular reports on United Nations cooperation
with regional and other organizations ideas on how
cooperation between the United Nations and the OIC
can be intensified. We look forward to receiving those
suggestions.

We also acknowledge the important stance that the
OIC has taken in relation to the challenges in respect
of international peace and security faced by many
Muslim majority countries. The suspension of Syria’s
membership of the OIC in August 2012 sent a clear
message on behalf of the Islamic world that the actions
of Bashar Al-Assad’s Government were unacceptable
and could not be tolerated. In the build-up to the
“Geneva II” conference and at the start of talks between
the Syrian opposition and the Syrian Government, we
welcome the OIC’s support for a negotiated political
settlement. A solution to the Syrian conflict can be
achieved only through a political dialogue. For the sake
the millions suffering as a result of the conflict, the
international community must keep striving towards
that aim.
Resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains
crucial to long-term security in the Middle East. We
welcome the leadership shown by the United States
on the issue, and the parties’ commitment to intensify
negotiations in the coming weeks. Difficult choices
lie ahead and bold leadership will be required on both
sides. The international community has a vital role to
play in supporting those efforts to achieve the lasting
peace that the people of the region need and deserve.
As his tenure comes to an end, we pay tribute to
the work of Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, SecretaryGeneral of the OIC. We look forward to working with
his successor, Mr. Iyad Madani, when he takes office in
2014. We are delighted that he has been able to join the
Council today for the briefing and are confident that
cooperation between the OIC and the Security Council

18/22

Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank the Azerbaijani delegation, and you in
particular, Mr. President, for organizing this debate on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC),
which has facilitated the Council’s consideration, for
the first time, of the issue of cooperation between the
two institutions in terms of the Council’s work. I thank
the Secretaries-General of the United Nations and
of the OIC for their respective briefings. I especially
congratulate Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, whose
mandate will soon expire, for his leading role as head
of the OIC in promoting Islamic principles of solidarity,
tolerance and moderation. Similarly, I congratulate
Mr. Iyad Madani on his election as Secretary-General
of the OIC. We are confident that under his leadership
the organization will continue to make a valuable
contribution to building a more peaceful and prosperous
world.
Today’s world is witnessing political upheavals in
Africa and the Middle East taking place within and
around the Muslim world that call for intensified efforts
among regional organizations and the United Nations,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Togo welcomes the OIC’s active role in
speaking on behalf of the Muslim world in international
efforts, including United Nations efforts to resolve such
conflicts and crises. In that respect, we especially recall
OIC initiatives including the appointment of a special
envoy for Mali and the Sahel, mediation efforts to
facilitate negotiations among the armed movements in
Darfur and the Sudan, the OIC’s support for the highlevel efforts on inter-Afghan relations and its support
for a political solution to the Syrian crisis. With respect
to those conflicts, the OIC has participated as a strategic
partner of the United Nations in seeking solutions and
ensuring support for humanitarian issues.

13-53191

28/10/2013

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

My country urges the OIC to further its constructive
role through greater investment in conflict-prevention
efforts. In that respect, it is crucial that the OIC further
strengthen internal unity and solidarity to end the
rivalries between some of its member States, which
threaten the achievement of negotiated solutions
to conflicts in those countries. In the same vein, we
welcome the establishment, on 20 March, of a peace,
security and mediation unit under the auspices of
the OIC Secretary-General in Jeddah, as well as the
close cooperation established with the United Nations
Mediation Support Unit. We believe that the unit’s
establishment will strengthen the OIC’s role and
capacity in using mediation as a tool in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts.
Moreover, while welcoming the establishment in
2011 of the OIC Independent Permanent Commission
on Human Rights, Togo calls on the OIC to urge its
States members to rapidly implement its 10-year
programme of action, in particular as it pertains to
good governance and the promotion of human rights in
the Muslim world, especially the rights of women and
children. Those measures will contribute to reducing
factors leading to crises within the Muslim world and
its individual States.
Increasing intolerance and discrimination due
to religious belief or conviction today seriously
threaten global peace and security. In that context,
Togo urges the United Nations, the OIC and the entire
international community to pursue, through consensus
rather than confrontation, efforts under way to
facilitate the coexistence of principles valued by our
States — freedom of expression and combating all
forms of religious discrimination and intolerance. In
that context, Togo particularly welcomes the work of
the Istanbul Process as well as the interfaith dialogue
and cooperation efforts of the General Assembly.
Nevertheless, the evolution in recent years within
States members of the OIC — particularly African
States — of the terrorism phenomenon remains a source
of great concern. Criminal groups are threatening
the stability in Africa in the name of religion and are
expanding their areas of operations to sow further
terror. In that regard, further strengthening and
support of the dynamic cooperation between the United
Nations and the OIC in the fight against that scourge
is crucial in order to ensure strengthened capabilities
of OIC member States to face the threat. However, it
is important that the response to the phenomenon not

S/PV.7050

remain confined to the area of security alone, but that
it takes into account the development dimension in
affected areas and ensure good governance and respect
for human rights.
Many areas of cooperation between the United
Nations and the OIC require development and further
strengthening commensurate with the significant
challenges to international peace and security. The
facilitation of a political process capable of ending
conflicts, especially in Syria, should become a priority.
We therefore urge both institutions to continue to
interact and share their experiences. In that regard, it is
my delegation’s belief that progressive implementation
of the framework adopted in Geneva in 2012, and
identifying the areas of cooperation planned between
the United Nations and the OIC, should become the
priority approach of focused efforts.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for organizing this debate to allow the Council to
consider an issue that is dear to my country, namely, the
contributions of regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and promoting rule of law. I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I welcome the Secretary-General of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in his first opportunity
to speak before the Council. I congratulate him on his
dynamic efforts, which have led to profound changes
in the OIC. We look forward to soon working with his
predecessor, Mr. Iyad Madani, whom we welcome and
wish every success in carrying out his functions in
future.
France has strengthened its relations with the OIC.
We have appointed a special envoy to the organization
and we hold regular political consultations on issues of
common interest such as the Syrian crisis, the Middle
East peace process, the Arab Spring, Mali and the fight
against international terrorism. We have also decided
to deepen our exchanges on human rights.
We welcome the adoption by the OIC of the 10-year
programme of action to meet the challenges facing the
Muslim Ummah in the twenty-first century. While the
Arab and Muslim world faces major crises, dialogue
between the United Nations and the OIC on topics such
as conflict prevention and mediation, human rights,
humanitarian assistance and refugees, the fight against
terrorism and intercultural dialogue is essential. It must
be strengthened.

13-5319119/22

S/PV.7050

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I should like to undescore several aspects of the
OIC’s contribution to the achievement of the United
Nations objectives.
First, I hail the courgeous commitment of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation in the Syrian
conflict. Since the beginning of the Syrian tragedy, the
OIC has tirelessly called on the Council to carry out
its responsibilities to put an end to the bloodshed. The
OIC has underscored that the primary responsibility
for the ongoing violence, murders and slaughters lies
with the Syrian Government. All that has led to the
deaths of thousands of unarmed civilians. The OIC has
condemned those massacres, perpetrated in cities and
towns by the Syrian authorities. Given the intransigence
of the Syrian regime and its persistent will to pursue a
military solution to the crisis, the OIC leadership took
the courageous decision to suspend Syria from the
organization in August 2012.
The OIC has also held the Syrian Government fully
responsible for chemical attacks against the Syrian
people, which took place on 21 August in Ghouta, on
the outskirts of Damascus. As Mr. İhsanoğlu indicated,
the use of such arms in Syria should be considered a war
crime and a crime against humanity. The perpetrators
of that odious crime must be brought to justice. On
Syria, we share the same objective: putting an end
to this conflict through a political solution that will
allow the Syrian people to achieve their aspirations for
freedom and justice.
We also believe that the Middle East peace
process is a central question. We very much hope that
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis
will allow for a negotiated solution based on the
coexistence of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
in peace and security.
Furthermore, we appreciate the mediations efforts
undertaken by the OIC through the good offices of its
Secretary-General in Somalia, where the organization
is an active member of the International Contact
Group, as well as in Afghanistan. We would also like
to hail the commitment of OIC member countries in the
service of peacekeeping and peacebuilding through the
contribution of military and police for peacekeeping
operations.
As the Secretary-General has also underscored,
the OIC is also an important partner for the United
Nations in the humanitarian field. A memorandum
of agreement and a plan of action was signed by the

20/22

28/10/2013

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the OIC in 2011. The two organizations have
worked closely in Somalia and the Philippines and
more recently in Syria, where they conducted a joint
assessment of humanitarian needs. In 2011 and 2012,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the OIC worked together to convene
an international ministerial conference on refugees in
the Muslim world.
I should also like to hail the commitment of the
OIC in the fight against terrorism. As noted repeatedly
by the Secretary-General of OIC, nothing justifies
international terrorism. In the fight against terrorism
and radical extremism, we all know that we enjoy the
support of Muslims around the world who condemn
those who distort or manipulate their religion.
The OIC is also a central interlocator for the
initiative of the Alliance of Civilizations. We are pleased
that the United Nations and the OIC are commited
to strengthening their dialogue to promote tolerance
and peace. It is essential to protect and promote,
everywhere, the freedom of religion or belief and the
rights of individuals belonging to religious minorities.
With regard to human rights, we hope that the
Permanent and Independent Commission for Human
Rights that the OIC has created will effectively
contribute to the promotion and protection of human
rights for all those living in OIC member countries, with
respect for the universal principles of human rights.
To conclude, I wish to emphasize that the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is a very topical matter. The severity and the number
of conflicts around the world require calling up all
available resources. This partnership must continue
in line with the relevant principles and provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, under the auspices
of the Security Council. That is how we will ensure
coherent international action, clarity in actions taken
by the United Nations, and respect for the core values​​
of our Organization.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of Azerbaijan to host today’s
high-level briefing on strenthening the partnership
and synergy between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC). We
welcome Foreign Minister Mammadyarov, who
has presided over this meeting. I thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon; Mr Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu,

13-53191

28/10/2013

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Secretary-General of the OIC; and Mr. Iyad Madani,
the newly elected Secretary-General of the OIC, for
their attendance. China has listened attentively to the
briefings by Secretaries-General Ban Ki-moon and
Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu.
China welcomes the presidential statement just
adopted by the Council (S/PRST/2013/16).
The United Nations is the core of our collective
security system, and the Security Council shoulders
the primary responsibility for maintaining world
peace and security. At the same time, various regional
and subregional organizations are playing an ever
more important role in maintaining regional peace
and security and promoting development. They have
become a useful complement to the United Nations.
At present, global and regional threats and
challenges are on the rise, and national security
interests are intertwined. Srenghtening cooperation
between the United Nations and various regional and
subregional organizations is conducive to promoting
multilateralism and solidifying and strenghtening
international collective security mechanisms and our
common efforts to maintain international peace and
security. China appreciates the important role played
by the OIC in promoting unity and cooperation in
the Islamic world and dialogues among different
civilizations. China supports efforts to further deepen
cooperation between the United Nations and this
Council on the one hand, and the OIC on the other hand,
in our common endeavour to promote world peace and
economic development.
I wish to highlight the following three points.
First, the conduct of cooperation between the United
Nations and the OIC should be guided by the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic norms governing international relations. The
purposes and principles of the Charter represent the
cornerstone of contemporary international relations.
The Charter is the guiding document for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
This cooperation should uphold fundamental principles
such as those established in the Charter, namely,
sovereign equality and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. This should be designed to strengthen
coordination in a united effort to solve regional hotspot
issues through good offices and mediation and to
maintain international and regional peace, security,
stability and development.

S/PV.7050

Secondly, in conducting cooperation between the
United Nations and the OIC, attention should be paid
to the overall coordination with an eye on comparative
advantages. Because of its advantages in terms of
religion, history and culture, the OIC is uniquely placed
to deal well with questions related to Islam. Over the
past years, the OIC has played an important role,
recognized by the international community, in assisting
in the settlement of regional conflicts and bolstering
post-conflict reconstruction. Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council, on the one hand, and
the OIC, on the other, should be built on coordination
and relative advantages in order to complement each
other’s efforts and build synergy.
Thirdly, cooperation between the United Nations
and he OIC can take a variety of forms while focusing
on results. In May 2012, the Secretariat and the OIC
reached an important consensus on strengthening
cooperation in conflict prevention, mediation,
humanitarian assistance and cross-cultural dialogues.
In May, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the OIC held a seminar in Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia, on international cooperation in fighting
terrorism with positive results.
Such interaction has furthered cooperation
exchange between the United Nations and the OIC in
areas of mutual concern, while accumulating useful
experiences for future cooperation. In keeping pace
with evolving situations and actual needs, both parties
would do well to to further explore and expand channels
of coordination and enrich the means and ways of
cooperation to achieve better results.
China attaches top priority to the unique role of
the IOC and supports its continuing, positive efforts
to maintain regional peace and security and promote
common development. Over time, China has actively
developed friendly, cooperative relations with Islamic
countries and has formed mutually supportive
political partnerships, mutually beneficial economic
partnerships, and humanistic partnerships built on
exchanges and cooperation.
China stands ready to join with the international
community in further elevating the cooperation
between the Security Council and the OIC in our joint
efforts to build a harmonious world of enduring peace
and a common prosperity.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Mr. Minister, we are pleased to welcome

13-5319121/22

S/PV.7050

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

you here to preside over the Council and pay tribute to
your personal contribution to improving the working
methods of the Council.
We thank the delegation of Azerbaijan for
convening today’s important meeting on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC). We listened attentively
to the statement made by the OIC Secretary-General,
Mr. Ekmeleddin İhsanoğlu, which highlighted the
OIC’s work on many of issues that are also on the
United Natons agenda and that, no less important, it is
doing so in a similar direction.
Currently, issues relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security make it increasingly
necessary for the international community to turn to
regional and subregional formats. Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations states that the Council
shall make every effort to achieve pacific settlement of
local disputes through regional arrangements.
At the same time, we note that in addition to a
geographical commonality serving as an effective
unifying factor, in many cases a common cultural
history serves the same purpose. The Organization of
Islamic Cooperation brings together countries whose
peoples profess common spiritual and moral values.
Such a unifying factor can and should play a crucial
role in resolving the many complex tasks facing the
world community. That applies first and foremost to
the prevention of conflicts, mediation, and political and
diplomatic settlement, where the potential of the OIC is
greatly needed.
Today the Arab world is experiencing a period of
turmoil, often accompanied by bloody conflicts behind
which lurk deep-rooted differences in values​​. Preventing
nations from sliding into the abyss of sectarian strife
is not just the responsibility of the Council; it is also
a common task in which the OIC, alongside regional
and subregional organizations, is destined to play an
irreplaceable role.
In a number of ways, the pooling of efforts in
fighting terrorism will serve to test the mettle of both
the Security Council and the OIC. Unfortunately, this
global evil is often and mundanely associated in people’s
minds with Islamic extremism. We are convinced
that terrorist actions, regardless of where, why and
by whom they are committed, require unconditional

22/22

28/10/2013

condemnation. Any form of support for such criminal
activity must be resolutely confronted and resisted.
Given the increasing threats posed by terrorism,
particularly sectarian and ethnic violence, we must
make especially strenuous efforts to counter the rising
incidence of defamation of any particular religion.
Against that turbulent backdrop, promoting the
ideas of peace, tolerance and non-violence; the dialogue
of civilizations, cultures and religions; and universal
moral values is more pressing than ever before in
order to fully uphold human rights and freedoms. All
this must harmoniously complement the principle of
international law enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, including non-interference in internal affairs,
the territorial integrity of States, the inadmissibility of
the use or threat of use of force.
Russia’s relations with the OIC have been built
on the basis of dialogue and mutual respect, and
goes back two decades. It would be remiss of me not
to recall that in 1993 I had the pleasure of being the
first Russian official representative, in my capacity as
Russian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, to visit
OIC headquarters.
Our country, with its 20 million Muslims, is an
observer at the OIC and is consistently developing
cooperation with the organization’s member States.
Early this month, the OIC Secretary-General visited
Moscow, where a framework agreement of cooperation
was signed between the Federation Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Russia and the OIC secretariat. That
important document serves as the principal road map
for close cooperation on the entire scope of our shared
agenda. Mr. İhsanoğlu also took part in the economic
summit between Russia and the OIC in Kazan.
In conclusion, I would like to voice the hope that
today’s presidential statement on cooperation between
the United Nations and the OIC (S/PRST/2013/16) will
stimulate the further strengthening and development
of cooperation between the two organizations and
complement it with concrete practical steps of common
interest.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

13-53191
