A/RES/73/177

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 January 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 74 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 17 December 2018
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/73/589/Add.2)]

73/177.

Human rights in the administration of justice
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1
and the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the
Optional Protocols thereto, 2 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, 3 the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Optional Protocol thereto, 4 the
International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance, 5 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 6 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 7 and the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 8 as well as all other relevant international
treaties,
Calling attention to the numerous international standards in the field of the
administration of justice,
Recalling all the resolutions of the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council, the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council that
are relevant to the subject of human rights in the administration of justice, including

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex; and United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1642, No. 14668.
3
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 1465 and 2375, No. 24841.
5
Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
6
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
7
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
8
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
1
2

18-22273 (E)

230119

*1822273*

A/RES/73/177

Human rights in the administration of justice

General Assembly resolution 71/188 of 19 December 2016 and Human Rights
Council resolutions 36/16 of 29 September 2017 9 and 37/22 of 23 March 2018, 10
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening and coordinating United Nations rule of law activities, 11
Recalling the adoption of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules), 12
Reaffirming the importance of international standards and norms in crime
prevention and criminal justice, including in relation to drug -related crimes, as
recognized by Member States in the outcome document of the thirtieth special session
of the General Assembly, entitled “Our joint commitment to effectively addressing
and countering the world drug problem”, 13
Welcoming the work of all special procedures of the Human Rights Council that
address human rights in the administration of justice in the discharge of their
mandates,
Taking note of the work of the human rights treaty body mechanisms on human
rights in the administration of justice, inter alia, of general comments No. 21 (1992)
on humane treatment of persons deprived of their liberty, 14 No. 32 (2007) on the right
to equality before courts and tribunals and to a fair trial 15 and No. 35 (2014) on liberty
and security of person, 16 adopted by the Human Rights Committee, general comments
No. 10 (2007) on children’s rights in juvenile justice 17 and No. 13 (2011) on the right
of the child to freedom from all forms of violence, 18 adopted by the Committee on the
Rights of the Child, general recommendation No. 31 (2005) on the prevention of
racial discrimination in the administration and functioning of the criminal justice
system, 19 adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, and
general recommendation No. 33 (2015) on women’s access to justice, 20 adopted by
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
Noting with appreciation the important work in the field of the administration
of justice of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the Secretariat and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), as well as the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Recalling the regional conference on oversight, inspection and monitoring of
places where children are deprived of liberty in the framework of the criminal justice
system organized in Buenos Aires on 19 and 20 May 2016 by the Special
__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/72/53/Add.1), chap. III.
10
Ibid., Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/73/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
11
A/73/253.
12
Resolution 70/175, annex.
13
Resolution S-30/1, annex.
14
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/47/40),
annex VI.B.
15
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/62/40), vol. I, annex VI.
16
CCPR/C/GC/35.
17
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/63/41),
annex IV.
18
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/67/41), annex V.
19
Ibid., Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/60/18), chap. IX.
20
CEDAW/C/GC/33.
9

2/9

18-22273

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/73/177

Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children and the United
Nations Children’s Fund, and the important recommendations that have been put
forward in this regard,
Noting with satisfaction the work of the Interagency Panel on Juvenile Justice
and of its members,
Encouraging continued regional and cross-regional efforts, the sharing of best
practices and the provision of technical assistance in the field of juvenile justice, and
noting in this regard the World Congress on Justice for Childre n, held in Paris from
28 to 30 May 2018,
Convinced that the independence and impartiality of the judiciary and the
integrity of the judicial system as well as an independent legal profession are essential
prerequisites for the protection of human rights, the rule of law, good governance and
democracy and for ensuring that there is no discrimination in the administration of
justice and should therefore be respected in all circumstances,
Recalling that every State should provide an effective framework of remedies
to redress human rights grievances or violations and to challenge the law fulness of
detention before a court,
Emphasizing that the right to access to justice for all, which could include access
to legal aid, forms an important basis for strengthening the rule of law through the
administration of justice,
Underlining the importance of implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, 21 and recognizing the role of the relevant Sustainable Development
Goals for eliminating discrimination in the administration of justice,
Mindful of the importance of ensuring respect for the rule of law and human
rights in the administration of justice as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity,
Recognizing the importance of the principle that, except for those lawful
limitations that are demonstrably necessitated by the fact of incarceration, persons
deprived of their liberty shall retain their non-derogable human rights and all other
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Concerned about the negative impact of overincarceration and overcrowding on
the enjoyment of human rights, and acknowledging that overincarceration constitutes
one of the major underlying causes of overcrowding,
Emphasizing that the penitentiary system should provide the possibility of
reform and social rehabilitation of the offender in all appropriate cases, and that
punishment should be dealt with in the larger framework of a criminal justice system
that provides the possibility of reinsertion and reintegration of the offender into
society,
Recalling that the social rehabilitation and reintegration of persons deprived of
their liberty shall be among the essential aims of the criminal justice system, ensuring,
as far as possible, that offenders are able to lead a law -abiding and self-supporting
life upon their return to society,
Underlining that, where persons are in vulnerable situations or marginalized,
prejudice and discrimination in the administration of justice may result in their
overincarceration and overrepresentation throughout the criminal justice system, and
recognizing the need for States to take measures, within the justice system,
particularly the criminal justice system, to prevent discrimination, inter alia, against
__________________
21

18-22273

Resolution 70/1.
3/9

A/RES/73/177

Human rights in the administration of justice

persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and to
increase their effective participation within the system,
Aware of the need for special vigilance with regard to the specific situation of
children, juveniles and women in the administration of justice, in particular while
they are deprived of their liberty, and their vulnerability to various forms of violence,
abuse, injustice and humiliation,
Noting the importance of gender-sensitive justice systems,
Reaffirming that children who are victims and witnesses of crime and violence
are particularly vulnerable and require special protection, assistance and support
appropriate to their age, level of maturity and needs, in order to prevent further
hardship and trauma that may result from their participation in the criminal justice
process,
Recognizing the specific situation and needs of children formerly associated
with armed forces or armed groups when accused of crimes under international law
allegedly committed while they were associated with armed forces or armed groups,
Reaffirming that the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration
in all actions concerning the child in the administration of justice, including in
relation to pretrial measures, as well as being an important consideration in all matters
concerning the child related to the sentencing of the parents, or, where applicable,
legal guardians or primary caregivers,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on human rights in the administration of justice; 22
2.
Also takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on non-discrimination and the protection of persons
with increased vulnerability in the administration of justice, in particular in situations
of deprivation of liberty and with regard to the causes and effects of overincarceration
and overcrowding, 23 as well as previous reports on human rights in the administration
of justice submitted to the Human Rights Council;
3.
Reaffirms the importance of the full and effective implementation of all
United Nations standards on human rights in the administration of justice, and invites
States to assess their national legislation and practice against those standards;
4.
Invites States to make use of technical assistance offered by the relevant
United Nations entities and programmes in order to strengthen national capacities and
infrastructures in the field of the administration of justice;
5.
Appeals to Governments to include, in their efforts to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 21 and in their national development plans,
the effective administration of justice and equal access to justice for all as an integral
part of the development process, with a view to promoting and protecting human
rights, and to allocate adequate resources for effective, fair, humane and accountable
justice systems, including the provision of legal aid services, and invites the
international community to respond favourably to requests for financial and technical
assistance for the enhancement and strengthening of the administration of justice;
6.
Stresses the special need for national capacity-building in the field of the
administration of justice, in particular through reform of the judiciary, the police and
the penal system, as well as juvenile justice reform, and through the encouragement
of independence, accountability and transparency in the judiciary, in order to establish
__________________
22
23

4/9

A/73/210.
A/HRC/36/28.
18-22273

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/73/177

and maintain stable societies and the rule of law in post-conflict situations, and
welcomes the role of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in supporting the establishment and functioning of transitional justice
mechanisms in post-conflict situations;
7.
Reaffirms that no one should be unlawfully or arbitrarily deprived of
liberty, and notes that any deprivation should observe the principles of necessity and
proportionality in this regard;
8.
Calls upon States to apply individual criminal responsibility and to refrain
from detaining persons based solely on their family ties with an alleged offender;
9.
Also calls upon States to ensure that anyone who is deprived of libert y
through arrest or detention has prompt access to a competent court with the effective
power to determine the lawfulness of the detention and to order release if the detention
or imprisonment is determined not to be lawful and prompt access to legal couns el,
which could include legal aid schemes, in accordance with their international
obligations and commitments;
10. Calls upon all States to consider establishing, maintaining or enhancing
independent national mechanisms with the mandate to monitor all pl aces of detention,
including by making unannounced visits, and to hold private interviews without
witnesses with all persons deprived of liberty, inter alia, in line with the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela
Rules); 12
11. Calls upon States to ensure a proper file and data management system on
prisoners that allows the tracking of the number of persons deprived of their liberty,
their detention period, offences or grounds for detention, and developments regarding
the prison population, and encourages States to collect other up -to-date,
comprehensive and disaggregated data that allow for the identification and pr evention
of discrimination in the administration of justice and overincarceration;
12. Affirms that States must ensure that any measure taken to combat
terrorism, including in the administration of justice, complies with their obligations
under international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law;
13. Recalls the absolute prohibition of torture in international law, and calls
upon States to address and prevent the detention conditions, treatment and
punishment of persons deprived of their liberty that amount to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment;
14. Calls upon States to investigate promptly, effectively and impartially all
alleged human rights violations suffered by persons deprived of their liberty, in
particular cases involving death, torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment, to provide effective remedy to the victims, in accordance with their
international obligations and commitments, and to ensure that detention
administrations fully cooperate with the investigating authority and preserve all
evidence;
15. Also calls upon States to ensure effective access to justice for persons with
disabilities when investigating, prosecuting and punishing persons responsible for
human rights violations and abuses committed against them, including by providing
effective remedies, taking into consideration, on an equal basis with others, the
specific circumstances of the person with disabilities, as well as by implementing
systemic changes, legal and policy reforms and capacity-building where needed in
order to ensure non-repetition;

18-22273

5/9

A/RES/73/177

Human rights in the administration of justice

16. Urges States to endeavour to reduce, where appropriate, pretrial detention,
which should be a measure of last resort and for as short a period as possible, inter
alia, by adopting legislative and administrative measures and policies on its
preconditions, limitations, duration and alternatives and by taking measures aimed at
the implementation of existing legislation, as well as by ensuring access to justice and
legal advice and assistance, which could include legal aid schemes;
17. Encourages States to address overcrowding in detention facilities by
taking effective measures, including through enhancing the availability and use of
alternatives to pretrial detention and custodial sentences, bearing in mind the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-custodial Measures (the Tokyo Rules) 24
and the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Priso ners and
Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok Rules), 25 access to legal
aid, mechanisms for crime prevention, early release and rehabilitation programmes
and the efficiency as well as the capacity of the criminal justice system and its
facilities, bearing in mind the United Nations Principles and Guidelines on Access to
Legal Aid in Criminal Justice Systems; 26
18. Urges States to take all necessary measures to prevent and eliminate
discrimination in law and in practice against persons who are in vulnerable situations
or marginalized in the administration of justice that may also result in their
overincarceration and overrepresentation throughout the criminal justice process;
19. Also urges States to pay special attention to the conditions of detention or
imprisonment of persons who are in vulnerable situations or marginalized and to their
particular needs;
20. Continues to encourage States to pay due attention to the Bangkok Rules
when developing and implementing relevant legislation, pr ocedures, policies and
action plans, and invites relevant special procedure mandate holders, the Office of the
High Commissioner, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and all other
relevant organizations to take those rules into consideration in th eir activities;
21. Encourages States to review penal policies that can contribute to
overincarceration and overcrowding, in particular regarding so -called “zero-tolerance
policies”, such as the application of mandatory pretrial detention and mandatory
minimum sentences especially for minor and/or non-violent crimes;
22. Recognizes that all children and juveniles alleged as, accused of or
recognized as having infringed the law, particularly those who are deprived of their
liberty, as well as child victims and witnesses of crimes, should be treated in a manner
consistent with their rights, dignity and needs, in accordance with international law,
bearing in mind relevant international standards on human rights in the administration
of justice, taking into account also the age, gender, social circumstances and
development needs of such children, and calls upon States parties to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child 7 and States parties to the Optional Protocols to the
Convention 27 to abide strictly by their principles and respective provisions;
23. Reiterates the importance of the United Nations Model Strategies and
Practical Measures on the Elimination of Violence against Children in the Field of
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, 28 and urges States to consider applying them,
as appropriate, in the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of laws,
policies, programmes, budgets and mechanisms aimed at eliminating violence against
__________________

Resolution 45/110, annex.
Resolution 65/229, annex.
26
Resolution 67/187, annex.
27
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
28
Resolution 69/194, annex.
24
25

6/9

18-22273

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/73/177

children in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice, and encourages States
to support and to benefit, as appropriate, from the programme proposed by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations Children’s Fund in this
regard;
24. Recalls its resolutions 69/157 of 18 December 2014 and 72/245 of
24 December 2017, in which it invited the Secretary-General to commission an
in-depth global study on children deprived of liberty, to be funded through voluntary
contributions, and in this regard encourages Member States, United Nations agencies,
funds, programmes and offices, as well as other relevant stakeholders, to support the
elaboration of the study;
25. Encourages States that have not yet integrated children’s issues into their
overall rule of law efforts to do so and to develop and implement a comprehensive
and coordinated juvenile justice policy to prevent and address juvenile delinquency
and to address risks and causes for children’s contact with the juvenile and/or criminal
justice system, as well as with a view to promoting, inter alia, the use of alterna tive
measures, such as diversion and restorative justice, and complying with the principle
that deprivation of liberty of children should be used only as a measure of last resort
and for the shortest appropriate period of time, as well as to avoid, whereve r possible,
the use of pretrial detention for children;
26. Stresses the importance of including reintegration strategies for former
child offenders in juvenile justice policies, in particular through the provision of
gender-sensitive education and life skills programmes, as well as treatment and
services for substance abuse and mental health needs, in line with relevant
commitments and obligations under international human rights law, with a view to
their assuming a constructive role in society;
27. Urges States to take all necessary and effective measures, including legal
reform where appropriate, to prevent and respond to all forms of violence against
children within the justice system, including within the informal justice system, where
it exists;
28. Also urges States to ensure that, under their legislation and practice,
neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without the possibility of release
nor corporal punishment is imposed for offences committed by persons under
18 years of age, and encourages States to consider repealing all other forms of life
imprisonment for offences committed by persons under 18 years of age;
29. Encourages States not to set the minimum age of criminal responsibility
at too low an age level, bearing in mind the emotional, mental and intellectual
maturity of the child, and in this respect notes the recommendation of the Committee
on the Rights of the Child to increase the lower minimum age of criminal
responsibility to the age of 12 years as the absolute minimum age, and to continue to
increase it to a higher age level; 17
30. Also encourages States to gather relevant information, including through
data collection and research, concerning children within their criminal justice systems
so as to improve their administration of justice, while being mindful of the children ’s
right to privacy, with full respect for relevant international human rights instruments,
and bearing in mind applicable international standards on human rights in the
administration of justice;
31. Stresses the importance of paying greater attention to the impact on
children of imprisonment or other sentences imposed upon their parents, while noting

18-22273

7/9

A/RES/73/177

Human rights in the administration of justice

with interest the convening of and reports on all relevant meetings and panel
discussions on these issues held by the Human Rights Council; 29
32. Calls upon States to take effective and appropriate measures to remove all
barriers preventing persons with disabilities from having effective access to justice
on an equal basis with others and without discrimination;
33. Invites States to provide for tailored and interdisciplinary human rights
training, including anti-racist, anti-discriminatory, multicultural, disability-inclusive,
gender-sensitive and child rights training, to all judges, lawyers, prosecutors, social
workers, immigration, correction and police officers and other professionals
concerned, including personnel deployed in international field presences;
34. Also invites States, upon their request, to benefit from technical advice and
assistance provided by the relevant United Nations entities and programmes in order
to strengthen national capacities and infrastructures in the field of the administration
of justice;
35. Invites the Office of the High Commissioner and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to reinforce their technical assistance to States, upon request and
in accordance with their respective mandates, to strengthen the national capacity building of States in the field of the administration of justice, in particular in post conflict situations, and in this context to strengthen cooperation with relevant United
Nations entities;
36. Underlines the importance of rebuilding and strengthening structures for
the administration of justice and of respecting the rule of law and human rights,
including in post-conflict situations, as a crucial contribution to building peace and
justice and ending impunity, and in this respect requests the Secretary -General to
further streamline and strengthen system-wide coordination and coherence of
programmes and activities of the relevant parts of the United Nations system,
including through the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Rule of Law Unit in the Executive Office of the
Secretary-General and the global focal point arrangement for the police, justice and
corrections areas in the rule of law in post-conflict and other crisis situations;
37. Invites States, in the context of the universal periodic review mechanism
and in their reports under international human rights treaties, to consider addressing
the promotion and protection of human rights in the administration of justice;
38. Also invites States, when reviewing progress made in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to consider the possibility of
looking into the causes and effects of overincarceration and overcrowding, including,
where persons are in vulnerable situations or marginalized, with regard to
non-discrimination and persons who are in vulnerable situations or marginalized in
the administration of justice;
39. Invites relevant special procedure mandate holders of the Human Rights
Council, as well as relevant treaty bodies, to give special attention to questions
relating to the effective protection of human rights in the administration of justice,
and to provide, wherever appropriate, specific recommendations in this regard,
including proposals for advisory services and technical assistance measures;
40. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session a report on the latest developments, challenges and good
practices in human rights in the administration of justice, including on the situation
__________________
29

8/9

A/HRC/21/31 and A/HRC/25/33.
18-22273

Human rights in the administration of justice

A/RES/73/177

of persons with disabilities in the administration of justice, and on the activities
undertaken by the United Nations system as a whole;
41. Decides to continue its consideration of the question of human rights in
the administration of justice at its seventy-fifth session under the item entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”.
55th plenary meeting
17 December 2018

18-22273

9/9
