S/PV.7588

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7588th meeting

Friday, 18 December 2015, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerry/Ms. Power. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Domingos Augusto
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Yi
Mr. Fabius
Mr. Judeh
Mr. Krivas
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ybáñez
Mr. Hammond
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-43795 (E)
*1543795*

S/PV.7588

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and the other
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber today. Their presence here underscores the
importance of the subject under discussion today.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consisderation of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Let me just say to everybody that we have a number
of Ministers who have flight schedules to meet. This
went on a little longer than we had thought, and I
appreciate everybody’s patience. We are very grateful
to them.
It is now my honour now to give the floor to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: The Syrian conflict began
with peaceful popular demands for political change,
but it soon became defined by internal, regional and
international divisions, including in this very Council.
Almost five years later, we see a country in ruins,
with millions of its people scattered across the world
and a whirlwind of radicalism and sectarianism that
challenges regional and global security.
I therefore welcome the critical initiative of the
International Syria Support Group. In particular, I
recognize the statesmanship of United States Secretary
of State John Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister
Sergey Lavrov. I also welcome the draft resolution
that the Security Council will adopt at this meeting.
As the first resolution to focus on the political path to
resolving the crisis, this marks a very important step on
which we must build.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
all of the Ministers for their great leadership and for
participating in this meeting.
At the two recent meetings in Vienna, the
International Syria Support Group made two major

2/22

18/12/2015

requests of the United Nations: first, to convene
formal negotiations in January between the Syrian
Government and opposition representatives, focused
on a Syrian-led transition process; secondly, in parallel,
to determine the requirements and modalities of a
nationwide ceasefire. The United Nations stands ready
to undertake those important tasks.
We welcome the meeting convened in Riyadh
that brought together a broad spectrum of the Syrian
opposition. As the Government and opposition
delegations are getting ready, the United Nations
stands ready to relaunch intra-Syrian talks mediated
by my Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. As set out
in the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), the
parties must ensure the full and effective participation
of women in those talks.
This morning, I urged the International Syria
Support Group to apply the necessary pressure on
the Syrian parties to immediately implement the
following confidence-building measures: first, to stop
the indiscriminate use of weapons against civilians,
including barrel bombs, which have continued despite
the Government’s pledge to refrain from such assaults;
secondly, to allow unconditional and unimpeded access
for aid convoys — tens of thousands of people in besieged
areas have been forced to live on grass and weeds, and
that is outrageous; thirdly, to halt attacks on medical and
educational facilities and lift all restrictions on medical
and surgical supplies from humanitarian convoys; and,
fourthly, release all detainees — reports indicate that
prisoners face torture and atrocious conditions.
Nearly two years have passed since the Geneva
II Conference. The people of Syria have suffered
enough. I call on them to show vision and leadership
in overcoming their differences. A fleeting opportunity
for peace has emerged. Their duty is to seize it.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing. I think everybody here joins in thanking
the Secretary-General for his leadership and for all of
the help provided by the United Nations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/996, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

15-43795

18/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2254 (2015).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Secretary of State of the United States.
I want to begin by thanking the other permanent
members who joined together to help fashion the
resolution 2254 (2015) and spent time this morning
working with our colleagues in order to bring us here
this afternoon, plus the non-member, Germany, to
whom we are also very grateful for their participation.
I want to thank all of the members of the Council
for coming together at this late hour. I thank in
particular Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Special
Envoy de Mistura for their leadership and commitment.
I also want to thank Foreign Minister Lavrov for his
collaboration and efforts in the course of both Vienna
conferences to produce the two Vienna communiqués,
which are integrated into today’s resolution.
By adopting resolution 2254 (2015) today, the
Council is sending a clear message to all concerned that
the time is now to stop the killing in Syria and lay the
groundwork for a Government that the long-suffering
people of that battered land can support. After four
and a half years of war, this is the first time that we
have been able to come together at the United Nations
in the Security Council to embrace a road forward.
During that time, one Syrian in 20 has been killed or
wounded; one in five is a refugee; and one in two has
been displaced. The average life expectancy in Syria
has dropped by 20 years.
We need to reverse the course. That is the
Council’s goal here this afternoon: to put an end to the
indiscriminate bombing, the acts of terror, the torture
and the bloodshed. And our shared task is to find a way
to make that happen.
In support of that objective, President Obama has
three interrelated goals for my country. The first is to
support our friends and to ensure that the instability
created by the civil war in Syria does not spread further
beyond its borders. That is why we are providing a

S/PV.7588

record amount of humanitarian assistance, and it is
why we are doing more to help Syria’s neighbours to
strengthen their capacity to safeguard their territory
and to defend against external threats.
Secondly, we are determined, with our coalition
and its partners, to degrade and defeat the terrorist
organization known as Daesh. In the past half-year,
the coalition and its partners have worked with Iraqi
forces in liberating Tikrit, freeing Sinjar, removing
terrorist commanders from the battlefield, cutting off
terrorist supply lines, hitting their oil facilities and
depriving Daesh of more and more of the territory
that it once controlled. Now we are intensifying the
pressure, helping our Iraqi partners to retake most of
Ramadi and squeezing supply routes into Mosul, and
we are pushing ahead into northern Syria, assisting
our partners along the Iraqi-Syrian border and in
their recruiting and propaganda efforts. Further, as
evidenced by the meeting of finance ministers that was
held right here in this very Chamber yesterday (see
S/PV.7587), we are multiplying our efforts to cut Daesh
off from the revenue sources that support its depravity
and criminality.
But the truth is that nothing would do more to
bolster the fight against the terrorists than a broadly
supported diplomatic process that gives the Syrian
people a real choice — a choice not between Al-Assad
and Daesh, but between war and peace, between the
violent extremes and a newly empowered political
centre. That is why we have joined many represented
here today in support of an urgent diplomatic initiative.
Again and again, countries — not just at this table
today but in countless meetings in various parts of the
world — have reaffirmed the notion that there has to
be a political settlement. Well, this is the test. This
is why we join here in an effort that is broader and
more action-oriented than any ever before attempted
regarding Syria to isolate the terrorists and to put Syria
on the road to the political transition envisioned by
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and now
embraced by the international community in a Security
Council resolution.
As the Council’s action today reflects, we have
made important progress in recent weeks — progress
that should give us all fresh grounds for encouragement.
Last month in Vienna, the United States and other
members of the International Syria Support Group
(ISSG) agreed on a series of steps to stop the bleeding
in Syria, to advance a political transition, to isolate the

15-437953/22

S/PV.7588

The situation in the Middle East

terrorists, and to help the Syrian people to be able to
begin to rebuild their country.
Last week in Riyadh, with the support of His
Majesty King Salman and his Government, a broad
cross-section of Syrian opposition representatives came
together to form a high committee for negotiation. Under
resolution 2254 (2015), adopted today, the purpose of
those negotiations between the responsible opposition
and the Government is to facilitate a transition within
Syria to credible, inclusive, non-sectarian governamce
within six months. The process would lead to the
drafting of a new constitution and arrangements for
internationally supervised elections within 18 months.
I might add that Geneva never had those dates. It is
the Vienna process and the Vienna communiqué that
has produced the 6-month and 18-month time horizon,
and it is the Vienna process that has also embraced the
ceasefire concept and a set of principles and values
concerning the shape that a new Syria might be able to
take, as directed by Syrians for Syrians. It is our hope
that a nationwide ceasefire can go into effect, excluding
only Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front and any other group
that we might decide at some time to designate.
I would close by saying that we are under no
illusions about the obstacles that exist. There obviously
remain sharp differences within the international
community, especially about the future of President
Al-Assad. We have emphasized from the beginning
that if this is to work, the process has to be led, shaped,
decided and implemented by the men and women of
Syria. It cannot be imposed from the outside, and we
are not seeking to do so. But we have also seen in recent
weeks — in Vienna, Paris and other capitals, and again
today here in New York — an unprecedented degree of
unity on the need to negotiate this political transition,
to defeat Daesh and then, indeed, to end the war. The
resolution that we have just adopted is a milestone
because it sets out specific concepts with specific time
frames. Accordingly, we need to work hard together to
help these political talks to go forward, to prepare for
a ceasefire and to encourage all the parties in Syria to
participate in good faith.
Let me just underscore the urgency of our task. Like
many representatives here, I have met with refugees in
and out of refugee camps. I have met with survivors,
as have others in this Chamber. I have met with
caregivers, as they have. I have met with many of the
people who have been on the front lines of this conflict.
I have talked to women who have struggled to hold

4/22

18/12/2015

their families together, despite constant danger, bitter
cold, shortages of food and great peril. I have heard the
blood-chilling stories of doctors and relief workers who
have been dealing with humanitarian trauma on a daily
basis — month after month, year after year, and now
into the fifth year. I am aware, as is everybody in this
Chamber, of the atrocities that have been and are being
committed, even as we sit here this afternoon, and too
often against innocent civilians.
Looking ahead, we know that Daesh can never be
allowed to gain control in Syria, so we have a global
imperative here not only to deal with a terrorist entity,
but also to end the civil war and to bring legitimacy
back to the governance of Syria. President Al-Assad, in
our judgement — which is not shared by everybody, but
as the majority of people in the ISSG believe — has lost
the ability to unite the country and to provide the moral
credibility to govern it in the future. So I shall just say,
not as a matter of ideology or of choice but purely as
a matter of reality and fact, given the situation on the
ground, that if the war is to end it is imperative that the
Syrian people agree on an alternative in terms of their
governance. That logic is compelling, and it provides a
unifying principle for most people in our efforts going
forward.
We have a lot of distance to travel — some would say
miles to go — but the truth is that, in the past two months
we have gone from a stand-still, from a non-existent
process, to holding three separate meetings of the ISSG
and now securing the Security Council’s embrace of a
process. We have agreed on a plan of action, and the
Council’s vote today is an important boost on the road
to a political settlement. It is a particularly important
step because it reaffirms this body’s endorsement of
the Geneva communiqué concerning a transitional
governing body with full executive authority, and it also
endorses the progress and the statements that we made
in Vienna regarding a time line for the transition and
elections, and standards for that election — the highest
standards under the supervision of the United Nations
for a free, fair, transparent and accountable election. It
also brings fundamental values and principles that can
guide the shaping of Syria by Syrians for Syrians.
Let us proceed with confidence from here in the
determination to end this war, eliminate the terrorist
threat and enable the people of Syria to return safely to
their homes.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
15-43795

18/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I wish to thank John Kerry
for his initiative to convene the third meeting of the
International Syria Support Group today in New York,
which has brought us together here in this Chamber.
This meeting of the International Syria Support
Group undescores the commitment of all its participants
to the Vienna process. Resolution 2254 (2015), which
we have just adopted, approves the Group’s statements
of 30 October and 14 November on the way forward
to implement the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) of 30 June 2012.
It also clearly establishes, first, that those three
documents constitute the sole platform for resolving the
bloody crisis in Syria, and, secondly, that the Vienna
format is the only one that unites all of the influential
external actors and is therefore capable of providing
the external conditions needed for a sustainable and
just settlement through negotiations between the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the entire
spectrum of the opposition. Today’s resolution puts the
international legal authority for the collective work
of preparing those negotiations under the auspices of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. It emphasizes that only through
an inclusive dialogue organized with the consent of the
Syrians themselves can an end be brought to the terrible
suffering endured by the Syrian people.
At the same time, the resolution affirms the
fundamental principles of political settlements,
which are that Syria must remain a united, secular,
multi-confessional and multi-ethnic State, a place of
welcome and safety for every sector of the population,
and that the Syrian people alone have the right to
determine their own future. That is a clear response
to external attempts to impose on Syrians solutions
to issues of various kinds, including the fate of
their President. It is precisely that approach that is
enshrined in the Geneva communiqué, the documents
of the International Syria Support Group and today’s
resolution.
However, we are all united in our agreement that
there is no place for terrorists, whatever their affiliation,
at the negotiating table, or for those who admit the
possibility of a military solution to the conflict. The
Council’s unanimous vote today should open up a

S/PV.7588

pathway to creating a broad anti-terrorism front on the
basis of the Charter of the United Nations, with the
support of everyone on the planet who opposes terror,
including the Syrian army, the Kurdish volunteers
and the armed patriotic Syrian opposition., Elements
of the Russian air forces contributed to the efforts to
accomplish this task in response to the invitation from
the legitimate Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We expect that a major role in this effort will be played
by yesterday’s resolution 2253 (2015), proposed by
Russia and the United States, aimed at toughening
controls on the financing of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and other terrorists by cutting off their
financing channels, mainly by preventing them from
conducting illicit trading in oil. The fight against
terrorism must be consistent and constant, whether in
Syria or anywhere else. Attempts to divide terrorists
into good and bad groups are unacceptable.
Today’s resolution also emphasizes the necessity
of providing the Syrian people with humanitarian
aid, carried out in strict compliance with the guiding
principles of the United Nations established in the
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, including the principle of the consent of
the Government of the host country. It is important that
today the Security Council once again affirmed the
necessity of respecting the sovereignty of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
The resolution adopted today strengthens the
Security Council’s control over the implementation
of the Vienna agreements, with the assistance of the
International Syria Support Group. The SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy, Mr. de Mistura, will
play a leading role in organizing and supporting the
negotiating process, based on the results of the meetings
with the Syrian opposition, including those being held
in Moscow, Cairo, Riyadh, Damascus, Al-Hasakah and
other places. We are relying on the Council secretariat’s
balanced recommendations on the essential steps to be
taken regarding all the provisions agreed in Vienna.
We firmly believe that our colleagues on Staffan de
Mistura’s team will approach that task responsibly and
impartially, without yielding to possible attempts by one
side or another to put pressure on them, and that they
will be guided exclusively by the task of assisting in the
process of arriving at a mutually acceptable agreement
between the Government and the opposition, as today’s
resolution requires.

15-437955/22

S/PV.7588

The situation in the Middle East

As those recommendations are completed, we
will be ready, as co-Chairs of the International Syria
Support Group with the United States and the United
Nations, to convene another meeting to formulate a
consensus based on the next steps to be take to promote
a settlement in Syria. As we undertake the work ahead
of us, we urge all our colleagues not to be carried away
by ideological rhetoric, to avoid the incitements of
pernicious sectarian strife and to work pragmatically,
with the aim above all of combating violent terrorism
and ending the conflict through a political settlement.
There is no alternative to that approach if we genuinely
wish to put the interests of the Syrian people and the
Syrian Government ahead of geopolitical ambitions.
The President: I thank Mr. Lavrov for his statement
and for his leadership on this issue.
I now give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign and Expatriate Affairs of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
Mr. Judeh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary of State of the United States, whose country
is presiding over the Council this month, for convening
this important ministerial meeting to follow up on
the constructive international work that has been
accomplished with the aim of bringing an end to the
crisis in Syria and the suffering of the Syrian people.
Today’s meeting is another milestone in the
international response to the situation in Syria. Over
the past few months, the parties concerned, both
internationally and regionally, have intensified their
diplomatic efforts to reach a common understanding
on how to achieve a political settlement of the tragic,
five-year-long Syrian crisis, whose repercussions pose
such a threat to the region and to the international
community, particularly through the humanitarian
issues resulting from the millions of Syrians who are
now internally displaced or seeking asylum, and on
the security front, owing to the expansion of the Daesh
terrorist group, the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist
individuals and entities.
Those commendable international efforts led to the
establishment of the International Syria Support Group,
and in that regard I would like to thank Secretary Kerry
and Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation, for their efforts in helping
to realize this achievement, which, God willing, may
eventually lead to the political solution for Syria that

6/22

18/12/2015

we all desire. I am also grateful to the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for
his work so far and his efforts in the future. We stress
how important it is that the Group continue to work on
ensuring the establishment of a political process for
Syria based on the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex) and the declarations issued by the
Support Group in the three meetings held in Vienna and
today in New York, and to implement the provisions of
resolution 2254 (2015), adopted by the Council today, a
historic document that paves the way for implementing
a political solution that we hope can end the crisis that
Syria and its people have endured.
In that regard, I would also like to express our
appreciation to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which
hosted a conference of the Syrian opposition in Riyadh
with the aim of launching the political negotiations that
we hope will lead to a settlement, and to all the other
countries that have worked tirelessly to achieve this. I
would also like to mention that Jordan has played the
part that it was asked to take on in launching the process
of coordinating the members of the International Syria
Support Group with the aim of reaching a common
understanding on the groups and individuals who may
be considered to be terrorists. We presented the results
of our work to the Support Group and have outlined the
consensus reached by some countries on some terrorist
groups; there were other groups about which members
could not agree, which means that negotiations on
the future designation of those groups may have to
continue.
In the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, since the
beginning of the crisis in Syria, we have said that
the only solution to the crisis is a comprehensive
political solution. Our position under the leadership
of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, son
of King Al Hussein, has been to emphasize that a
comprehensive political solution must be realized. That
remains our position and our conviction. We see no way
to restore normalcy in Syria, to mend the social fabric
and to safeguard its territorial integrity and political
independence except through a political solution. We
do not see any other way of confronting and defeating
terrorism, extremism and Daesh groups or of uprooting
them from Syria and other places.
That objective cannot be realized except through
a comprehensive political solution that all Syrians can
agree on. We will support and help them to realize
it, so as to save Syria and restore international and

15-43795

18/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

regional peace and security. The Council’s adoption
of resolution 2254 (2015) today will give them the
necessary momentum to realize a political solution,
based on the concepts in the Geneva communiqué,
within a comprehensive political context and in line
with the statements of the International Syria Support
Group. It should enable them to begin and sustain a path
towards the realization of a political solution through
the process outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) and to
determine the time frames required and mechanisms
necessary for its implementation and the fulfilment of
all obligations, as well as to lay the groundwork for a
comprehensive ceasefire, which would, however, not
apply to the terrorists groups Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front
and others, but which will lead to defeating them.
With regard to terrorism and extremism, Jordan
leads the international efforts to defeat the terrorism
and extremism in our region. It is a terrorism that
destroys the image of our great religion, Islam, and its
message of tolerance and its moderate cause. All those
who try to commit crimes in the name of our religion
are not part of the religion at all. All Syrian parties
must rise to the level of making a sacrifice for, and
thereby realize the religious aspirations of, the Syrian
people to achieve a comprehensive political solution,
one that could restore security, stability and harmony
to Syria and lead to the uprooting of terrorism. It could
have implications worldwide and provide the basis for
the reconstruction of Syria so that it can live in peace
with itself, a Syria of plurality, and allow the refugees
to return to their homeland.

S/PV.7588

resources, has become the second-largest host for
refugees in the world and is the country that hosts the
second-largest number of Syrian refugees, with all the
attendant consequences and pressures on major sectors
like health, education, security, the labour market and
the infrastructure, which are costing the Jordanian
treasury a lot of expenses beyond the reach and the
ability of the Kingdom to manage.
Jordan and its kind people, including our Syrian
brothers already in the country, have opened their
houses to the refugees from Syria. We have shared with
them our limited resources. On behalf of all humankind,
we have carried out our obligation in hosting them and
providing them with all that we can. We are proud of our
ability to host them. Our hosting is in consonance with
the principles of the Hashemite leadership. However,
the world must share the burden with us, because we
are performing that humanitarian duty on behalf of
all humankind. We ask for help to shoulder the burden
and to work with us in accordance with the response
plan drawn by the Government of Jordan to alleviate
the suffering of those who are living in the camps or
being hosted by our citizens. We look forward to the
London Conference to be held early next year, and
we call on the international community to participate
in the Conference so as to achieve the necessary and
desired results.

The international community in general, and the
Council in particular, must not allow any obstacles to
impede a comprehensive political solution or lead to its
failure, and they must take effective measures capable
of defeating any attempt to delay that realization.
Failure would have grave consequences for everyone.
We have all seen conclusive evidence of the dangers
resulting from the absence of a political vision and a
political solution.

Today, we are facing a real chance, one that must
not be missed, to take confident steps towards the
realization of a political solution that will satisfy all
Syrians and restore stability and security to Syria.
We should help the Syrian people to realize their
ambitions to move into a new reality, a reality that they
themselves will define, one that will maintain the unity
and territorial integrity of their country and enable
us to defeat terrorism, working in coordination and
partnership with them. Today, from the Chamber, I call
on all Syrians and the entire international community
to avail ourselves of this opportunity before it is too
late.

Today’s momentum should spur the international
community to intensify its efforts to face the crisis of
the Syrian refugees, one of the most difficult and painful
humanitarian crises, especially for neighbouring States
hosting refugees, and notably my country, Jordan. The
number of Syrians in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
alone is estimated at 1.4 million, and they are spread
across all regions of the Kingdom. Approximately 9 per
cent of them live in camps. Jordan, with its limited

My statement today could be the last during
Jordan’s tenure as a member of the Security Council,
as our non-permanent membership will end in a few
days. Allow me to avail myself of this opportunity to
express to the whole membership of the Council our
deep thanks and gratitude for the cooperation we have
received during our two-year tenure in the Council,
which began in January 2014. I also wish to express
our deep thanks and gratitude to the Member States for

15-437957/22

S/PV.7588

The situation in the Middle East

the confidence given to Jordan, under the leadership
of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, by
electing our country as a non-permanent member of the
Council.
Jordan believes in the Charter of the United
Nations and is committed to its purposes and
principles. We are all proud of the quality achievements
that the Organization has realized and the initiatives
undertaken in all sectors, notably in the youth sector. I
wish to refer to the various initiatives in regard to Syria,
the humanitarian situation in Syria, the Palestinian
question and other important issues on which we
worked with other Council members to achieve positive
results and solutions during our membership. Any
achievements realized in this important body have
all been accomplished through cooperation with the
membership in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish to
thank Minister Judeh and the Hashemite Kingdom for
their service and the peacekeeping they undertake, as
well as for the extraordinary work done with refugees.
We are all very grateful.
It is now my privilege to give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Development for
France.
Mr. Fabius (France) (spoke in French): There is
great urgency in Syria, as well as for the Syrian people.
In the past five years more than 250,000 have been killed,
while 4 million have become refugees and 13.5 million
have been displaced. The terrorism of Daesh has struck
the heart of its cities. There is an urgent need to resolve
this crisis, which, far beyond Syria, poses a threat to
international peace and security.
In this context, resolution 2254 (2015), which we
have just adopted unanimously, represents a glimmer
of hope and is what I might call a road-map resolution.
We all know, as participants in it, that a still-tenuous
political process was initiated in Vienna on the basis
of the Geneva communiqué, whose principles remain
obligatory for us. The process has brought together,
in an unprecedented manner — and this is a positive
thing — all of the relevant international partners.
The international community must provide a credible
framework for negotiations to be held between a
delegation from the regime and a delegation from the
opposition, under the auspices of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, our friend Mr. Staffan de

8/22

18/12/2015

Mistura, so as to establish a transitional authority and
facilitate a ceasefire. The Council is today endorsing
the initial results of the process.
Allow me to quickly emphasize a few points.
First, with respect to the opposition, we have
heard some ask, what opposition? Several meetings in
various formats have been held on this topic, but allow
me to underscore the success of the recent conference
convened by Saudi Arabia in Riyadh, upon request of
the Vienna Group. That success should be stressed,
because the Syrian opposition responded by joining
together. Indeed, all of the various movements of the
political and armed opposition came together around
a common platform and expressed their commitment
to a political solution: a free, secular and democratic
Syria that has space for all of the components of
Syrian society. So we have an interlocutor guided by
the Geneva communiqué. Indeed, the Special Envoy
of the United Nations, with the High Negotiations
Committee, now has an opposition interlocutor. At this
stage, we note that, as far as we can see, the Syrian
regime has not yet demonstrated a clear desire to enter
into serious negotiations on the basis of the terms of
reference established.
Secondly, at the political level, there are plans to
hold inter-Syrian talks as soon as possible. However,
they will bear fruit only if, with our support and
guarantee, the credible political framework defined by
the Geneva and Vienna communiqués is in fact created.
That framework is based on several principles. The first
is an effective political transition, meaning the handover
to a transitional authority of full executive power,
in particular control over the military and security
apparatus, as set out in the Geneva communiqué. That
step should be taken soon.
Secondly, there must be institutional reform, in
particular in the area of security, in order to provide
Syria with a framework that respects the diversity of
the Syrian people.
Finally, there must be safeguards regarding the exit
of Mr. Bashar Al-Assad, which is necessary not just
for moral reasons, but also, as we have stressed earlier,
ones of effectiveness. Indeed, how could a person
possibly bring together a whole people when he has
played such a large part in massacring them? In that
respect, whatever our views might be, we simply cannot
ignore an undeniable political reality: that as long as
Mr. Bashar Al-Assad’s Government remains in power,

15-43795

18/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7588

a lasting and genuine reconciliation between the Syrian
people and the State appears unattainable.

triumph over terrorism and put an end to the Syrian
tragedy.

Finally, allow me to share a few thoughts on the
ceasefire. It must be national, viable and verifiable,
and we believe that for it to be lasting, at least three
conditions should be met.

The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of China.

First, we believe that the ceasefire should
accompany, not precede, the transition, and that only
the advent of this transition can provide the opposition
with the necessary security conditions.
Secondly, we believe that the ceasefire must
be prepared for by taking immediate humanitarian
measures aimed at alleviating the suffering of the
people and giving credibility to the political process.
Compliance with international humanitarian law is
a sine qua non, in particular the immediate halting
of indiscriminate attacks against civilians and
unhampered access for humanitarian assistance.
Confidence-building measures would be most welcome
so as to create a foundation for the ceasefire.
Finally, after such violence, monitoring of the
ceasefire will be quite difficult and will require creative
solutions not only on the ground but also on the political
front. A mechanism will be required through which
the members of the International Syria Support Group
that are most concerned, as well as the permanent
members of the Security Council, can hold the parties
accountable for compliance with their obligations.
By way of conclusion, let me say that I spoke earlier
about a glimmer of hope and a road-map resolution.
All of us around the table must contribute in good
faith to creating conditions conducive to a genuine
political transition in Syria. We must all bring our
influence to bear to induce the Syrian parties to uphold
the guidelines that we have set out, in particular as
inter-Syrian talks are set to begin under the auspices of
the United Nations and of Staffan de Mistura.
France, for its part, will remain active and vigilant
so as to ensure that all military forces are focused on
combating Daesh and eradicating terrorism. We will be
vigilant in order to ensure that the parties, and first and
foremost the regime, engage in talks and uphold their
humanitarian obligations. And we will be vigilant so
that the international community effectively commits
to a credible transition and a lasting ceasefire. Only
these clear objectives and this rediscovered unity will
enable the international community to, as we hope,

Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2254 (2015) by the Security Council. The resolution
embodies the broad consensus of the international
community, demonstrates the important role of the
Security Council, reflects the keen aspiration of the
Syrian people and lends fresh impetus to the political
settlement of the Syrian issue. We must follow through
on it with a view to translating consensus into action
and expectation into reality as soon as possible.
The protracted conflict of the past five years
has brought Syria, a country with a time-honoured
civilization, to ruins. Large numbers of Syrians
have been displaced and are unable to return to their
homes. What is worse, it has become a hotbed where
radical ideas breed and spread as well as a playground
for terrorists, posing a grave threat to the peace and
security of the region and beyond. As such, the
international community should work towards the
political settlement of the issue with a stronger sense of
urgency and responsibility.
For five years, relentless international efforts have
been made to seek a political settlement. This on-andoff political process has had its ups and downs. We need
to build on successful experience, learn the lessons
and press ahead with the political process firmly and
steadily, so that it can be put on an irreversible path.
First, we must remain committed to the goal of a
political settlement. What has happened tells us that the
greater the bloodshed, the higher the tension. There is
simply no military solution to the Syrian crisis. Political
negotiations are the only viable option. All warring
parties in Syria must stop fighting immediately, and
those organizations and individuals that reject the
ceasefire will find themselves in opposition to the
Syrian people and the whole world, and they will pay a
high price. The Security Council has already sent a clear
and strong message. The relevant countries, especially
the countries of the region, should also leverage their
respective influence to engage the various parties in
Syria and call for a meaningful ceasefire.
Secondly, we must remain committed to the
principle that the future of Syria must be independently

15-437959/22

S/PV.7588

The situation in the Middle East

decided by the Syrian people. No one cares more about
Syria’s future or knows the country better than the
Syrian people, as Syria belongs to the Syrians. The
political process should be Syrian-led and Syrianowned. This is consistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
universally recogtnized norms governing international
relations.
I wish to stress again that specific steps in the
political transition must be independently worked out
between the Syrian Government and the opposition
representatives through negotiations. The process of
drafting a new constitution must be independently
decided on by all parties and groups in Syria, and a
future leader of Syria must be independently chosen
by the Syrian people. Other countries could help in a
constructive way. The international community needs
to foster an enabling environment, and all parties
should create favourable conditions to that end.
Thirdly, we must remain committed to having
the United Nations serve as the main channel for
mediation. United Nations involvement would bring
more legitimacy and authority to the process, and it
is the largest common denominator acceptable to all
parties. Under Security Council mandate, the United
Nations will formulate a comprehensive ceasefire plan
and promote peace talks between the Government and
the opposition. We look to the United Nations to work
on both fronts steadily, as mandated, and play a greater
role in integrating the opposition groups, coordinating
international counter-terrorism efforts and other
areas. The international community should assist,
complement and provide cooperation and support to the
mediation efforts by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Special Envoy de Mistura in a constructive way.
The International Syria Support Group should build on
its previous efforts and continue to support the United
Nations mediation.
Since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis, China
has all along held an objective and just position and
has participated in the settlement of the issue. China
neither has nor does it pursue self-serving interests
on the Syrian issue. No matter how we vote — for or
against — our goal is always to avoid war and prevent
turmoil, give the Syrian people stability, give peace a
chance and make a political settlement possible. What
we are trying to do is to uphold the fundamental and
long-term interests of the people in Syria and the region,
safeguard the purposes and principles of the Charter

10/22

18/12/2015

of the United Nations and the basic norms governing
international relations, and protect the legitimate
interests of developing countries, especially small- and
medium-sized countries.
The changing dynamics in the Syrian situation
affect the various parties, the region and the whole
world. Its increasingly clear, spiralling effects have
triggered severe global challenges, such as terrorism
and the refugee crisis. We call on all the relevant
parties to rise above narrow geopolitical rivalries
and a zero-sum approach, work for global strategic
stability and the greater good, work together to advance
political transition, jointly fight terrorism, ease the
humanitarian crisis and take a holistic approach to the
refugee problem.
Instability causes suffering, and conflict leaves
no winner. We must join hands to help parties to the
conflict to bury the hatchet and build peace so that the
Syrian people will be able to lead lives free of fear and
war.
The President: I thank Minister Wang Yi
particularly for having travelled all the way to be here
for one day. He is about to catch a plane to rush back.
We are very appreciative of his effort, which, in itself
makes an important statement.
I now give the floor to the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom.
Mr. Hammond (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy,
Staffan de Mistura, for all that they are doing to bring
the Syrian parties together. Allow me to also thank you,
Mr. Secretary, for the characteristic drive and energy
that you have brought for months to this process in
establishing the International Syria Support Group.
That has given new momentum to the resumption of
Syrian-led talks and has brought us to this important
occasion today.
Resolution 2254 (2015), which we have adopted
unanimously today, is a further step in that work.
Sadly, it is far too soon for any of us to predict an end
to the Syrian conflict, but I hope that we will look
back on today as a significant step in that direction.
Frankly, on Syria, the Council has too seldom found
the unity it needed to live up to its responsibility for
delivering peace and security, despite some useful
but only partially implemented resolutions. That has
to change. No country, nor any person who has been
15-43795

18/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

involved in Syria’s destruction over the past four years,
can take any satisfaction from what has been happening
there. On the Syrian dossier, we have to concede that
we have all failed. We have all been losers, but by far
the greatest losers are the people of Syria themselves.
We have to do better, and we have to do better fast, if
there is not to be still more suffering.
The participants in the International Syria Support
Group came together behind a single aim: to support
the Syrian parties in their efforts to find an end to the
conflict and to tackle the terrorists currently operating
in their country. We all share the sense of urgency that
comes from witnessing the ongoing deterioration of
the humanitarian and security situation in Syria. The
Syrians — over 250,000 of whom have been killed
and millions more forced from their homes — have
borne the brunt of that conflict. It is not a humanitarian
disaster. It is a humanitarian catastrophe. The ongoing
and indiscriminate use of weapons on civilians,
especially artillery and aerial bombardments, including
barrel bombs, continues to cause terror, destruction
and civilian deaths. While Daesh poses a real threat to
Syrians, as well as to the wider region, it is Al-Assad
who bears the responsibility for the majority of the
deaths in Syria.
I commend Saudi Arabia for convening a
broad cross-section of representatives of the Syrian
opposition groups in Riyadh earlier this month. The
agreement reached at that meeting in Riyadh and
the formation of a high-level negotiating committee
showed the determination of the Syrian opposition
groups to come together, whatever their differences, to
play a crucial and constructive role in the talks. They
reaffirmed their commitment to the implementation of
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), working
towards a managed transition away from Al-Assad and
a pluralistic future for Syria. I also welcome Jordan’s
efforts aimed at building consensus on identifying the
terrorist groups operating in Syria. While it is for the
Council ultimately to decide to designate any such
groups, theInternational Syria Support Group is in a
privileged position to provide information, analysis
and advice to the Council to assist it. We believe that it
will take time for that review to mature, enabling us to
test which groups are willing to commit to a political
process and a ceasefire.
I would now like to turn to the content of the
resolution just adopted and highlight the areas that will
be critical to the progress of talks.

S/PV.7588

First, all of us, both in the Council and in the broader
international community, want to see an national
ceasefire established. To have a realistic chance of
success, a ceasefire must be closely aligned to making
progress on a political transition and on talks between
the Syrian parties under United Nations auspices. We
have seen previous attempts to end the conflict in
Syria undermined by a lack of determination on the
part of the parties to contribute productively to talks.
It is critical that the voices of all Syrian are heard in
this process, including Syrian women and members of
Syrian minorities.
Secondly, there needs to be confidence among
the parties that the political process will deliver real
results, without which neither the talks nor the ceasefire
will be successful. That will not be easy. Five years
of conflict has eroded confidence. Therefore, all the
parties must undertake confidence-building measures,
some of which are identified in the resolution that
we have adopted today. We welcome the work being
undertaken by the United Nations to that end, with
the aim of arriving at modalities for a ceasefire, as
mandated by today’s resolution. All parties have a duty
to take care, in their military operations, not to cause
the deaths of civilians, whether by deliberate or by
reckless targeting. The indiscriminate use of weapons,
especially the use of artillery and aerial bombardments,
including barrel bombs, must stop. Medical facilities
and schools have increasingly become targets for aerial
bombardment, something that is abhorrent to all of us
and must stop. All parties must adhere to their duties
under international human rights and humanitarian
law. They must allow humanitarian agencies rapid, safe
and unhindered access throughout Syria by the most
direct routes. There are 13.5 million Syrians in need
of humanitarian assistance. Those people need to see a
change in their lives, if they are to have confidence in
this political process and to feel its benefits. The United
Kingdom is the second-largest bilateral donor to the
humanitarian effort in response to the Syrian conflict,
after the United States. But let us all do more on that
front.
The resolution also reiterates a commitment to
political transition in Syria, following the principles of
the Geneva communiqué in full, and leading to free and
fair elections under a new Syrian constitution within
18 months. That will involve the establishment of a
transitional governing body with full executive powers
and representative of all Syrians, all of which provides

15-4379511/22

S/PV.7588

The situation in the Middle East

the framework for talks and an end to the conflict.
That process necessarily involves the departure of
Bashar Al-Assad, not only for moral reasons, given the
destruction that he has unleashed upon his own people,
but also for practical reasons, because it will never be
possible to bring peace and unity to Syria as long as
he remains in office. But we must and will protect the
institutions that are necessary for the future governance
of Syria. That will be possible with a representative
transitional governing body and with the support of the
International Syria Support Group.
While we must seek to end the conflict in Syria,
especially the violence that is directed against civilians,
we must also join in confronting the threat posed by
Daesh and other extremist groups in the country. An
end to the civil war in Syria is critical to tackling Daesh
in the long term. We all agree that terrorist groups must
not and will not benefit from the ceasefire that we are
promoting. A key consideration for the Syrians in the
establishment of the transitional governing body will
be the fight against terrorism. In that fight, they will
have the full support of the International Syria Support
Group and the global coalition to counter the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. Following the appalling
attacks in the Sinai, Beirut, Ankara and Paris, the
Council unanimously decided to adopt resolution
2249 (2015), which calls on all countries to use all
the necessary means to combat Daesh. The United
Kingdom responded to that resolution by extending into
Syria the air strikes that we were already carrying out
in Iraq against Daesh. In that regard, it is vital that all
countries that claim to be fighting Daesh do what they
say rather than direct the bulk of their attacks against
non-extremist opposition groups. There has been clear
evidence over the past weeks that the weakening of such
groups has created opportunities for the expansion of
Daesh in certain areas, the very opposite of the stated
objective.
As well as focusing on the immediate threats, we
must also prepare for the future in Syria. We must
reaffirm our commitment to assist in the post-conflict
reconstruction of the country. Next February, in close
partnership with Germany, Norway, Kuwait and the
United Nations, the United Kingdom will co-host a
conference in London on humanitarian support for
Syria, including a focus on civilian protection, as well
as planning for stabilization. Of course, that conference
will seek to raise the funding that is necessary to meet
the United Nations appeal to support those displaced
by the humanitarian crisis. The United Kingdom is also
12/22

18/12/2015

committed to supporting post-conflict reconstruction
efforts in Syria, and has already committed to
providing at least $1.5 billion to that work in the long
term, in addition to the more than $1.64 billion we
have so far given in humanitarian aid. I hope that in
February we will see others committing to both the
immediate challenge and the long-term challenge of
reconstruction.
In conclusion, the conflict in Syria is now almost
five years old. During that time, more than 250,000
Syrians have been killed. We all have a duty to prevent
further slaughter. Despite the important step that we
have taken with today’s resolution, despite the progress
we have made in Vienna, despite the important steps
forward at the meeting in Riyadh the week before last,
there is still a very long way to go. In order to have
a chance of success, the United Nations will need the
clear and continued support of the International Syria
Support Group, and I know that I can say that it will
have the support of that group. But above all, we need
Syrian leaders of all persuasions to take responsibility
for the future of their country and to take the tough
decisions needed to bring about a lasting political
settlement and an end to the conflict. We can help, but
only the Syrians themselves can bring an end to Syrian
suffering.
The President: Allow me to thank the Secretary
of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of
the United Kingdom, Mr. Hammond, for his personal
engagement and collaboration on this matter. It has
really been key, together with that of Frank-Walter
Steinmeier, Laurent Fabius and company. We are very
appreciative of their help.
I now give the floor to the Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Spain.
Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The
unanimous adoption of resolution 2254 (2015) opens a
window of opportunity to address through dialogue the
crisis in Syria, one of the most painful conflicts that
we have seen in decades. The main victims of the crisis
are first and foremost the Syrians themselves. Today’s
resolution comes too late for the more than 250,000
people who have died in the past five years. We should
not forget that in Syria the most fundamental norms
of international humanitarian law have been — and
continue to be — violated. At the same time, the war in
Syria is a challenge owing to the implications that it has
for the entire region. It triggered the escalation of the
terrorism perpetrated by Daesh, which has become the
15-43795

18/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

main threat to the international community on a global
scale.
As a co-sponsor of the resolution, Spain is well
aware of the attacks in Paris, Beirut, the downing of
a Russian airliner over the Sinai and the attacks in
Ankara. A ceasefire in Syria will allow us to focus on
the political solution to that conflict, while continuing
the fight against terrorism. That is now our priority.
In the coming months, Spain will continue to
actively participate in the coalition against Daesh in
various areas, including the training of Iraqi security
forces. Today’s resolution affirms, moreover, the
centrality of the United Nations, and in particular the
Security Council, which can no longer sit idly by in the
face of a conflict of this magnitude. The Vienna process
has been key in bringing together countries with very
different, even antagonistic, views on the conflict
in Syria around the negotiating table. However, the
United Nations should mediate a long-term solution, as
is reflected in the responsibilities set out in resolution
2254 (2015) to the Secretary-General, the team of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and the Security Council itself.
Without the unity of the international community
we would not have come this far. However, the success
or failure of this process will depend mainly on the
Syrians themselves. The challenge is considerable.
After so many years of war, it will be very difficult to
heal the wounds; the temptation to embrace a military
solution will be present at each stage of the process.
Spain has always supported a dialogue without
preconditions in Syria, with the knowledge that the
future will inevitably go through a transition that will
lead to a new political system based on the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). We fully support
Special Envoy de Mistura, who has all the qualities
necessary to successfully conduct this exercise.
The implementation of confidence-building
measures in the short term would be a clear sign
of hope. In that regard, we call for the immediate
cessation of indiscriminate attacks against the civilian
population, in particular the use of barrel bombs by the
Government of Syria.
In conclusion, yesterday marked five years since
Mohammed Bouazizi’s protest in Tunis, which led to
the Arab Spring. Yesterday in this Chamber we also
adopted resolution 2253 (2015), in which we committed
to take concrete measures to sever the umbilical chord

S/PV.7588

of Daesh’s financing. I trust that the Security Council
will swiftly take a position with the same firmness and
unity in favour of guaranteeing humanitarian assistance
to all Syrians through the most immediate channels and
without any obstacles. Spain is working with Jordan and
New Zealand to achieve the adoption of such a draft
resolution. We will submit for adoption together next
week, and I am sure that all Security Council members
will provide their full support. The involvement of all
the parties will be needed to implement that resolution.
In recent days we have had positive news on Libya
from Morocco. Step by step progress is being made
in Yemen. In Syria we have a long road ahead full of
obstacles, but at least we are taking the most important
step — an indispensable step, in fact — so that armed
clashes give way to diplomacy.
As a member of the Security Council, Spain will
spare no effort in translating the spirit of unity and
consensus into an effective commitment to peace,
security and stability in Syria and in the Middle East
as a whole.
The President: I now give the floor to the Secretary
of State for External Relations of Angola.
Mr. Domingos (Angola): We thank the United
States Secretary of State, Mr. John Kerry, for presiding
over this important meeting.
We also welcome the adoption of the landmark
resolution 2254 (2015), which delineates the process
that will bring about the end of the Syrian crisis. Its
pledge to support the ceasefire in Syria marks a vital
step forward. We encourage all parties to abide by its
provisions in order to successfully implement a Syrianled political transition, thereby ensuring the continuity
of governmental institutions and the maintenance of
the independence and territorial integrity of Syria. We
urge all parties in Syria, as well as the international
community, to maintain their focus and commitment
to the principles stipulated in that resolution and in the
Geneva communiqué (S/2023/522, annex).
The conflict in Syria has become one of the most
appalling situations confronting the international
community, with far-reaching political, humanitarian
and economic repercussions. The Security Council
has addressed the issue on numerous occasions with a
feeling of despair due to the grim situation faced by
the Syrian people. During the debates on the Syrian
situation, the delegation of Angola often admitted
to its disappointment with the lack of political will

15-4379513/22

S/PV.7588

The situation in the Middle East

demonstrated by the major stakeholders. Such political
will is necessary to achieve an effective, real and
durable solution to end a war that has claimed the
lives of so many innocent people while also displacing
millions. Now, as we reach the end of this year, we
look forward with a sense of renewed hope due to the
apparent determination by the international community
to defeat terrorism, as well as the positive momentum
for the political resolution to the conflict in Syria.
The recent upsurge in brutal terrorist
attacks — namely, in Paris, Beirut, Iraq, Ankara,
Egypt, Bamako and elsewhere — and the staggering
refugee crisis from Syria seemed to have played the
role of a game-changer by making the international
community understand the implications of allowing
conflicts to degenerate to such an extent, as has been
the case of the crisis in Syria. People suffering under
such deplorable conditions for such a prolonged period
of time, while international organizations and world
Powers are unable or unwilling to protect them, are
prey for the recruitment efforts of radical and extremist
elements. Exclusion, poverty and armed conflict serve
as a breeding ground for violent extremist groups to
spread their ideology of hatred and intolerance, as is
the case with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL)/Daesh and other terrorist organizations operating
in the region.
It is reassuring that the international community
has begun to turn the tide by adopting positive steps
towards a political transition in Syria that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and that
will, hopefully, enable them to independently and
democratically determine their own future, while
repudiating extremist elements such as ISIL/Daesh and
Jabhat Al-Nusra, among others.
We welcome the outcomes of the recent Syria talks
in Vienna and the specific steps outlined with regard
to the political process in Syria, notably the request
for the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan
di Mistura, to convene a meeting with the Syrian
Government and opposition by January 2016. In that
regard, we stress the importance of identifying members
representing the entire spectrum of opposition forces,
and for both sides to start discussing without further
delay the end of hostilities and the establishment of a
sustainable ceasefire. That would constitute the first
step towards a meaningful political process enabling a
new future for Syria.

14/22

18/12/2015

It is also imperative that the parties to the conflict
begin implementing confidence-building measures on
the ground in order to attain the established deadlines
for the political process agreed by the International
Syria Support Group. That includes a joint national
unity Government, the drafting of a new constitution
and the holding of elections based on that constitution.
Putting an end to the violence is one of the most
pressing issues at the moment. As the refugee crisis has
demonstrated, the humanitarian catastrophe needs to be
reversed by creating conditions for a ceasefire, thereby
permitting the safe return of displaced people and
refugees to their homes. In the meantime, however, we
should not forget the collective obligation to continue
providing humanitarian aid until a normal life can be
restored in Syria.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
support to the principles of the Geneva communiqué
and the constructive measures adopted at the Vienna
meetings regarding the way forward in the resolution of
the Syrian conflict. We also welcome the broad-based
international coalition to fight the so-called Islamic
State/Daesh and other terrorist groups. Auspiciously,
it became evident that inaction was no longer suitable
given the dangerous proliferation of extremism
throughout the world and its impact on the daily lives
of people everywhere. A unified stand in the fight on
terrorism is crucial. Terrorists can prevail anywhere
in the world. The more the international community
is divided and States selfishly pursue their national
interests, the more the terrorists prey on vulnerable and
alienated communities in conflict-ridden areas, thereby
swelling their ranks and increasingly threatening
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.
Mr. Krivas (Lithuania): Our meeting today and the
adoption of resolution 2254 (2015) mark an important
step towards the settlement of the most brutal conflict
of this century. The peace process that started in Vienna
is long overdue, as a human tragedy continues to take
place inside Syria and keeps spilling over its borders,
with a particularly heavy burden on its neighbours.
Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey are bearing the brunt of
it. Unprecedented numbers of refugees are reaching
Europe, while human traffickers and smugglers are
profiting from their plight.

15-43795

18/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

To this very day, the civilian population continues
to suffer atrocities committed not only by terrorist
groups such as Daesh but also by President Al-Assad’s
regime. As part of the problem, President Al-Assad
cannot be seen as part of the solution to this devastating
crisis. All Syrians should feel safe and have the right
to be secure in a future peaceful and democratic Syria.
Those who committed crimes against humanity, gross
human rights violations and mass atrocities should be
brought to justice. There can be no room for impunity.
An immediate halt to the hostilities in Syria that
leads to the end of this bloody conflict is a matter of
urgency and a moral obligation. The very first and
most urgent step is to agree on a long-term, sustainable
ceasefire. It is imperative to fully open unconditional
and unhindered humanitarian access to all in need,
including those in besieged and hard-to reach areas.
At this juncture, the political momentum is fragile
and still reversible. A real breakthrough requires
long-term, genuine engagement from all parties to
the conflict, along with courage and readiness to
compromise. After years of this monstrous war there
will be no winners, but there is much to be gained by
immediately stopping the bloodshed, safeguarding
the integrity and sovereignty of the Syrian State and
starting to build a future for its people.
We welcome the meeting by the broad range of
opposition representatives recently held in Riyadh,
which aimed to achieve a common stance in the
peace process. We see it as the start to consolidating
the moderate opposition and as a sign of readiness to
seek common solutions. In order to achieve peace and
reconciliation, the Syrians will need our massive, longterm and sustained assistance in all aspects, including
in the political, security and humanitarian spheres, in
reconciliation and reconstruction and in the country’s
overall development.
We must continue to push the peace process forward
by seeking a genuine and sustainable resolution to the
conflict, setting aside divergent views and interests.
The strong leadership and mediation of the United
Nations remains essential. In that respect, we express
our appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
his Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for their
efforts. A well conceived, consistent and comprehensive
strategy for political transition, including reconciliation
and the voluntary, safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, must be thoroughly prepared and

S/PV.7588

responsibly implemented in accordance with the 2012
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Even with a political transition soundly on track,
Daesh will remain one of the biggest threats to peace
and stability in the region and beyond. Along with the
military effort to defeat Daesh, there will be a long and
difficult battle against its poisonous ideology. That
battle must be fought by Muslims themselves, who
are the primary and most vulnerable target of Daesh’s
murderous ideology.
In order to avoid the risk of fragmentation or the
creation of new frozen conflict zones in Syria, and
to advance the peace process and reconciliation, it is
critically important for local populations to take the
lead and ownership. Women’s voices in particular must
be heard loud and clear at all stages of negotiations
leading to peace and post-conflict reconstruction.
Syria’s strength lies in its cultural, ethnic
and religious diversity. All pieces of that complex
fabric — Muslims, Kurds, Alawites, Druze, Turkmen,
Yazidis, Christians and others — must play a full and
integral part in the future of Syria, while enjoying equal
rights, safety, dignity and inclusion in the governance
of the country. Even if the political transition is
facilitated by a third party, the final decisions on their
destiny must be taken by the Syrian people themselves.
Only the Syrian people can decide what kind of State
they want to live in. We hope that they will choose an
inclusive, democratic, accountable and moderate State,
in order to avoid repeating the tragedy that marks their
lives today.
The President: I now give the floor to the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Malaysia.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to first thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
We are of the view that, by bringing the Vienna
International Syria Support Group process to New
York, non-participating Security Council members are
able to substantively engage on issues concerning the
situation in Syria, on which we would have preferred to
have more time for consultations. This is an important
step in ensuring and cementing the Council’s unity of
purpose and vision on the way forward for Syria. That
the international community has a strong desire to see
an end to the conflict in Syria is beyond doubt. The
cost in terms of human life and destruction of property
of the Syrian conflict to date is simply staggering.

15-4379515/22

S/PV.7588

The situation in the Middle East

Such suffering and misery must end now. It is for that
primary reason that Malaysia joined the consensus on
resolution 2254 (2015).
We support the aim of resolution 2254 (2015)
to build on the vision and principles of the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and the Vienna
statements embodying the collective will of the
international community to bring about a peaceful
and sustainable solution to the Syrian conflict. In that
context, my delegation expresses its deep appreciation
to Special Envoy Steffan de Mistura for his untiring
facilitation, which we fully support.
As it moves into its fifth year, the Syrian conflict
continues to be a litany of horrific human rights
abuses and violations — most notoriously violations
of international humanitarian law through the use
of toxic chemicals as weapons, and indiscriminate
attacks against civilians perpetrated by the parties to
the conflict. The Syrian people are further tormented
by Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist
groups and violent extremists, reinforced by the
unprecedented influx of foreign terrorist fighters.
The Syrian Government must accept that it has the
primary responsibility and obligation to protect its own
people, in accordance with established international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We reaffirm the demand on all parties
to cease all indiscriminate attacks against civilians and
to end targeted attacks on civilian infrastructure. We
reaffirm our condemnation of the continued use of
barrel bombs, aerial bombing and artillery shelling of
civilians. There can be no impunity for the perpetrators
of possible war crimes and crimes against humanity.
They must be held accountable.
At the same time, Malaysia remains deeply
concerned that, despite the clear demand for cooperation
stipulated in resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014), the delivery of humanitarian assistance
remains a huge problem. All parties to the conflict,
particularly the Syrian authorities, must do more to
demonstrate full and effective compliance with those
resolutions.
Only through the peaceful resolution of the
conflict can the dire and deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Syria begin to be meaningfully addressed,
making it all the more urgent to do so. On that note,
Malaysia acknowledges the role of Syria’s neighbours,
in particular Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, for their

16/22

18/12/2015

steadfast resilience and for their hospitality is sheltering
and caring for the millions fleeing the humanitarian
catastrophe in Syria, despite facing enormous capacity
and resource constraints.
A fundamental element of any proposed peace
process must include the implementation of a nationwide
ceasefire. We are pleased that this requirement,
including modalities for implementation, is explicitly
outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). The preservation
of Syria’s unity, independence, territorial integrity
and secular character are key factors for ensuring
acceptance of any proposed political process or plan by
the Syrian people.
No amount of encouragement, persuasion or
pressure will be effective without the political buy-in
of the Syrian people. In that connection, we call upon
Syrian Government representatives and representatives
of the opposition to spare no effort to ensure that the
proposed talks take place in early January 2016.
While noting that there are a number of contentious
issues that have yet to be addressed or agreed upon, we
nevertheless call on all parties to continue to engage
constructively in dialogue and to further narrow
differences with a view to finding mutually acceptable
solutions to end the conflict.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that there
can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict. The
future of Syria must be determined through an inclusive
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process. The
Syrian Government, the opposition parties and the
Syrian people cannot afford to let this opportunity
pass. We believe that the Council has an obligation
to support initiatives, such as the International Syria
Support Group or any other initiative, that seeks to
resolve the conflict in Syria through peaceful means.
In that regard, we look forward to the full and effective
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) by all the
parties concerned.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Nigeria.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): We would like to thank
the delegation of the United States for convening this
meeting on a subject of vital importance to international
peace and security. We also want to acknowledge the
presence of participating Foreign Ministers and to
welcome them to the Security Council. We listened
attentively to the Secretary-General’s briefing, and

15-43795

18/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

we thank him not only for sharing his perspectives on
this subject, but also for being a moral voice in global
politics.
The conflict in Syria is a matter of concern to
Nigeria as well. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups associated
with them are taking advantage of the situation to
entrench themselves and consolidate their positions.
They are committing war crimes and crimes against
humanity and, to that extent, they constitute a grave
threat to international peace and security.
Containing and defeating the terrorists should be a
top priority for the international community. Achieving
that will require that the Syrian conflict be resolved
urgently, expeditiously and comprehensively. The
warring parties must agree on a ceasefire without delay.
That is a crucial first step and a valid point of departure
to de-escalate the conflict and create the conditions for
achieving a political solution.
The establishment of the International Syria
Support Group has given much-needed momentum to
the search for a peaceful resolution of the conflict in
Syria. The presence of key international and regional
stakeholders in the Group is a clear indication that the
international community is prepared to work in unison
to resolve the Syrian conflict. We note the outcomes of
the Group’s meetings of 30 October and 14 November,
held in Vienna, and the meeting held today in New
York. We support the efforts of the Group to resolve
the Syrian conflict on the basis of a Syrian-led political
process and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex).
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2254 (2015)
today is an unequivocal indication of the commitment
of the Council to resolve the Syrian conflict. Indeed,
as others have aptly noted this afternoon, it presents a
clear road map on the way forward. We urge the warring
parties to build on the momentum of the resolution
to bring the conflict to an end and restore the muchneeded peace, security and stability in Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting on the
peace process in Syria. We also welcome the presence

S/PV.7588

of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other highlevel representatives at this meeting.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted in
favour of resolution 2254 (2015), despite the short
period of time with which we had to familiarize
ourselves with its content, because we believe that the
text reaffirms the view that the solution to the armed
conflict that affects that Arab country, as a result of the
criminal actions of terrorist groups, should be political,
peaceful and negotiated. We have always been in favour
of such an approach. We are pleased to note that there
is political will among the players with influence on the
crisis in Syria that can pave the way for peace, which
the Syrian people so yearn for. We must act decisively,
and we think the space opened up by the presidency of
the Council provides an encouraging sign.
We must seize the opportunity before us and
decisively move the peace process in Syria forward,
building on the momentum of Vienna, along the path
to a political solution to the armed conflict. In the same
vein, willingness should not only be expressed in words,
but with concrete actions resulting from a commitment
by both parties to put an end to such a conflict as this,
which has had very serious humanitarian consequences
and has affected international peace and security.
We express our appreciation and support for the
diplomatic efforts made by Mr. Staffan de Mistura to
achieve a firm and lasting peace in Syria. We are aware
that identifying common elements to lay the basis for
political negotiations is a difficult, but very important,
task that requires the commitment of all parties to
achieve concrete progress.
We believe that a positive aspect of the Vienna
process is the willingness to engage with the
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad in order
to find a political way out of the conflict. Venezuela
believes the legitimate Government of President
Al-Assad to be one of the key players in the political
equation that could lead to a resolution of the conflict.
Ignoring that essential reality is to condemn the peace
process to failure.
The Syrian people must reaffirm their political
independence, with the help of the international
community, without foreign interference or solutions
imposed from outside that reflect interests that are
different from those of Syria. In that connection,
Venezuela reiterates its support for the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of Syria

15-4379517/22

S/PV.7588

The situation in the Middle East

and its right to self-determination in accordance with
international law, including the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
The resolution of the humanitarian crisis in Syria is
linked to the end of hostilities. Continued conflict will
further exacerbate the tragic humanitarian situation
and will, in turn, create greater instability and have an
impact on neighbouring countries, which have taken
in millions of refugees fleeing the war. Furthermore,
it is important to draw up as soon as possible the lists
of terrorist and opposition groups in order to advance
the agenda proposed by the International Syria Support
Group in November. Opposition groups should be
aware that they must sit down and negotiate with the
Syrian authorities in a constructive spirit to achieve a
political and peaceful solution to the conflict.
With regard to the designation of terrorist groups,
there must not be any double standards or “good” and
“bad” terrorists. That aspect is important because the
Syrian Government is waging a merciless battle against
the terrorist organizations of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) and Al-Nusra Front, among others,
which have expanded their activities to other countries
in the Middle East, North Africa and other regions. If
the international community does not act decisively
to prevent the financing, training and arms transfers
to those groups and stop their use and encouragement
as tools to overthrow Governments, all peoples will
continue to pay a high price to achieve the peace and
security that they so yearn for.
In that context, international cooperation in the
fight against terrorism must be strengthened. Venezuela
supports any action aimed at combatting ISIS and other
terrorist organizations, with the understanding that
it must be coordinated with the Syrian authorities.
That is why the effective implementation of the
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council to combat terrorism — including
Council resolutions 2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and
2253 (2015) — is of paramount importance as part
of the strategy designed collectively to put an end to
the financing, supply of arms and training to terrorist
groups and armed and violent non-State actors that later
become allies of ISIS and Al-Nusra Front in different
parts of the world, making them a global threat to
international peace and security.
We must prevent the collapse of Syria and its
institutions, as noted in the Vienna statement. That
is crucial, since the traumatic experiences in Iraq and
18/22

18/12/2015

Libya — and their terrible consequences — must not
be repeated.
Finally, our country and our Government will
continue working towards achieving peace and the end
of this terrible conflict through our modest cooperation
in the Security Council, on the basis for a negotiated
political solution and with the leadership of the Syrian
people and its Government and institutions, thereby
ensuring the sovereignty and independence of that
brotherly Arab country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank
Secretary Kerry and the United States for convening
today’s meeting and for preparing the resolution that
we adopted today (resolution 2254 (2015)). We also
acknowledge and thank the other Foreign Ministers for
coming to our meeting today.
We appreciate that this meeting and the resolution
were convened and drafted, respectively, under
significant time pressures and, for that reason, we were
prepared to go along with the resolution even if we did
not entirely welcome the short time that we were given
to consider it.
The collapse of Syria into the nightmare of civil
war has resulted in the spread of insecurity throughout
the world. Al-Assad’s cruel response in 2011 to peaceful
civilian protest and ongoing breaches of international
humanitarian law have fuelled extremism and
terrorism. They have precipitated the foreign terrorist
fighter phenomenon. For Syrians, the conflict has
meant death, suffering, destruction and displacement
on a scale that is difficult to comprehend. The conflict
has produced the biggest exodus of people since the
Second World War. Syria’s neighbours, especially
Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey, have borne the brunt. The
conflict has further destabilized Iraq and given rise to
appalling atrocities, and the destabilizing impacts have
now reached Europe.
The international community and the Security
Council must accept a share of the blame. The
devastation in Syria demonstrates beyond any doubt
the need for effective conflict prevention, and for
Council unity in achieving it. The fact that we could
today come together at last and adopt this landmark
resolution in a short time reflects the determination of
the international community to end the conflict. We
welcome in particular the continued close engagement
15-43795

18/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

between the Security Council and the International
Syria Support Group.
As we move forward, it must be a time for
acceptance. Everyone involved in the Syrian tragedy
must accept that no side can win militarily. The
Al-Assad Government and the opposition fighters must
accept that, however much more death and destruction
they inflict on their country, there will be no victory.
They and those external actors who have serious
political stakes in how the Syrian conflict is resolved
must accept that political solutions mean political
compromise. Anyone who insists on political red lines
that block the necessary compromises will have to
measure the delay that they cause in terms of more lives
lost, more refugees and more suffering. Delay plays into
the hands of the extremists, such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Compromise requires a
willingness to take difficult decisions, to give and take,
to ultimately accept an outcome that may be short of
initial positions. A political solution will be imperfect,
but it is necessary.
In July, six countries came together with Iran and
found a political solution to one of the most difficult
issues of the past decade. My Foreign Minister, who
was presiding over the Council at the time of the
adoption of the resolution on the Iran nuclear issue,
challenged Council members to apply the same courage
and commitment to a political solution for Syira.
The establishment of the Support Group and its
meetings have given us hope that there is at last a way
out of this conflict. The Support Group benefits from
its inclusive membership and from the ambition and
capacities of the major Powers involved. It has also
benefited from focusing on the issues that all agree
upon — working together to counter terrorism, ensure
the survival of State institutions in Syria and end violent
conflict. That is positive, but big questions remain.
First, there is the need for a comprehensive ceasefire.
Secondly, offensive operations must be immediately
and exclusively focused on ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front
and any other terrorist organizations designated as
such by the Security Council. Those operations must
be carried out in a way that protects civilians. Thirdly,
we recognize the Jordan-led process to expand the list
of designated terrorist organizations, as envisaged in
resolution 2249 (2015). But until there is agreement,
we should proceed on the basis that peace in Syria will
not be served by a hasty approach that defines far too

S/PV.7588

many people as terrorists. Fourthly, Al-Assad’s future
is an issue for the intra-Syrian process to decide. We
agree with the Secretary-General that it is unacceptable
to let one person take the political-negotiation process
hostage.
Answers to other difficult questions will also be
needed. They include the sequencing of the ceasefire
and the mechanics of the transition, including ceasefire
monitoring, long-term mechanisms for guaranteeing
security and coalescing the Syrian opposition. We
welcome the efforts of Saudi Arabia on that last point.
On all of those issues, New Zealand encourages
key players to prioritize pragmatism and an end to
the conflict over their other interests. New Zealand
supports a Syrian-led political transition process that
is fully inclusive, representative and provides for the
protection of groups within Syria. The Council also
has a role to play in reminding everyone that political
solutions do not mean giving up core values. It is clear
that the Syrian Government’s resistance to the core value
of inclusiveness has been a key factor in perpetuating
recruitment conditions for violent extremist groups.
We firmly believe that the day will come — and
must come — when there will be accountability. In the
meantime, we must do all we can to reduce suffering,
open humanitarian access, build trust and protect
civilians. Ending indiscriminate attacks and releasing
political prisoners are also critical.
An immediate next responsibility for the Security
Council is to renew the mandate for cross-border and
cross-line humanitarian assistance. The arrangements
in place have facilitated the United Nations and others
to help millions of people. The draft resolution that
has been prepared by New Zealand, Jordan and Spain
reflects developments over the last year. Its adoption is
urgent, and we call on all of our Council colleagues to
join us in adopting the draft resolution very soon.
Finding a solution has taken too long, but we
finally have an opening. Let us make the year 2016 the
year when we end the fighting, work together to counter
terrorism and start to rebuild Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of United States Secretary of
State John Kerry, as well as of the Ministers and Deputy
Ministers who have joined us today.

15-4379519/22

S/PV.7588

The situation in the Middle East

We hope that resolution 2254 (2015) contributes
to the ceasefire and the start of a process of formal
negotiations to achieve a lasting political settlement in
Syria. My delegation would have appreciated having
more time to consider the text of the resolution.
The recent meetings of the International Syria
Support Group are a step forward towards dialogue,
bringing together at the same table the relevant
international and regional actors with influence on the
parties in conflict. However, the next step is to overcome
the existing substantive differences and, as noted by the
Secretary-General, to be able to reduce them and build
areas of shared understanding. We believe that all Syrian
actors who are willing to reach a political solution for
lasting peace should be brought together in an inclusive
manner. The Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
is clear: there must be a political process led by the
Syrians themselves. That also involves the active and
proportionate participation of women.
The parties have an obligation to the Syrian people
to commit firmly to reaching an agreement, and our
role as the international community is to support that.
Any political solution must preserve the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic. State institutions must remain intact
to avoid situations where the erosion or collapse of
institutions leads to catastrophic consequences for the
civilian population.
Terrorism, which has greatly affected Syria and
many other countries, must be fought in a united manner
similar to the valued unity with which the Council has
addressed the terrorist threat in recent weeks. However,
terrorism should not be an impediment to the political
process.
We have said here in the Chamber that a political
solution is the only way to deal with the humanitarian
crisis. We must not forget that the civilian population,
including millions of children, has been the most
affected of all in almost five years of conflict. Nor can
we think of lasting peace without justice, accountability
and reconciliation. Nevertheless, a political solution
will remain distant so long as the militarization of the
conflict continues. We therefore call for an end to the
supply and flow of weapons to all parties.
The President: I give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Chad.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
United States presidency for convening this ministerial
20/22

18/12/2015

meeting on Syria. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his statement.
The situation in Syria remains a major source of
grave concern. The war in that country has gone on
for far too long, and the Syrian people continue to
bear a heavy burden. It is high time to take stock of
the Council’s action regarding the conflict, with its
multifaceted and multidimensional consequences.
Despite the Council’s adoption of several resolutions
and statements concerning the situation in Syria, it
must be noted that the war drags on, with its funeral
march of atrocities, suffering, the forced displacement
of innocent civilians and the destruction of the country’s
vital infrastructure.
Despite the complexity of the Syrian crisis, the
international community must not give up or spare
any effort in advancing the political process with a
view to achieving an end to the crisis that is lasting
and acceptable to all parties concerned. To that end,
we call on the parties to the conflict to be guided by
the force of reason rather than the logic of force, and to
resolutely commit to dialogue with a view to ending the
interminable cycle of violence.
It is clear that there is no military solution to the
Syrian crisis. Solely an inclusive political process can
put an end to the conflict, in which preliminary figures
indicate that the number of deaths, as has been noted,
is over 250,000, among which are 12,000 children.
Hundreds of thousands have been wounded, with some
7 million internally displaced persons and more than
4 million refugees.
Chad welcomes the convening this morning in New
York of the International Syria Support Group, and
warmly welcomes the intensive diplomatic efforts of
its initiators, notably the United States of America and
the Russian Federation, as well as other regional and
international partners. We hope that the new dynamism
created by the Vienna and New York conferences and
endorsed by resolution 2254 (2015), which was adopted
earlier, will allow us to overcome our differences and
set up a political transition in line with the already
established road map and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex) and in full respect for the unity,
independence and sovereignty of Syria. In that regard,
we call on the regional actors to play a constructive role
with a view to encouraging the parties to demonstrate
flexibility and to commit in good faith and without
preconditions to the political process.

15-43795

18/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

The option of peace requires difficult choices and
concessions from both sides. Continuing the war is not
just disastrous, but also provides a breeding ground
for the spread of terrorist groups, such as Daesh and
Jabhat Al-Nusra, which could destabilize the entire
region. Indeed, the scope of the threat is worldwide. In
a region wracked by crises that are each as grave the
next, the rapid settlement of the Syrian crisis is urgent.
It will require further action and commitment to joint
efforts and cooperation on the part of all regional
and international partners, aimed at restoring peace
in Syria. Along those lines, Chad voted in favour of
resolution 2254 (2015) in the hope that it might help the
Council progress towards peace in Syria.
The President: I want to take this occasion, on
behalf of Secretary Kerry, to thank all Council members
for moving very quickly today in pursuit of a unified
message to the world and unity for resolution 2254
(2015). I know it was not easy for many delegations, so
I offer the sincere gratitude of our delegation and all the
members of the International Syria Support Group who
worked on the resolution and sought to enshrine its key
provisions.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): In its meeting yesterday (S/PV.7587), the
Security Council took an important step in the fight
against terrorism by adopting resolution 2253 (2015).
Today, we are participating in another important
ministerial meeting on my country, Syria. I should
like to see Council members consider the situation
in Syria objectively and appropriately, rather than by
adopting positions that intensify and prolong the crisis,
thereby promoting the spread of anarchy and terrorism,
the exploitation of my country, and the repetition of
actions that are based on failed assumptions and have
already wrought havoc and destruction in more than
one country.
The Government of Syria favours a fight against
terrorism that is based on legal principles, not on fear
or reaction to terrorist acts taking place outside Syria.
The Syrian Government remains open to any initiative
or sincere effort to help it overcome the present crisis.
As everyone knows, Syria, on the basis of its national
responsibility and the interests of its people, has
extended great cooperation and commitment to the
efforts of the United Nations, starting with the mission

S/PV.7588

carried out by Mr. Kofi Annan, followed by those of
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi and Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
who is with us today but has just this moment left the
Chamber.
Today, I reiterate the readiness of the Syrian
Government to participate effectively in any sincere
effort to ensure that Syrians alone will determine
their choices through an intra-Syrian dialogue under
Syrian leadership and without foreign intervention,
and in a manner that maintains Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. That has been reaffirmed by
all of the relevant Security Council resolutions on
Syria. However, we note that, regrettably, while some
countries affirm Syria’s sovereignty in the Council,
they have violated it on the ground by supporting
terrorist groups and sending military aircraft to bomb
oil installations and economic infrastructure, and by
imposing unilateral sanctions on the Syrian people.
The success of any political path in Syria requires
the Government of Syria be an integral part of and
party to the process. Coordination and cooperation
with the Syrian Government are therefore necessary in
all aspects of such a path if we truly desire success.
Furthermore, a successful political track will require
international commitment and sincere, genuine
political will on the part of all parties, including those
countries with a direct influence on the parties that are
undermining the political process and those that are
providing the latter with a lifeline.
While the international community emphasizes that
there is only one solution — the political solution — there
are those that irresponsibly and unaccountably reiterate
that they will resort to a military solution. They have
given names to their failed initiatives, such as “Storm”,
“Volcano”, “Cyclone” or “Tornado”. It has become
quite clear that the success of the political process must
be predicated on a serious, effective and collective fight
againt terrorism.
My country therefore welcomes the Council’s
adoption of resolution 2253 (2015) and appreciates
the initiative of our friend the Russian Federation
and its sincere efforts to introduce the resolution,
complementing and strengthening other important
aspects of the issue that have not been fully covered
by previous Security Council resolutions on combating
terrorism. It imposes clear and unambiguous obligations
on countries that support terrorism, thus backing up
resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015).

15-4379521/22

S/PV.7588

The situation in the Middle East

18/12/2015

Resolution 2253 (2015) responds to several
concerns that my delegation has been raising for the
past few years. My country therefore joins in the
positive response to its adoption, and hopes that it will
be a turning point in the efforts to close the gap between
our words and deeds and thus to lay a foundation for
a genuine international alliance aimed at combating
terrorism. We have no interest in hollow, unrealistic
alliances that are led by supporters of terrorism that
only erode the provisions of anti-terrorism resolutions,
and in particular in selective alliances that violate
States’ sovereignty and serve only the interests of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida and
their questionable ideologies.

We call on all honourable Syrians to participate
in the political process on a national basis in order
to help develop and rebuild Syria by restoring its
security and stability as a priority. A settlement can
be achieved only under a Syrian-led solution reached
via a comprehensive political process that responds to
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. It must
be done through a national dialogue that can bring
everyone together under Government auspices with
the aim of establishing a secular, pluralistic State in
which all are equal before the law — a State in which
opportunities are open to all without discrimination,
led by the Syrian people alone in freedom, transparency
and without foreign interference or influence.

We know that the restoration of peace and stability
throughout Syria requires that we deal immediately with
the threat posed by terrorism within the framework of
international legitimacy and that we tackle the realities
on the ground practically and pragmatically. The Syrian
Government is therefore ready to halt the fighting in
areas where Syrian armed groups are present in the
interests of achieving national reconciliation aimed at
restoring normalcy in those regions, including State
institutions and public services, and under which the
armed groups can lay down their weapons so that their
conditions may be met and they can be pardoned. We
have already made successful attempts in some of
those areas, and the Government is seeking to expand
such reconciliation efforts in order to see stability and
security restored. However, where terrorist groups and
mercenaries such as Daesh, Jabhat Al-Nusra and others
are concerned, the Syrian Government will never
engage in dialogue and will continue to fight until they
are eradicated.

In conclusion, I would like to state that I have
noted glaring contradictions in some of the statements
made today. On the one hand, they emphasize that the
Syrian people alone must decide their future, without
outside intervention, while at the same time they have
raised issues about our sovereignty relating to my
country’s presidency, a matter that is the prerogative
of the Syrian people alone, as stated in paragraph 1 of
resolution 2254 (2015), which “stresses that the Syrian
people will decide the future of Syria”. Such efforts
to interfere with the foundations of sovereignty in my
country only expose the true intentions behind the
policies of those speakers, who abandoned the context
of the resolution before the ink on it was dry. Taking a
resolution that they had only just adopted and agreed
on, they began interpreting its provisions to suit their
wishes. That is not promising behaviour and does not
give us confidence in what we are hearing and doing.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

22/22

15-43795
