A/66/PV.120

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

120th plenary meeting

Friday, 29 June 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Zinsou (Benin),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/66/762 and
A/66/762/Add.1)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.53)
Mr. Okafor (Nigeria): I wish to express profound
appreciation to the President of the General Assembly
for convening this important meeting. My delegation
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Canada, Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, for his
efforts and commitment in facilitating the consultations
on the draft resolution (A/66/L.53) on the third review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Today’s meeting is indeed an affirmation of
the significance and invaluable contribution of the
General Assembly to the global efforts to combat the
scourge of terrorism. The statements by Member States
yesterday underscore the importance of strengthening
international cooperation to prevent and combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
The heightened incidence of terrorist attacks
globally remains a continuing challenge. In this regard,
Nigeria firmly supports the full implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy

(Qatar)

as a comprehensive and effective framework to fight
terrorism. Equally, Nigeria endorses the mandate
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF), whose activities range from conflict
prevention and resolution to capacity-building,
education, peacekeeping, health and other development
questions. We believe that all those issues should be
addressed during this review to strengthen the global
efforts to combat terrorism.
Nigeria
supports
international
initiatives
aimed at strengthening international cooperation
to counter terrorism and the implementation of all
recommendations formulated within the overall
framework of the Strategy’s four pillars. Whenever
new mechanisms are deemed necessary, it is important
to avoid duplication of effort and to ensure that they
work together within the United Nations and its
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to
facilitate and promote coordination and coherence in
order to prevent and combat terrorism in all its forms.
At the regional level, Nigeria has participated
in the formulation of the Protocol to the 1999 OAU
Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism and has acceded to the Convention.
Over the past four months, Nigeria has faced an
upsurge in acts of terrorism in the northern part of
the country. Rather than being intimidated by those
terrorist acts, we are resolved to develop national
strategies and, above all, collaborate more closely
with the international community. In this regard,
Nigeria’s response has been swift and determined. We

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-39684 (E)

*1239684*

A/66/PV.120

have developed new national strategies and intensified
collaboration with the international community in
addressing this threat. Nigeria has also undertaken
measures to strengthen its law enforcement capabilities
and legal/regulatory infrastructure and to enhance its
strategic partnerships.
It is pertinent to note that, in January, Nigeria
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF) launched the Integrated Assistance
for Countering Terrorism Initiative. The CTITF also
facilitated a training workshop in June on suicide
attacks and preventive strategies, under the project for
stabilization and counter-terrorism capacity-building in
Nigeria.
In support of awareness activities on global
counter-terrorism efforts, Nigeria has also indicated
interest in hosting the launch of the Strategy in the West
African subregion later this year. The three-pronged
project is a concrete example of what can be achieved
when partner States, international organizations, civil
society organizations and stakeholders work in concert
for the attainment of a common objective. Furthermore,
Nigeria’s membership in the Global Counterterrorism
Forum and the Advisory Board of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre underscore our commitment
to galvanize and join global efforts in the fight against
terrorism and all its ramifications.
At the national level, President Goodluck Ebele
Jonathan signed into law, on 3 June 2011, the Terrorism
Prevention Bill 2011 and the Money Laundering
Prohibition Act 2011. The Bill established measures
for the prevention, prohibition and combating of acts
of terrorism in Nigeria, while the Money Laundering
Prohibition Act strengthened measures to prohibit
the financing of terrorism and the laundering of the
proceeds of crime or illegal acts. To further strengthen
the provisions of those laws in accordance with modern
standards, Nigeria is reviewing this legal/regulatory
architecture and incorporating global best practices.
It is evident that close and systematic cooperation
among all States is indeed an essential prerequisite for
an effective United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Winning the war against terrorism is
achievable only through firm and determined resolve
and commitment by all stakeholders at the national,
regional and international levels. I would like to urge the
General Assembly to continue this coordinated approach
towards combating terrorism. It is our fervent hope that

2

this third review will provide new insights and impetus
for enhancing the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Nigeria reiterates
its commitment to the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and all other such initiatives.
Mr. Tuvić (Serbia): It is my pleasure to attend
this extraordinary event that marks six years since the
adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy.
Let me point out that the Republic of Serbia aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union (EU). I shall therefore focus my
statement on some points from my country’s national
perspective. In particular, I want to emphasize those
elements that have not been included in the recently
published report of the Secretary-General on the
progress made in the Republic of Serbia in implementing
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/66/762), in particular the progress relating to
strengthening national capacity, legislation and the
training of local stakeholders to implement standards
that contribute to the development of national
counter-terrorism plans.
For the Government of the Republic of Serbia,
which has set an ambitious reform agenda with
membership in the European Union as its strategic
priority, any assistance providing more effective and
efficient social, economic and political development
is of great value. When it comes to fighting terrorism,
the guidelines contained in the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy are of paramount
importance to us, particularly the references to measures
aimed at strengthening international cooperation.
In that context, I wish to inform the General
Assembly that we are approaching the final stages
of preparation for the start of a joint project with the
European Union (EU) and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) aimed at strengthening
the legal regime against terrorism in Serbia. Keeping
in mind that the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
is the primary global provider of legal technical
assistance relating to the international legal regime
against terrorism, we have developed, together with
the European Commission, a programme of activities
designed to ensure a high level of visibility and to be
an example of good practices that can be emulated by
others.

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

The proposed initiative will be further developed
in close cooperation with representatives and experts of
the member States of the EU, as well as with the relevant
EU institutions. We wish to emphasize that relevant
provisions and strategic commitments in EU documents
will be taken into account. The primary aim of the
initiative is to build the capacities of relevant authorities
and to develop a comprehensive counter-terrorism
legal framework in the Republic of Serbia in order to
effectively combat terrorism and strengthen efficient
interagency cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
Finally, let me mention some of the activities of
the Republic of Serbia aimed at strengthening the
common front in the fight against terrorism. In order
to strengthen the regional response to the serious
challenges and threats to international security caused
by links between the financing of terrorist activities
and organized crime, my Government hosted last
year a workshop on countering terrorist financing
for south-eastern European States held jointly by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Southeast European Cooperative Initiative and the
Regional Cooperation Council, in cooperation with the
UNODC.
We also wish to inform the Assembly that, in
late April, the Government of the Republic of Serbia
adopted a national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), on the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. A draft law on the freezing of terrorist assets
is currently being publicly debated and will enter
procedural channels as soon as the new Government
is formed. Once the draft law is adopted, Serbia will
have a formal mechanism in place to detect and freeze
assets of persons and entities on the Security Council’s
sanctions list.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): I would like to
congratulate the President of the General Assembly and
His Excellency Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski,
Permanent Representative of Canada, for the successful
consultations they held and for achieving consensus
on the draft resolution on the third review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/66/L.53). We also wish to express our gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his reports (A/66/762
and A/66/762/Add.1) and for the efforts of the United
Nations system undertaken to implement the Strategy.

Kyrgyzstan continues to conduct activities
designed to implement the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Great attention has been
paid to the improvement of legislation that aims at
eliminating the conditions and causes that allow
terrorist or extremist organizations to thrive and at
countering the ideology of terrorism and extremism.
In particular, laws have been passed on counteracting
extremist activities, combating terrorism and terrorism
financing and the legalization of the proceeds of
crime. In addition, provisions of the criminal code
were tightened with respect to the organization of
activities aimed at inciting national, racial, religious
or interregional strife, the financing of terrorism and
involvement in the commission of terrorist crimes.
Previously, the Kyrgyz Republic had joined 10 of
the 12 existing United Nations conventions designed
to combat international terrorism, as well as their four
complementary protocols. Now Kyrgyzstan is seriously
considering joining the remaining conventions.
One of the important issues we have considered is
the strengthening of competent authorities’ capacity in
the fight against terrorism. In that regard, in February
2010, we established a State office on financial
intelligence for the purposes of countering terrorist
financing, money-laundering and the proceeds of crime.
In January 2011, a presidential decree established an
anti-terrorism centre under the auspices of the State
committee on national security in order to coordinate
the activities of the public authorities and to promote
international cooperation.
For Kyrgyzstan, issues of regional stability and
security are of particular importance, in the light of
the withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force from Afghanistan in 2014. In that context,
the Kyrgyz Republic supports the strengthening of
regional cooperation. I am pleased to note that, at
present, cooperation has been established with the
anti-terrorist structures of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) and other regional and international
organizations.
We consider it important to interact with the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia. It is with the active collaboration of the
Centre that, in December 2011, a joint action plan to

12-396843

A/66/PV.120

implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in Central Asia was adopted for the first time
at the regional level. Of particular importance was the
decision taken at the June meeting of the Council of the
heads of member States of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization held in Beijing to approve the programme
of cooperation of SCO member States in the field
of combating terrorism, separatism and extremism
for the period 2013-2015. It should be noted that the
programme provides a wide range of organizational
and practical measures to identify, prevent and combat
illegal activities related to terrorism, separatism and
extremism, as well as for concerted action in the
areas of international legal, informational, analytical,
scientific and methodological activities, field personnel
and logistics.
Within the framework of cooperation with the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism, we commend
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, the Security Council Counter-Terrorism
Committee and other United Nations entities in
providing necessary information and analytical and
technical assistance. Kyrgyzstan has established
constructive cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s Executive Directorate. In April, a
Counter-Terrorism Committee group of experts visited
Kyrgyzstan. We hope that their efforts will help to
carry out joint measures aimed at strengthening United
Nations technical assistance and the Kyrgyz Republic’s
national capacity to combat terrorism.
Mr. Nikolaichik (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Terrorism continues to be a serious threat to international
peace and security, and to retain its universal and
transborder nature. The links between terrorism and
transnational organized crime — money-laundering
and illegal trafficking in drugs and arms — have
intensified. These trends demand that we continue to
step up efforts to implement the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy comprehensively and in
all its aspects. Moreover, as we do so, we believe it is
important to gain long-term results from the Strategy’s
implementation.
The stronger links between terrorism and
transnational organized crime also demand that we
continue to cooperate effectively in counteracting
terrorism, within the framework of the Security
Council and the General Assembly and through the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate, the International Atomic Energy Agency,

4

the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
INTERPOL. In our view, an important element of such
interaction should continue to be strengthening national
capacities and potential for combating terrorism. Given
terrorism’s ongoing threat, this aspect of activity should
receive greater attention. We call for the completion of
an effective system for rendering technical assistance,
one whereby donors supply technical assistance for
capacity-building that complies fully with States’
requests and without delay.
Ensuring border security is an important part of
combating terrorism. As a regional exporter of security,
in the future Belarus intends to act as an effective
guarantor of the security of borders in the interests of
its own region. In that regard, we note that costs in this
area tend to rise. In that connection, in the light of the
need for building capacity in border protection, due to
ever-growing threats, we call on our partners to assist
with practical interaction, cooperation and mutual help
in strengthening borders.
It is exceedingly important to strengthen the
international legal framework in order to combat
terrorism. In that connection, we express our hope
for a speedy conclusion of work on a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. Belarus is ready
to consider compromise proposals in order to conclude
the text of the convention and complete the work on this
very urgent document. We call on States to demonstrate
maximum flexibility and a constructive attitude,
including negotiations on the basis of a consensus.
The most recent and glaring terrorist acts have
reaffirmed the vulnerability even of socially well off
and politically stable States in the face of such threats.
Terrorists acting alone have once again shattered
existing notions of the nature and objectives of
terrorist activity. In that regard, the Belarus delegation
emphasizes the importance of pooling efforts to improve
preventive measures for combating terrorism, and
also of improving the exchange of experience in areas
such as transportation security; chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear terrorism; combating the
financing of terrorism; and counteracting the use of the
Internet for terrorist purposes.
In conclusion, I would like to remind all present
that in today’s world no countries or regions are
immune to terrorism. It can be eliminated only through
a broad range of consolidated, effective and mutually
complementary measures, undertaken on a bilateral,
subregional, regional and international basis.
12-39684

A/66/PV.120

Mr. Garcia (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking the President for organizing this
meeting and by applauding the efforts of Ambassador
Rishchynski of Canada, who served as facilitator during
the negotiations on the draft resolution (A/66/L.53) on
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
France associates itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union; I would like to add
a couple of complementary remarks.
While terrorism continues to evolve, it is more
necessary than ever that the international community
presents a unified front against this threat. Partly thanks
to the Strategy, the United Nations has gradually become
an essential actor in the global fight against terrorism.
But we must follow up those efforts. To that end, we
must continue to promote this tool, designed to bring
coherence to existing mechanisms and to strengthen
cooperation between States and organizations.
Promoting the Strategy will enable us to make progress
in a number of areas. First of all, we hope promoting
it will play a part in capacity-building, which is a key
component in helping the most fragile States or those in
crisis to develop the means to help them fight terrorism
effectively. Next, it is imperative that the fight against
terrorism is conducted with strict respect for human
rights. In the long term, promoting the rule of law and
respect for human rights remains the best guarantee of
the effectiveness of our fight against terrorism. Finally,
I would like to add that we should not underestimate
the role of the victims of terrorism. In combating this
scourge, their voices and message must be taken into
account. In all these aspects, we hope that the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, established through
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, will
ensure that tangible results can be speedily obtained.
The draft resolution we will adopt today
emphasizes the importance of better coordination at
several levels. At the international level, it is important
to strengthen coordination with the other organizations
fighting terrorism and with those that have developed
relevant strategies. This includes the European Union,
in particular, but also the Global Counterterrorism
Forum. At the internal level, we are pleased that the
draft resolution calls for giving greater attention to
the proposal to create the post of a counter-terrorism
coordinator. In order to be effective, the United Nations
must be sure that initiatives are not duplicated and
synergies are improved. The establishment of the post
of counter-terrorism coordinator should advance that
goal.

It is commendable that the General Assembly has
been able to arrive at a consensus on this issue. We
are determined to ensure that progress can be made in
fully implementing the Strategy throughout the world.
In general, France will continue to make every effort to
ensure that the United Nations has the strength it needs
to combat terrorism in all its forms.
Mr. Lakhal (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the President for organizing the third
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, and to congratulate the Secretary-General
on his report (A/66/762) on the activities of the United
Nations in implementing the Strategy over the past two
years. I would also like to thank Ambassador Guillermo
Rishchynski, Permanent Representative of Canada, and
his team for the commendable efforts they have made
in achieving consensus on the draft resolution on the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/66/L.53).
The Tunisian delegation associates itself with the
statement made by the Permanenet Representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.
The Tunisian delegation is gratified by the holding
of this third review of the Strategy, which provides
my delegation an opportunity to reaffirm its firm
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and its full
adherence to the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Tunisia has always shown its steady commitment
on the national, regional and international levels to
the efforts carried out by the international community
to combat terrorism. That commitment has been
reflected on the national level through the adoption of
a multidimensional strategy to grasp the underlying
causes of terrorism and the conditions that promote
its expansion, along with legal instruments in order
to concretize in domestic law the provisions of
international treaties and conventions in that area.
But given the deficiencies and gaps characterizing
Tunisian law with regard to combating terrorism and
money-laundering, which have also been used by the
past regime to repress individual liberties, Tunisia has
undertaken an in-depth reform of its laws to ensure
that all actions undertaken to combat terrorism are in
keeping with its human rights obligations.
Tunisia is convinced that the struggle against
terrorism goes beyond the individual abilities of any
State. We have therefore adhered to nearly all of the
initiatives and actions dealing with the struggle against

12-396845

A/66/PV.120

terrorism by ratifying all of the regional conventions
in that sphere. We have also adhered to most of the
international conventions and treaties dealing with
that phenomenon, and we continue to work to fulfil
our obligations under the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy.
Tunisia remains convinced that the continuation at
the global level of political injustices, the non-resolution
of conflicts, economic disparities, exclusion and the
defamation of religions are factors that continuesto
fuel extremism and promote the indoctrination and
recruitment for terrorism. Today, the threat of terrorism
is a global challenge that can only be met through the
strengthening of the counter-terrorism architecture of
the United Nations and a balanced implementation of
all the pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Such an approach requires mobilization and real
international solidarity, based on effective regional and
international cooperation, as well as on the support of
all international actors — Governments; international,
regional and subregional organizations; civil society;
and the media — to that cause to avoid a scattering
of efforts and to consolidate our capacity to prevent
terrorism in order to fight it and to limit its impact.
Our shared campaign against terrorism is surely
legitimate and justified, but it must not be conducted
without distinguishing between criminals who have no
respect for human life and peoples who are tirelessly
fighting to safeguard their right to freedom, dignity and
independence. Such is the case of the Palestinian people,
who are facing Israeli practices of State terrorism used
as a systematic policy designed to usurp the maximum
of Palestinian lands, to wipe out an entire culture and
to displace as many people as possible in Palestine in
order to confine them in ghettos. We must vigorously
condemn that kind of State terrorism, in particular
since that is a policy practised in total defiance of
international law and in contempt of the most basic
principles of international law.
Before I conclude, I would like to raise one
particularly important issue, which is the social
rehabilitation of individuals condemned for terrorism.
That is an essential, albeit problematic, issue since
the United Nations counter-terrorism agenda does
not cover it sufficiently. My delegation believes that
rehabilitation during and after incarceration is another
form of combating terrorism, which should be part of all
counter-terrorism strategies, be they national or global.

6

Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted by the
General Assembly by consensus six years ago, is the
international community’s expression of political
will to jointly and in a coordinated manner tackle the
scourge of terrorism, with the United Nations at the
centre of responsibility.
Terrorism is a serious threat to international peace
and security and is an attack on the values that they
represent. As a global and transnational phenomenon,
terrorism can only be successfully fought through
international cooperation. The United Nations
therefore has an important responsibility to support
the coordination of global efforts against terrorism.
Its role should be reinforced and strengthened in order
to ensure adherence by all countries to those efforts
and to ensure that those efforts will be sustained and
undertaken in a coordinated manner in the medium and
long terms.
Once again, we would like to reiterate our firm
support for the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the four pillars on which it is based. We
would like to underscore the need for those pillars to be
approached in a balanced and integrated manner, with
a special emphasis on pillars I and IV.
In addition to highlighting the work of the United
Nations in the context of the Strategy, including the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force and other related bodies, we would like to
acknowledge that there remain issues and gaps, which
may continue to be developed in order to respond to
the changing needs, which are constantly evolving and
which are what characterizes the scourge before us.
In that context, it is our hope that this review of the
Counter-Terrorism Strategy will contribute to providing
important guidance in that regard.
My country condemns terrorism in all of its forms
and is committed to preventing and combating it while
following and respecting the norms of international law,
in particular human rights, international humanitarian
law and international law with regard to refugees. Our
commitment in this area has been reflected in the fact
that we have ratified all international instruments
relating to the prevention and suppression of terrorism.
It is also reflected in our active participation in various
forums and appropriate multilateral bodies.
At the national level, Chile has established a
counter-terrorism department that reports to the

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

Ministry of Foreign Affairs in order to facilitate the
coordination of foreign policy in the area of terrorism
with various related national agencies and to provide an
effective response to international requirements in that
area. My country’s authorities are currently reviewing
their ability to respond and have shown themselves
to be open to an exchange of experiences and good
practices in preventing and responding to a possible
terrorist attack, which would include phenomena such
as bioterrorism and cyberattacks. We have reached the
conclusion that communication flows are important and
that the participation and coordination of a number of
different actors and strata involved is very important.
Fundamental responsibility for implementing the
Strategy falls upon the shoulders of the Member States.
For the implementation to be effective and sustainable,
however, contributions are needed from the other
stakeholders involved. That would include regional and
subregional bodies, which can bring a contribution to
the table with their knowledge and experience of local
episodes. In harmonizing and coordinating efforts, it is
important to bear in mind the specific characteristics
of the phenomenon of terrorism as it manifests itself in
different geographic zones, in such a way that it would
be possible to develop initiatives that take into account
vulnerabilities, cultural factors and other contextual
issues.
Regionally, Chile has continued to participate in
the Inter-American Committee on Terrorism, which is a
mechanism under the Organization of American States.
In the most recent period, our national institutions
participated in workshops and conferences prepared by
the Committee’s secretariat with the aim of preventing
and combating terrorist attacks. In November 2011,
Chile co-organized, with the Committee’s secretariat
and the Government of Canada, a subregional workshop
on bioterrorism. The workshop brought together experts
from the Southern Cone, as well as officials working
on terrorism at the regional level, and provided for
an exchange of views. A report will be prepared with
specific recommendations in order to create a national
strategy in that area.
National capacity-building is another key factor
in efforts against terrorism. In that regard, it is
fundamental to have joint contributions of all actors
at the international, regional and subregional levels,
geared to increasing capacity and to making it possible
to strengthen the role of authorities within the territory
of each State.

Developing this and other mechanisms is not
enough to halt a phenomenon that is complex and
that can manifest in many different ways. We believe
that establishing safety and security plans, enacting
legislation and providing modern and cohesive
institutions is only part of the solution. We also
believe that the root cause of terrorism lies in the lack
of opportunity, which means that it is necessary to
promote a dialogue among the different social actors
and provide for the active participation of civil society.
This is essential in order to determine and eliminate
those factors that might fuel terrorist acts, which would
include religious, racial, ethnic or political intolerance
as well as the socio-economic divide between nations.
In that context, we would like to reiterate that regardless
of the measures adopted to combat terrorism, it is
important to apply them with strict adherence to
international law, particularly respect for human rights,
international humanitarian law and international
refugee law.
My country appreciates the report of the
Secretary-General on the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, contained in document A/66/762. We would
like to highlight the merit of the proposal on creating a
position for a counter-terrorism coordinator. We hope
this initiative will continue to be improved upon so
that it can achieve general support once conditions are
created to that end.
As we have said in other bodies, before concluding
our remarks we would like to join in the call for
renewing efforts and the necessary political will to
conclude a general convention against terrorism.
Along with providing a framework and complementing
institutional norms that are already in place, it would
send a very strong message from the international
community to those who seek to weaken international
security or undermine human rights and civil liberties.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight and
express my gratitude for the work led by the Permanent
Representative of Canada, Ambassador Guillermo
Rishchynski, as well as for the manner in which his
Mission and his team led the process of negotiations
that made it possible to achieve consensus on the draft
resolution (A/66/L.53) that we will be adopting today.
The text of the draft resolution enables us to reaffirm
the international community’s commitment to the
strategy specifically and to the fight against terrorism
in all of its manifestations.

12-396847

A/66/PV.120

Mr. Al-Awady (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Iraq believes
in the need to combat terrorism. We know that everyone
is aware of Iraq’s suffering brought about by democratic
and political developments in our country following the
fall of the Saddam regime, in 2003. Owing to the great
importance we attach to international cooperation,
Iraq has made every effort to combat terrorism. In that
regard, I should like to refer to the following.
First, article 7 A of Iraq’s 2005 Constitution
prohibits any institution or person from advocating
terrorism, racism or ethnic or religious cleansing. It
also prohibits preparations to commit terrorist acts,
especially by Baathists in Iraq, as well as symbols of
Baathism. That cannot be condoned under the new
multilateral politically diverse system in Iraq. Iraq has
committed itself to fighting terrorism in all its forms,
so that our country is not a haven for such activities.
In order to achieve that, Iraq has ratified most
international treaties, conventions and instruments,
including the 16 that have been highlighted in United
Nations resolutions, such as resolution 1373 (2001).
Iraq has participated in international workshops
and conferences aimed at fostering dialogue and
understanding among civilizations and at preventing
discrimination and the arbitary singling out of religions
and cultures. Iraq has supported the Global Strategy
in order to prevent the using of charity to provide
financing and support for terrorism. Iraq has also
taken part in a number of workshops organized by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
With regard to coordinating anti-terrorism efforts,
diversity and peaceful coexistence in Iraq cannot be
achieved by legislation alone, but by serious efforts
to bolster democracy and respect for citizenship. It
also cannot be done in the absence of democracy and
an appropriate political environment that is open to
everyone and fosters tolerance, plurality, equality and
the belief in peaceful coexistence free of ethnic conflict.
Iraq has been successful in achieving those goals.
The Government of Iraq has put together a global
counter-terrorism strategy along the lines of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It is based
on harnessing the legal, political, diplomatic, economic,
informational, cultural, educational, financial and
military means to counter terrorism and prevent it
from jeopardizing security in Iraq. That will also have
a positive impact on global and regional security and
accord with relevant international humanitarian and
human rights law and instruments.
8

In order to achieve equality among the various
sectors of Iraqi society, the second paragraph of
article 14 of the Iraqi Constitution calls for respect
for religious rights and protects freedom of religious
practices. Article 41 ensures the right to freedom of
religion regardless of affiliation with any religious or
ethnic group.
In order to implement Security Council resolution
1624 (2005), Iraq has expressed its willingness to
implement all relevant provisions in respect of the
rights of refugees and citizens and international
human rights law. Pursuant to articles 15, 19 and 37
of the Constitution, the Iraqi Government has made it
illegal to arrest any person without an arrest warrant
issued by a court of law. Article 40 also guarantees
the freedom of postal, electronic and all other forms
of communications and bans telephone surveillance
and other restrictive measures without a court-issued
warrant, in conformity with human rights norms.
We have also enacted legislation to that effect and
have set up, in conformity with the Constitution, the
Independent High Commission for Human Rights, under
the supervision of the Iraqi Parliament, to guarantee
full respect for human rights. This will not be in
contradiction with the law of refugees or international
humanitarian law. Article 21 of the Iraqi Constitution
bans extradition of political asylum seekers to any
foreign country and the forcible return of such asylum
seekers, but political asylum shall not be granted to a
person accused of committing terrorist crimes.
Iraq has ratified all international and regional
human rights conventions and has signed the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, opened for
signature, ratification and accession by resolution 39/46
of 10 December 1984. By virtue of Iraqi Law No. 17 of
2010, the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, which was
adopted by the General Assembly in 2006 (resolution
61/177), was incorporated into national law. The Iraqi
Parliament has also ratified accession to the Arab
Charter on Human Rights, which was adopted by the
League of Arab States in 2004.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): With the historic
adoption in 2006 of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288) and its
plan of action, the international community moved from
platitudes to platform in the fight against terrorism.
For the third biennial review, our resolve remains

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

clearer than ever. The Philippines joins all speakers
and other delegations in renewing its commitment
to fighting one of the gravest threats to international
peace and security. We also extend our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(A/66/762) of 4 April, on the implementation of the
Strategy.
One of the most important counter-terrorism
measures for the Philippines, then as now, is intercultural
and interfaith dialogue. Respect for human dignity
lies at the core of greater understanding, respect and
tolerance between and among peoples. We continue to
contribute to advancing that dialogue here at the United
Nations, in regional forums and within our nation.
The Philippines also affirms the United Nations role
in strengthening the international legal architecture
by promoting the rule of law, respect for human rights
and effective criminal justice systems. Together, they
constitute the fundamental basis of our fight against
terrorism.
President Benigno Aquino III has identified the
promotion of a just and lasting peace and the rule of
law as a key result area of his Social Contract with
the Filipino People. An important part of that is the
amendment to the Philippines Human Security Act
of 2007 (Republic Act No. 9372) — our landmark
law against terrorism — which was designed to more
effectively bring terrorists to justice and prevent them
from committing terrorist acts with impunity. But while
we are providing more legal tools for law enforcement
and judicial authorities to fight terrorism, respect for
and the protection of civil liberties and human rights
will at all times be upheld.
Just recently, in keeping with his commitment to
good governance, President Aquino signed two new
laws against money-laundering and terrorist financing.
The first is Republic Act No. 10167, which strengthens
the Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2001. The second is
Republic Act No. 10168, which defines and penalizes the
crime of the financing of terrorism. Those laws make it
easier to freeze a suspicious bank account in order to
ensure that criminal proceeds will not be disposed of
pending investigation by the authorities. The Financial
Action Task Force has taken note of those significant
steps as the Philippines’ contribution to global efforts
to suppress money-laundering, counterfeiting and the
financing of terrorism.
In the criminal justice system, law enforcement,
security and prosecution authorities should be adequately

equipped to respond to terrorist acts, from investigation
and evidence-gathering to the bringing of perpetrators
to justice. National counter-terrorism programmes
must also be anchored in reliable intelligence. With
the long-standing support of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Anti-Terrorism Council
Programme Management Centre of the Philippines
continues to offer a highly focused training programme
to combat terrorism. The training programme is
evidence-based and intelligence-led and emphasizes
the joint training of law enforcement, security and
prosecution authorities.
Last March, Manila hosted a national experts
workshop on designing training for collaborative
investigation and prosecution of terrorism-related cases,
which implemented the Philippines counter-terrorism
training initiative on capacity-building. At the
workshop, Philippine and international experts
developed substantive content for the drafting of
training materials. They also agreed on selection
criteria to develop a pool of national trainers and on
guideposts for assessing the quality and impact of
training for priority themes. Those themes include
intelligence-gathering and analysis, investigation
and prosecution, particularly communicating with
investigators and evaluating evidence.
Terrorists must never have the ability to wield the
destructive force of nuclear weapons and weapons of
mass destruction. The 64-point action plan adopted at
the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons enhances
international cooperation towards that aim. We must
build on what we achieved at that Review Conference,
working for nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation
and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We all, hand
in glove, must work to ensure that nuclear weapons and
weapons of mass destruction never fall into the hands of
terrorists. Our efforts reflect our firm commitment to
being an even more credible and reliable partner in the
global counter-terrorism campaign. That has been true
for our own region, through the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations Convention on Counter-Terrorism.
Because many of our countries have fallen victim
to terrorism, many of us recognize first-hand that
fighting this evil in all its forms and manifestations
is a very complex and difficult task. But rather than
submit to fear and paralysis, we should be all the more
undaunted and determined. With the Strategy and plan
of action, we now have a global consensus on what must

12-396849

A/66/PV.120

be done. The plan distils our shared experience and best
practices. We look forward to sharing stories on their
national implementation as we seek to further improve
what we must individually do.
We must remain even more vigilant. The fight
against terrorism should only unite us, and not sow more
conflict that will divide us. This year, in the spirit of the
thirtieth anniversary of the 1982 Manila Declaration on
the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes, and
in the spirit of the purpose and principles of the United
Nations Charter, let us all focus on the big picture of
counter-terrorism.
For that reason, I cannot end without adding our
congratulations to Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski,
Permanent Representative of Canada. His masterful
facilitation of our consultations — guiding us through
the details without missing the big picture — has led to
the consensus draft resolution (A/66/L.53) that we are
poised to adopt.
Mr. Rezag-Bara (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank the President of the General Assembly for the
importance that he attaches to the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Rishchynski, Permanent Representative
of Canada, for his efforts in coordinating our work,
and congratulate him on his successful work towards
achieving the adoption of a consensus draft resolution
(A/66/L.53) on the the third review of the Strategy.
My delegation supports the statements made
respectively by the Permanent Representative of Syria
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and by the Ambassador of Benin on behalf of the
African Group. My country takes this opportunity to
yet again condemn as vigorously as possible all forms
and manifestations of terrorism, including all acts and
activities resulting in harm, and the direct or indirect
encouragement, support, promotion or rationalization
of such activities.
Terrorism recognizes neither countries nor religions
and cannot be justified or linked to any specific culture,
civilization or human group. We reaffirm our position
of principle in support of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We also thank the Working
Group on Counter-Terrorism for its remarkable efforts
to coordinate the activities of all the actors. I therefore
hope that the most recent resolution on the Strategy
(resolution 64/297) will remain open and be regularly
updated and adjusted to take into account the most

10

recent developments in combating terrorism, and to
meet the new challenges posed by that transnational
scourge.
My delegation also wishes to emphasize the need
to implement in an integrated and harmonious way the
four pillars of the Strategy, since progress made since
the second review of 2010 will require further efforts
for the implementation of those objectives in the years
to come. In this context, I recall the crucial importance
of strengthening the Strategy through bilateral, regional
and international cooperation, capacity-building
and exchanges of experience in the fight against
terrorism. I also recall one of our latest achievements in
strengthening the Strategy — the creation of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, in which sisterly
Saudi Arabia played a leading role. I would also refer to
the measures taken for the creation of the Centre, and
reaffirm our support for that initiative. It is our hope
that consultations will continue to define its various
competencies, legislation and mandates. The Centre
will be a new and effective mechanism for coordination
and liaison among all the participants in the Strategy.
Allow me to go over some of the major aspects of our
approach to combating terrorism, which is based on our
national perception of the dangers and challenges posed
by the scourge. That approach represents our important
contribution to international and regional efforts to
implement the Strategy and cooperate with relevant
regional mechanisms. Our approach is based on the
need to mobilize the domestic front for such efforts. The
political aspect is therefore very important. The Charter
for Peace and National Reconciliation, proposed by our
President and adopted in a 2005 plebiscite, is indeed the
proper model for engaging nationally, in coherence and
solidarity, with the scourge of terrorism.
At the same time, we wish to provide compensation
to, support and care for all victims of terrorism.
That initiative has also strengthened economic and
social development by promoting our ambitious
programmes, which have contributed to the reduction
of unemployment and allowed for new and fruitful
investments.
The struggle to combat terrorism can succeed
only if it takes into account the need to consider the
ideological sources and discourse that incite extremist
violence, which pushes some of the most vulnerable
and least protected groups to accept and be influenced
by that discourse. Algeria has therefore done its best

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

to develop educational and cultural programmes with a
religious orientation based on the principles of human
rights, peace and tolerance. I would also note the pooling
of efforts among security and safety organizations, civil
organizations and religious bodies in order to isolate
and weaken the remaining terrorist groups, and reduce
the impact of their harmful acts. Algeria has always
worked to strengthen the values of democracy, the rule
of law and the protection of basic freedoms, and has
undertaken comprehensive economic and institutional
reforms to strengthen social development and reduce
differences.
Algerian counter-terrorism policy has assumed
an important regional dimension by strengthening
cooperation with the countries of the Sahel, thereby
expanding the field for cooperation in addressing the
challenges posed by terrorist operations, particularly
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. Algeria also
collaborated with concerned countries of the region in
strengthening counter-terrorism cooperation by holding
a conference with the parties involved on 8 September
2011. The conference underscored the need to adopt
an integrated regional approach that acknowledges the
need to improve the security situation and to address
political challenges in a framework of respect for
the unity and sovereignty of States, while expanding
partnership and cooperation in the areas of economic
and humanitarian development.
The chaotic security situation and the increase in
terrorist activities in the region are also linked to an
increase in arms and drug trafficking and smuggling. In
that context, my delegation would draw the attention of
the international community to the need to vigorously
combat the financing of terrorism and to address the
issues of abduction, hostage-taking and demands of
ransom in exchange for the freeing of hostages — all
means used by terrorists to increase their lethal capacity.
Algeria would like to express its satisfaction
at the level of cooperation with United Nations
counter-terrorism
mechanisms
and
specialized
agencies. In that regard, I would refer to the training
programme established in Algeria in collaboration
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities; and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
Algeria’s membership of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum reaffirms its firm commitment to participating

in all activities designed to strengthen international
cooperation to combat terrorism.
Algeria, in partnership with Canada, presides
over the work of the seminar for counter-terrorism
capacity-building in the countries of the African Sahel.
In November 2011, Algeria hosted a coordination
meeting in that area and endorsed the programme of
action and activities of that group.
In conclusion, it is our hope that the resolution
that will result from our work will be a new and
effective contribution to our global efforts to combat
transnational terrorism.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): At the outset, I
would like to join others in thanking the Permanent
Representative of Canada for his efforts in facilitating
the consultations that resulted in a consensus draft
resolution (A/66/L.53) on the third review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We
also appreciate the Secretary-General’s report on the
activities of the United Nations system in implementing
the Strategy (A/66/762). Montenegro fully aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union.
Terrorism is a complex global phenomenon that
knows no boundaries, and its effects are not limited to
any particular country or region. Terrorism constitutes
a significant threat not only to international peace
and security, but also to the principles and ideals of
the United Nations. Being a global challenge, it truly
requires an integrated and well-coordinated global
response.
The unanimous adoption of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in September 2006
(resolution 60/288) was a milestone achievement.
It provided a foundation for an effective and
comprehensive response to counter terrorism at
all levels. Much progress has been achieved in the
implementation of the Strategy since its adoption and
through the biennial reviews. The institutionalization
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF), which now comprises 31 entities; the CTITF
initiative and work on the Integrated Assistance for
Countering Terrorism project; the establishment of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Centre within
the Task Force; the holding of regional workshops, and
the adoption of the first-ever regional joint plan of action
in Central Asia all represent important developments
and significant gains that will contribute extensively to
countering terrorism. Montenegro also welcomes the

12-3968411

A/66/PV.120

establishment of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum,
which aims at promoting the implementation of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Against the backdrop of the remarkable results
achieved thus far at the national, subregional, regional
and international levels, much more needs to be done to
ensure the implementation of the Strategy in its entirety.
We have to galvanize our efforts and collaboration at all
levels and among different stakeholders in combining
security, rule of law, development and human rights
components with the aim of developing a more balanced
and multifaceted approach to all the pillars of the
Strategy and more effective responses to the scourge
of terrorism.
The unique role of the United Nations, which needs
to be at the forefront of those efforts, is pivotal. Closer
and more integrated coordination within the United
Nations and its relevant entities is necessary in order
to maximize its effectiveness and avoid a duplication of
tasks. In that direction, Montenegro fully supports the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
latest report, including on the appointment of a single
United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator.
The Strategy, together with the third biennial
draft resolution, underlines the fact that the primary
responsibility for implementing the Strategy rests with
Member States. For that reason, Montenegro has made
a concerted effort and undertaken numerous steps to
build an efficient legislative and institutional framework
for preventing and combating terrorism.
Montenegro remains firmly dedicated to fulfilling
the obligations that arise from the universal legal
framework against terrorism and related challenges.
Fully cognizant of the fact that national actions,
no matter how effective, can never be sufficient,
Montenegro attaches great importance to working
and to actively collaborating, through joint training,
working bodies and projects, with other countries of our
subregion and the wider region, as well as with relevant
subregional, regional and international organizations
and initiatives towards eradicating terrorism.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
country’s resolve and support to continue to contribute
constructively to international efforts in countering
terrorism and to the full and timely implementation
of the Global Strategy. We hope that the third biennial
review will make a meaningful contribution to

12

further strengthening the momentum and overall
implementation of the Strategy.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Last September, when
we met a decade on from the 9/11 attacks to take stock of
our collective efforts to combat international terrorism,
it was clear that those efforts had already met with
some success. Progress had been made in disrupting
and dismantling international terrorist networks and
in establishing robust legal, policy and institutional
frameworks at both the national and global levels. Our
understanding of what was required to prevent and to
combat international terrorism had also evolved.
However, it is clear that terrorism still poses a
serious threat to the international community and
that terrorist networks continue to evolve and to
adapt to the changing and challenging circumstances.
While Al-Qaida has been considerably weakened,
the emergence of specific regional offshoots, notably
in the Arabian Peninsula, the Horn of Africa and the
Sahel, continue to be of particular concern. Terrorist
networks have proved remarkably adaptable and
resilient, changing tactics, adopting new technologies
and identifying new sources and methods of financing
to maintain their operations. Around the world terrorist
attacks continue. There is no room for complacency.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, now six
years old, remains our core framework for confronting
the challenge. Our discussions this week have confirmed
that the global consensus around the Strategy and our
shared resolve in support of its effective implementation
remain as strong as ever. I will make five specific points
regarding the draft resolution (A/66/L.53) before us.
First, over the past three years, we have made great
strides in developing the United Nations framework
for supporting the implementation of the Strategy. It is
clearly in our interests to ensure that the activities of the
United Nations counter-terrorism bodies are well and
fully integrated. We therefore welcome and support the
Secretary-General’s intention to develop his proposal
to appoint a single United Nations counter-terrorism
coordinator. We urge the Secretariat to present a
fully developed proposal to Member States as soon as
possible to enable final agreement in a timely manner.
Secondly, we welcome the draft resolution’s
acknowledgement of the important complementary
work of other international and regional organizations
and forums in supporting the Strategy’s implementation.
New Zealand is an active participant in several of those

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

efforts, including the work of the Pacific Islands Forum
and our partnership with the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, as well as the recently established
Global Counterterrorism Forum. Indeed, that Forum
offers the potential to be a significant force multiplier
for United Nations capacity-building efforts, helping to
mobilize resources and to strengthen the provision of
assistance in many regions affected by terrorism. We
therefore welcome the call for enhanced cooperation
and coordination between such forums and the United
Nations.
Thirdly, the past two years have provided further
demonstration of the persistent link between terrorism
and other security threats, including transnational
crime, armed conflict and State fragility. Where those
threats converge, as they often do, they can pose serious
challenges to national and international security. We
therefore urge that, over the coming biennium, the
United Nations give even greater attention to achieving
a better and more effective integration of our responses
to those often interlinked threats.
Fourthly, we echo the call of other States
represented here today for the full, balanced and
effective implementation of the United Nations Strategy
across all four pillars. Our collective understanding
of how to address conditions conducive to terrorism
and measures to prevent and to counter the spread of
extremism has advanced significantly over the past few
years. We encourage further concerted efforts in that
direction again in the coming biennium.
We also welcome recent steps to ensure that the
United Nations Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime
is accurate and effectively targeted, particularly through
the appointment of the Ombudsperson of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999). The Ombudsperson has already had a
positive and significant impact on the Committee’s work.
However, her effectiveness is ultimately determined by
the cooperation and the support received from Member
States, including through the provision of information.
New Zealand is one of several countries to have
reached an understanding with her Office regarding the
criteria by which it would consider requests for such
information. We urge other States to do likewise.
Finally, New Zealand urges that the United
Nations continue its vital work in strengthening
national and regional capacities to combat and to
prevent terrorism. Capacity­-building is integral to the

partnership underpinning international counter­-terrorism
cooperation. New Zealand has been pleased to partner
with the United Nations counter-terrorism entities on a
number of those initiatives, including in areas such as
preventing terrorist financing through the use of cash
couriers and strengthening criminal justice and law
enforcement capacities and cooperation.
As this review acknowledges what has been
achieved, it must also serve as a very timely reminder
of the significant tasks and challenges that remain
ahead of us. New Zealand is committed to playing its
part in efforts to strengthen our collective resilience and
to build the capacities of all States to disrupt terrorist
networks, prevent terrorist acts and bring perpetrators
to justice.
Above all, our discussion in the General Assembly
of the world’s most universal body must send a
strong signal of the strength and determination of
the international consensus against terrorism. Those
who plan and perpetrate terrorism must know that
the international community, as represented by the
Assembly, stands resolved to resist and prevent their
crimes; that their funding will be intercepted; that their
networks will be disrupted and destroyed; and that they
will be detected, caught and punished for their attacks
on the innocent. Above all, they must know that they
will not succeed in their terrorist plots and that we,
collectively, will do all that is necessary to ensure that
end.
Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I welcome this important meeting, which
allows us to review the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I also welcome the report
of the Secretary-General (A/66/762) on United Nations
efforts to implement the Strategy.
While my country is pleased with the positive
results achieved so far in implementing the Strategy
as part of the work of the United Nations and at
national and regional levels to ensure a comprehensive
international approach to dealing with this dangerous
phenomenon, we believe that the progress achieved
in implementing the Strategy’s four pillars is not yet
sufficient. This is due to many ongoing conditions that
contribute to the emergence of terrorist acts, such as
aggression and the illegal use of force. Such conditions
demand that the international community revitalize its
mechanisms and strengthen its efforts to address and
contain those causes.

12-3968413

A/66/PV.120

Despite the successful efforts by the international
community to combat terrorism to date, we continue
to witness more sophisticated and dangerous terrorist
acts. That makes it imperative that the international
community strengthen cooperation and coordination
in fighting and preventing the financing of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. That must be done
by intensifying the fight against piracy and preventing
smuggling and illicit trafficking in arms and drugs; by
enhancing international cooperation and coordination
in disseminating information; and by strengthening the
legal framework that enables the prosecution of those
involved in acts of terrorism.
With regard to the issue of ensuring respect for the
human rights of all and for the rule of law, we believe
that there is a need to reaffirm our full commitment
to the principles of the United Nations Charter and
international law, as well as to the relevant international
conventions, particularly those relating to the protection
of human rights in all counter-terrorism activities.
The United Arab Emirates, which deplores and
strongly condemns all forms of terrorism, has taken
a number of measures designed to help implement
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. They include
the continuing evaluation and development of our
national legislation, systems and programmes aimed at
combating terrorism and its financing; strengthening
measures against money-laundering; and enhancing
efforts to prevent and prosecute all transnational crimes,
including the smuggling of drugs and small arms. To
that end, the United Arab Emirates has devoted its
capabilities and national expertise to coordinating and
cooperating with international mechanisms and other
relevant regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen its control over banking operations, accounts
and investment deposits.
The United Arab Emirates is currently completing
preparations in Abu Dhabi to host the headquarters of
the International Centre of Excellence for Countering
Violent Extremism, which has been endorsed by the
Working Group on Combating Violent Extremism
established by the Global Counterterrorism Forum. The
Centre will officially open next October, in collaboration
with a number of public and private institutions, and
will be the first global forum enabling Governments
and civil society organizations to coordinate national,
regional and international efforts to combat acts of
violent extremism.

14

As we look forward to the international community
reaching an agreement on a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism, we renew our call for the
convening of an international conference, under the
auspices of the United Nations, to formulate a clear
definition of terrorism and identify the root causes of
its spread. In that context, we also call for support for
an international plan to support victims of terrorism.
We hope that the deliberations at this meeting will help
promote the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Mr. Al-Ahmad (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, allow me to convey our gratitude and
appreciation for the condolences extended this morning
to my Government, people and royal family on the
passing away of His Royal Highness Crown Prince
Nayef Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, Prime Minister and
Minister of the Interior. His Highness’s long-standing
efforts to maintain security and combat terrorism were
commendable. The great contributions he made will go
down in the annals of history.
We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement made on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation in connection with this third review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I cannot fail to thank the Permanent Representative
of Canada and his team for their tireless efforts over
the past few months to achieve consensus, as well as for
their preparatory work. I should also emphasize the fact
that the experience and wisdom that Mr. Rishchynski
and his colleagues demonstrated throughout that
difficult task played a key role in the success of our
endeavours.
Terrorism is one of the most significant challenges
of our time. Fighting this phenomenon is not limited
to the borders of any one State but is indeed a task for
the international community as a whole. Terrorism is
not limited to one nation, race, civilization or religion.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has on many occasions
and in many international forums reaffirmed its
condemnation of, and indignation at, the phenomenon
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, by
whomever and however committed. We have declared
our total readiness to work with all United Nations
bodies to define and fight terrorism, grapple with
its underlying causes and contribute effectively to
collective international efforts and policies to combat it.
That reflects our ongoing and consistent policy towards
international terrorism and its perpetrators.

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

We have adopted a number of measures and
actions at the local, regional and international level to
counter terrorism, since it is a threat to international
peace and security. At the national level, they include
the establishment of the Prince Mohammed Bin
Nayef Centre for Counselling and Care in the area
of rehabilitation. At the international level, we have
ratified a number of relevant conventions, including
the Convention of the Cooperation Council for the
Arab States of the Gulf on Combating Terrorism,
the Convention of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference on Combating International Terrorism and
the Arab Convention for the Suppression of Terrorism,
as well as 14 of the 16 international conventions aimed
at combating terrorism.
The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre,
which was referenced in resolution 60/288, was
established during the International Counter-Terrorism
Conference in Riyadh in 2005. The creation of the
Centre, which was launched following a signing
ceremony in New York on 19 September 2011, was a
very important step. Its Advisory Committee met for the
second time in Saudi Arabia in June. The Centre reflects
our conviction that combating the collective threat
posed by terrorism requires international cooperation
and coordination of effort, exchanges of views and
experiences and information programmes and training.
This is a threat that undermines the collective security
and stability of all.
My country would like to reaffirm the importance
of defining global counter-terrorism strategies at every
level. We therefore welcome and support the contribution
of the Global Counterterrorism Forum to implementing
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Reviewing the Strategy is not a simple or routine task
carried out every two years. It is in fact essential to enable
us to tackle this phenomenon, which is a continuing
scourge and threat to our security that has increased
and evolved in recent years. We must recognize that the
terrorism that we know today is no longer the traditional
terrorism involvign the usual groups, organization
and sources of financing. We now know that there are
self-radicalized persons who work alone and without
organizational support. Fighting international terrorism
of such magnitude requires in-depth reflection on the
root causes that motivate terrorism and incite people to
violence.
Ensuring justice and restoring rights is crucial to
the fight against terrorism. Justice requires that we

acknowledge that terrorism can be practised by States
against their own people. We cannot remain silent in
the face of the very carefully planned out terrorism
practised against the Palestinian people, or in the face
of accusations that an unarmed people are engaging
in terrorist acts. We demand that a stop be put to the
illegal occupation of Gaza, where 1.6 million people
live, half of whom are children, as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights stated in her
report.
My country sees the wisdom of the Secretary­
General’s recommendations in his report (A/66/762)
to raise the coordination levels among all teams and
bodies within the United Nations in the fight against
terrorism. Notwithstanding that, we would like to also
reaffirm that it is important to preserve the specific
role of each body and that coordination should not
undermine the balance, transparency or means of
communication between the various State bodies or
Member States. Furthermore, those recommendations
must be considered more closely in the period to come.
We appreciate the attention of the General Assembly
and the efforts that the President had made leading up to
today’s review. We reaffirm our commitment to make
every possible effort to implement the principles of
the Strategy at the international, regional and national
levels.
Ms. Mweemba (Zambia): I wish to congratulate
the President for convening this important meeting. I
also wish to recognize the tremendous contribution of
Canada in facilitating the draft resolution (A/66/L.53)
on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which is to be adopted soon.
Since the last review, Zambia has made significant
strides in addressing the four pillars of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In
addressing them, the Zambian Government has, among
other steps, created core national programmes to address
problems affecting the development of education, health
services, agriculture, housing and local Government.
The Zambian Government has also further introduced
a wide range of socio-economic reforms to address
issues of social security and protection, as well as
those of gender and youth development. Development
programmes covered in those sectors include the
development of the arts, culture, sport and recreation.
In the mainstream economy, the Government
is working around the clock to enhance labour and

12-3968415

A/66/PV.120

industrial reforms and addressing matters relating to
financial planning, with a view to developing land and
natural resources, infrastructure, trade and commerce.
In the area of sustainable development, my country is
looking at improvements in science and technology in
order to develop the energy, mining and ecotourism
sectors, while preserving the environment.
The Zambian Government has also taken cognizance
of the fact that bad governance can lead to terrorism.
In this vein, there are reforms in the media, the public
service, the judiciary, constitutional and electoral
areas. General legislation is also being implemented
to promote good governance. In the meantime, the
Government has cultivated a mutual partnership with
the private sector and civic organizations, including
religious institutions, in order to promote dialogue
on matters of common interest, such as the threat of
terrorism.
In addition to that, Zambia continues to observe
and implement all the international conventions that
our country has signed, especially in relation to human
rights, particularly those of women and children, and
to promote friendly and cordial relations with the
country’s neighbours and all foreign countries.
With regard to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism, Zambia, as a member of the Eastern
and Southern African Anti-Money-Laundering Group,
is actively taking steps to address the various challenges
that the country faces in relation to preventing and
combating terrorism. Zambia will pursue a foreign
policy based on the mutuality of common interest and
respect, including in the fight against terrorism.
As for capacity-building, Zambia intends to
continue to increase its capacity to deal with the threats
of terrorism in collaboration with other institutions,
such as the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. Representatives may also wish to note that
Zambia has established a financial intelligence centre
and is in the process of establishing a centre against
terrorism.
Finally, Zambia notes with great approval the
recommendation to appoint a counter-terrorism
coordinator. That will ensure that the Strategy and
activities of the United Nations with regard to preventing
and combating terrorism are more effectively managed
and implemented.

16

Mr. Bame (Ethiopia): Let me begin by thanking
the President for organizing this important debate
on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. I would like also to express my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his reports on the Strategy
(A/66/762 and A/66/762/Add.1).
My delegation also aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Benin on behalf
of the African Group.
Terrorism today constitutes one of the most
serious challenges to international peace and security.
It is beyond doubt that there is an urgent need to
effectively address the challenge through concerted
counter-terrorism measures. In response to the growing
threat of terrorism in the world, the international
community has taken various significant steps in
developing long-term strategic responses to that
scourge. As a result, in 2006 all United Nations States
Members unanimously adopted the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which provides
for a holistic response to terrorist acts and includes a
concrete plan of action that rests on four pillars.
Without a doubt, some progress has been made
in implementing the Strategy, but the undiminished
incidents of terrorism serve as a constant reminder
that the implementation of the Strategy has not yet
produced the desired results. It is therefore obvious
that effective measures are required to address the
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, prevent
and combat terrorism, build State capacity and promote
respect for human rights and the rule of law.
As we all know, terrorism is a complex and
ever-changing phenomenon in terms of its motivation,
financing and support mechanisms, methods of attack
and choice of targets. That makes it more difficult to
counter terrorism effectively. We should admit that
the future is uncertain and that it is still possible to be
exploited by extremists. However, if we are united and
committed in the fight against terrorism, peace and
security in the world will be secured.
While the primary responsibility for implementing
the Strategy rests with Member States, international,
regional and subregional organizations should continue
to play a key role in promoting counter-terrorism
cooperation. The joint response of the international
community also has to be long-term and multipronged.
It has to address the various conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism and must include dialogue,

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

understanding and efforts to counter the appeal of
terrorism.
Ethiopia is convinced that tolerance and dialogue
among civilizations and the enhancement of interfaith
and intercultural understanding are among the most
important elements in promoting cooperation and
success in combating terrorism. We therefore welcome
the various initiatives to that end. In a globalized society,
Ethiopia is concerned about terrorists’ increasing use
of new information and communication technologies.
The exploitation of the Internet by terrorist groups for
a variety of purposes is not new, but lately we have
seen terrorists turn increasingly to the Web and the
channels it supports to raise money, attract recruits,
communicate information and spread propaganda. The
international community’s response to this challenge
has been inadequate, however.
Ethiopia underlines the importance of greater
cooperation among United Nations entities and of
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF) to ensure overall coordination
and coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the
United Nations system, as well as the need to continue
promoting transparency and to avoid duplication
of their work. In that connection, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator be appointed.
Ethiopia has taken a number of measures relating
to the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We have
ratified 10 United Nations anti-terrorism instruments.
The Ethiopian Parliament has also passed and begun to
implement anti-terrorism legislation, with the objective
of providing a comprehensive legal framework for
combating terrorism. With the support of the CTITF,
Ethiopia has also hosted a regional workshop in Addis
Ababa on counter-terrorism.
We recognize that money-laundering and
terrorist financing are very serious challenges for the
international community as a whole. Preventing the
financing of terrorism is crucial to suppressing terrorist
acts. In that context, we have established a financial
intelligence unit that is actively exchanging information
on flows of suspicious funding, including terrorist
financing. In that regard, we believe that the cooperation
of the relevant United Nations entities is essential to
the full implementation of our international obligations
to combat the financing of terrorism. Ethiopia has also
strengthened its cooperation in exchanging information

relating to the prevention and combating of terrorism,
through bilateral agreements on a joint working group,
for example, and on countering terrorism bilaterally.
We have also concluded extradition and mutual legal
assistance agreements with countries of our region and
others.
Ethiopia’s
commitment
to
working
with
international organizations such as the United Nations
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
and with regional bodies of which it is a member,
such as the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, is unwavering. I would like
to take this opportunity to acknowledge the work done
by the Task Force and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to organize workshops and seminars
focused on the implementation of the Strategy in our
subregion.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country’s
commitment to continuing to work at the national,
regional and global levels to combat terrorism in
order to create an international environment hostile to
terrorism.
Mr. Ndungutse (Uganda): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to convey Uganda’s appreciation for
the efforts of His Excellency Ambassador Guillermo
Rishchynski, Permanent Representative of Canada
and facilitator of the consultations of the third biennial
review of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Strategy.
Uganda continues to face terrorist challenges
from the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) and Al-Shabaab groups,
which are all linked to Al-Qaida. The ADF, now based
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, has embarked seriously on recruiting and
training young people, including children, who are
now child soldiers. However, since the bomb attacks
of 11 July 2010 in Kampala, no other incidents have
been recorded. Mindful of the threat posed by those
and other terrorist groups, Uganda recognizes the
key role played by the United Nations in international
counter-terrorism operations, and strongly supports the
effective implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Since 1998, the Government of Uganda has
adopted several measures at the national, regional and
international levels aimed at preventing and combating
both local and international terrorism. That approach

12-3968417

A/66/PV.120

involves a combination of the policy tools and measures
available, as well as cooperation at various levels. In
the fight against terrorism, Uganda has adopted the
following measures.

to sensitize members of society. Security forces are also
collaborating closely with immigration and customs
authorities in order to prevent people involved in illicit
activities from entering the country.

At the international level, we continue to support
all relevant United Nations resolutions, conventions
and international agreements. In that regard, we
are implementing measures to prevent, combat and
eliminate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

Uganda is also building its capacity in the fight
against terrorism through the acquisition of specialized
equipment and training. Uganda has also started issuing
national identity cards to all its citizens, which is
expected to eliminate cases stemming from the illegal
acquisition of travel documents.

At the regional level, Uganda has adopted
and is implementing international protocols on
countering terrorism in the region. As a member of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), Uganda is implementing the IGAD plan of
action for preventing and combating terrorism, adopted
in Kampala in October 2003. We are also actively
involved in regional and subregional efforts to promote
peace and security through frameworks such as the East
African Community (EAC), IGAD, the Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the African Union (AU).
At the national level, Uganda passed an
anti-terrorism act in 2002 that establishes the legal
framework within which counter-terrorism efforts are
regulated. Under the law, anyone who engages in aiding,
financing, harbouring or planning acts of terrorism is
committing an offence that carries a maximum penalty
of execution. Part II, section 5, of the act also provides
for mutual legal assistance and extradition.

We reaffirm our support for the implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and would like to make the following recommendations.
First, there should be timely and regular exchanges
of information relating to terrorism between States.
Secondly, improved international cooperation in the
investigation and prosecution of terrorism-related
cases should be given priority. Thirdly, national
capacities in intelligence, investigation and prosecution
of terrorism-related cases, including extradition of
all terrorists without exception, should be enhanced.
Fourthly, regional and subregional cooperation with
the AU, IGAD and the ECA, inter alia, should be
strengthened. Finally, international cooperation
in countering the financing of terrorism should be
improved.

Uganda has taken all the necessary measures to
combat terrorism, particularly by making efforts to
prevent its territory from being used for cross-border
terrorist acts and to swiftly bring to justice people or
entities participating in such acts on its territory, an
example of which is the prosecution of those involved
in the attacks in Kampala on 11 July 2010, in which
78 innocent people perished and more than 200 were
injured.

Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Allow me to thank the
President for his leadership in organizing the third
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. We thank the Permanent Representative of
Canada for his efforts in facilitating the consultations
on the draft resolution (A/66/L.53) on the review of
the implementation of the Strategy. My delegation
also welcomes the comprehensive reports of the
Secretary-General on the activities undertaken by
the United Nations system to implement the Strategy
(A/66/762 and A/66/762/Add.1).

In 2000, we enacted an amnesty law, whose
effectiveness has been proven as it has motivated a
number of terrorists to abandon their cause and surrender.
Most of those who defected to the Government from the
ADF and the LRA have been pardoned and reintegrated
into society. In 2007, Uganda created a strategy for
raising public awareness and sensitization through
police-led security education and training programmes,
under which regular surveys and inspections of vital
installations and establishments are carried out in order
to upgrade security measures around the facilities and

Since its adoption, in 2006, the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy has continued to
provide a comprehensive and important governing
framework for counter-terrorism activities. The biennial
review is an opportunity for us to take stock of the
progress made by all the Member States in implementing
the Strategy. While we renew our commitment to
enhancing counter-terrorism cooperation among States,
it is also necessary to continue the coordination and
collaboration between the United Nations and regional
and national counter-terrorism networks.

18

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

Despite the concerted efforts by the international
community and Member States to counter terrorism,
the menace continues to threaten the world in different
forms and manifestations. The scourge afflicts all
of us — the big, the small, the strong and the weak.
What remains of critical concern is the continuing
phenomenon of an ever-ready and increasing pool of
volunteers willing to participate in terrorism.

them home, consistent with the policy of restorative
justice. In so doing, it was also recognized that the
indefinite incarceration of the former combatants would
only encourage greater feelings of anger and bitterness.
That was done despite the recovery of buried weapons
on a regular basis. Close to 600 child soldiers captured
by security forces have been rehabilitated and returned
to their families or extended families.

In that context, it is critical to sustain the focus on
addressing the conditions that give rise to the spread of
terrorism. In our view, the current predominant focus
on security aspects, while necessary, will not suffice
to eliminate terrorism or its appeal. There is therefore
a need for a more balanced implementation of the four
pillars of the Strategy.

All of those persons have been provided the
opportunity to resume their education, gain access to
technical training or develop skills in agriculture and
fisheries so that they can return to normal society with
skills that can provide livelihoods. Our approach to
healing the wounds reflects our own values. Restoration
and rehabilitation, rather than punishment, is our
approach.

Sri Lanka recently emerged from 27 years of
terrorism. In 2009, with its defeat, we brought to an
end a dark era of 27 years of daily bombings, including
endless suicide bombings and shootings, and thousands
of deaths, mainly of civilians — men, women and
children. Thousands of children were recruited as
combatants by the terrorists.
Today we have peace. The Government has adopted
a policy of restorative justice in order to counter any
future drift towards terrorism. Because of peace
breaking out, the economy is booming and tourism is
growing exponentially. The Government has adopted a
policy to address the causes of terrorism that broadly
coincides with the sentiments expressed by the President
of the General Assembly. Economic marginalization
and a lack of opportunity have been recognized as
key factors that attract the young to the ranks of the
terrorists.
Large-scale funding has now been directed to the
former conflict-affected areas in my country in order
to rebuild schools, hospitals and clinics, rehabilitate the
agriculture and fisheries, rebuild roads, reconnect the
electricity and water, and so forth. As a consequence,
in the past year, the economy of those areas rebounded
with growth of about 22 per cent, compared with the
national average growth rate of 8.2 per cent.
The Government also recognized that long-term
incarceration of combatants would be counterproductive.
At the end of the conflict in 2009, over 11,700 terrorist
combatants surrendered to security forces. The
Government, having recognized that most of them were
victims rather than initiators of the terrorist conflict,
decided to rehabilitate the former combatants and send

Our youth was also attracted to terrorism by the
glamorization of violence as a means to achieve political
goals and as a means for young people to express
themselves. The easy manipulation of the media by
terrorist groups, the charismatic and uncompromising
approach of the leadership, the exploitation of youth
disenchantment by greedy politicians and the tolerance
and accommodation shown by certain influential
international elements towards the terrorists’ goals
were key elements. We need to be unflinchingly aware
of the consequences of nurturing tigers.
One of the key concerns of the Government is the
continuing existence in certain countries of the West of
vocal supporters of the terrorists, in particular elements
that had once funded the terrorist groups, its child
recruitment and suicide bombing campaigns. Those
groups continue to raise funds and agitate against the
Government and the people of Sri Lanka. The message
that that tolerance conveys to other terrorist groups is
one of hope.
Sri Lanka is a State party to key international
instruments aimed at countering terrorism. Sri Lanka
has also enacted strong legislation to give effect to the
international instruments. A number of mutual legal
assistance agreements have been signed at the bilateral
and regional levels. We are a member of the Asia/
Pacific Group on Money Laundering and of the Egmont
Group. In 1988, we ratified the South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation Regional Convention on the
Suppression of Terrorism and the related mutual legal
assistance agreement.

12-3968419

A/66/PV.120

Sri Lanka is a party to the seven key human
rights treaties and is committed to upholding the
core principles and values enshrined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, international law and
international humanitarian law. The Directorate of
Human Rights and Humanitarian Law of the Sri
Lanka Army, in collaboration with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, provides training in
international humanitarian law and human rights law
to service personnel. The National Human Rights
Commission is responsible for promoting and protecting
human rights. The Commission can inquire into and
investigate complaints regarding rights violations in
order to ensure compliance with the fundamental rights
provisions of our Constitution.
My delegation supports the efforts to enhance
overall coordination and avoid duplication of effort
in countering terrorism. While we welcome the
Secretary-General’s proposal to create a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator, we also hope that such
a position will not affect the existing mandates of the
United Nations organs and the General Assembly’s
role in countering terrorism. We also believe that the
early conclusion of the comprehensive convention on
terrorism will further facilitate the implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Sri Lanka remains committed to implementing
the Strategy and to supporting international efforts
to counter terrorism. We are also ready to contribute
to counter-terrorism efforts through the sharing of
expertise, best practices in the delivery of essential
services and other lessons learned.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): It is an honour for me to be
here today, and I would like to thank the President for
convening this meeting.
I join previous speakers in congratulating
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, Permanent
Representative of Canada, for successfully leading the
consultations on the third review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The Maldives does not believe that there can be
a localized incident of terrorism. We do not believe
that any terrorist act can be considered solely as a
national issue. In all its forms and manifestations and
in all the locations around the world where we see
this scourge rear its ugly head, it has always been an
international issue of concern. It is condemned globally
and it is through a globally coordinated Strategy that

20

we address it. It is in that sprit that my delegation
commends the work done to bring about consensus
on the draft resolution (A/66/L.53). It is in that same
spirit that we support the Secretary-General’s reports
(A/66/762 and A/66/762/Add.1), the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the relevant United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
The Republic of Maldives is firmly committed to
combating all acts of terrorism and is pleased that the
draft resolution takes into account the necessity for a
balanced, comprehensive and systematic approach to
addressing global terrorism. Maldives is party to 12
of the 13 international treaties on counter-terrorism,
as well as the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC) Regional Convention on
Suppression of Terrorism and its Additional Protocol.
As a party to those international obligations, Maldives
reaffirms its commitment to fighting for justice, basic
human rights and the rule of law.
Maldives commends the Royal Government of
Saudi Arabia for its initiative in establishing the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre last year and looks
forward to greater engagement from the Centre.
It should be noted that fighting terrorism requires
a comprehensive approach, where nations focus on
awareness and prevention rather than just punishment.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, being the voice
of the community of nations, takes that basic premise
into account.
With
regard
to
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations, Maldives supports the appointment
of a single United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator,
as well as the development of national and regional
strategy implementation plans. It is our deepest desire
that those recommendations are operationalized in a
manner that encourages greater regional cooperation.
As an island State in the middle of the Indian
Ocean, Maldives is confronted with the scourge of
maritime piracy. In the recent past, our country has
faced an upsurge of incidents. In that regard, it is
pleasing to note that the seventeenth SAARC Summit,
held in Maldives in November 2011, decided to initiate
work towards combating maritime piracy in the South
Asian region.
Throughout history, Maldives has been, and
remains, constantly vigilant of ideologies that breed
extremism, which in turn cultivates hate and thereby

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

fosters violence. However legitimate a grievance may
be, the use of violence to support a political, religious
or other ideology can be defined as nothing less than
terrorism.
The Government of Maldives has placed the
prevention of violence at the forefront of its agenda. Our
law enforcement agencies have been able to coordinate
to root out violence. It is imperative that intelligence be
shared both domestically as well as internationally so
that there is a coordinated effort to counter terrorism.
In 2008, my country adopted a liberal Constitution
where powers were separated and independent
institutions of democratic governance created. In order
for the current and future generations of Maldivians to
better understand the inherent rights and responsibilities
enshrined in the new Constitution, the Government of
Maldives recently initiated a programme incorporating
civic education into the country’s school curriculum. In
higher secondary education, the Government has also
supported an interdisciplinary study of faith aimed at
encouraging unity, progress and hope in order to dispel
any sign of hatred and division.
It is through addressing that hatred that we change
the extremist narrative, through education that we
lessen recruitment and through democratic norms
that we produce justice. As part of a programme of
strengthening the independent institutions and branches
of democratic governance in Maldives, the Government
is facilitating a programme on justice sector reform,
incorporating human rights prerogatives and democratic
ideals into the judicial system so that that branch of
governance may better meet its obligations under the
new Constitution. That reform programme, together
with updated bills on violence and the introduction of
a penal code, will give structure to the judicial system
and ensure that the most absolute measure of criminal
justice is carried out, while protecting the fundamental
human rights of all Maldivians and the maintenance of
the rule of law.
Economic disparity and exclusion must also be taken
into account as root causes of terrorism. As a nation
with an economy that is both small and vulnerable to
internal and external shocks, Maldives is ever cognizant
of the potential for radicalization among the destitute.
Maldives is therefore determined to maintain its focus
on development as a vehicle to combat terrorism.
Terrorism in all forms and manifestations is a threat
to human dignity. We, as the community of nations,

must be resolute in our comprehensive response to it.
The Maldives believes that the United Nations remains
the only organization that can universally deal with
this global challenge. Maldives therefore pledges its
unequivocal support for the fulfilment of each pillar of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Mr. Alia (Benin) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, on behalf of the African Group and on my
own behalf, I would like to express my full satisfaction
for the holding of the third review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as
at seeing you, Sir, presiding over our meeting. Allow
me to also express the African Group’s appreciation
for the untiring and sustained efforts of Ambassador
Guillermo Rishchynski, Permanent Representative of
Canada, who served as the facilitator for the Strategy’s
third biannual review. The Group would also like to pay
tribute to him for the intensive consultations that were
held in the context of reaching consensus on the draft
resolution on the review (A/66/L.53).
Terrorism is a serious threat to our collective
security. Terrorist attacks, which sow the seeds of
misfortune and desolation throughout all continents,
especially in Africa, serve to remind us of the need
and urgency of uniting our efforts and coordinating our
action in order to conquer that danger.
Africa reiterates its total condemnation of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. It firmly rejects any
attempts to associate terrorism with any one religion
or nationality, and believes that those who are bent
on inventing such entirely absurd ties are playing into
the hands of terrorists, whose actions are in no way
justifiable. The persistence of this heinous phenomenon,
which appears in unsuspected forms and immeasurable
proportions, demands that all nations cooperate closely
and act vigorously in a pitiless struggle to eradicate it.
No one can ignore the existence of terrorism. It has
reared its head ever more cruelly since the vile attacks
of 11 September 2001 and continues to affect Africa,
particularly Nigeria. There is no motive or reason that
can justify terrorism, a totally irrational phenomenon
whose acts are as vile as they are shameful. The
international community must spare no effort to find
ways to drive terrorists from their sanctuaries, whether
in the mountains of Afghanistan or the dunes of the
Sahara and the Sahel, and to bring them to justice
in order to prevent them from harming and to save
humankind from their lethal schemes.

12-3968421

A/66/PV.120

Africa supports without reservation the central
role of the United Nations in the struggle against this
scourge through the establishment in 2006 of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which we are currently
reviewing for the third time in order to see how far we
have come and to examine the best prospects for an
effective fight in the future. The Secretary-General’s
report (A/66/762), which summarizes United Nations
efforts to implement the Strategy over the past two
years, provides the basic data we need to measure what
has been done to date and to lay out what is to be done
in future against terrorism.
The African Group commends the attention given
to strengthening the Strategy’s four pillars, especially
those geared to eliminating conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism, as well as those on preventing and
settling conflicts, extending assistance to victims of
terrorism, development and social integration, dialogue,
understanding and the fight against terrorism’s appeal,
as well as measures aimed at strengthening States’
capacities in the areas of preventing and combating
terrorism, and at strengthening the role of the United
Nations in that regard.
The African Group takes note of the report and
believes that everything must be implemented in order
prevent terrorists from organizing and carrying out their
plans. In that regard, the Group considers it imperative
that steps be taken at the global level to combat terrorist
groups’ use of modern means of communication,
particularly Internet sites, by which they coordinate
their criminal activities in recruiting, propagandizing
and spreading the word about their vile acts. We
would also like to stress the importance of ramping up
efforts to combat the financing of terrorism in all its
forms, especially ransom payments demanded when
hostages are taken. This disgusting and cynical method
is a significant source of financing for terrorism. The
Group emphasizes the necessity of implementing those
provisions concerning ransom payment contained in
resolution 65/34, introduced at Algeria’s initiative in
accordance with the decision of the African Union.
The African Centre for Study and Research on
Terrorism, established within the framework of the
African Union, is one of Africa’s special contributions
to the international communicty’s efforts to combat
terrorism. It is also worth mentioning that an African
anti-terrorism framework law has been adopted and
is currently being prepared as part of the the Centre’s
activities.

22

The African Group commends the Secretary­
General’s proposal to designate a United Nations
counter-terrorism coordinator to head the Counter­
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and provide
advice in this area. Meanwhile, we would like to see more
extensive cooperation among States through existing
legal instruments at the global, regional and subregional
levels, such as the Convention on Extradition and
Mutural Legal Assistance in Counter-Terrorism, signed
in New York by a number of African countries on an
initiative by Morocco. In that connection, the African
Group welcomes the establishment of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre with the cooperation
of Saudi Arabia, and would like to pay deserved tribute
to that country for an excellent initiative, a step forward
in the search for ways and means for an effective and
coordinated approach to fighting the peril of terrorism.
The launch in New York on 26 September 2011 of the
Global Counterterrorism Forum is also a commendable
additional means for continuing to tighten the noose
around terrorism.
The President took the Chair.
I cannot conclude without reiterating the importance
that the African Group attaches to finalizing the draft
of a general convention on terrorism. In that regard, I
would like to call on all States to cooperate in seeking
the compromises necessary for the adoption of a
final text that enables us to focus our actions against
terrorism within a single legal framework and at the
same time to fill the gaps in existing institutions.
The President: In accordance with resolution 44/4,
of 17 October 1989, I now call on the observer of the
Council of Europe.
Mr. Koedjikov (Council of Europe): At the
outset, let me reiterate, as so many speakers before
me have done, the importance that the Council of
Europe attaches to having a single, coherent and
universally accepted framework for global solidarity
and action against terrorism. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is an outstanding
achievement. It must be preserved, promoted and,
above all, put into practice.
The Council of Europe is the oldest all-European
regional organization. In the immediate aftermath of
the Second World War, our founding fathers dreamed
of a Europe of like-minded nations that shared the
same values — respect for human rights, democracy
and the rule of law — a Europe that would never again

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

have to live through the horror and destruction of war.
Indeed, common understanding and respect for those
fundamental values is both a precondition and a solid
basis for addressing the conditions conducive to the
horror and destruction that terrorism brings. From this
viewpoint, everything that the Council of Europe has
been doing for more than 60 years now has contributed
to curbing the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism. Nevertheless, events have shown that Europe
is not immune to the threat of terrorism, including that
of homegrown terrorism.
New measures are therefore needed that strike a
fair balance between the protection of individual human
rights and the protection of society from terrorism. As
a rule-of-law organization, the Council of Europe pays
close attention to strengthening legal action to prevent
and combat terrorism. We have developed broadly
accepted norms and procedures for sharing information
and mutual legal assistance. In that regard, I should
mention the Council of Europe mutual legal assistance
treaties and the Convention on Cybercrime, which is
increasingly becoming a global reference.
The most prominent step taken since the second
biennial review was the follow-up to the Council of
Europe 2005 Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism,
which is an important legally binding regional
instrument. This year, the monitoring mechanism for
the Convention was set in motion for the first time. The
first monitoring round will focus on the implementation
of the provisions aimed at countering recruitment for
terrorism.
The core body of our counter-terrorism action,
the Committee of Experts on Terrorism of the Council
of Europe, is responsible for identifying gaps in
international law and action against terrorism and to
propose solutions. It is now working on the national
coordination of the use of special investigation
techniques where we have a “soft law” recommendation
and on legislative approaches to criminalizing
preparatory acts by terrorists acting alone.
We strongly believe that addressing the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism, the strengthening
of the implementation of international instruments and
of the legal action to prevent and combat terrorism
while respecting human rights and the rule of law must
go hand in hand with capacity-building of all national
institutions involved in countering the terrorist threat.
The development of specialized training modules,

the exchange of good practices and the clearing and
mainstreaming of communication channels between
practitioners will all help to curb the threat and bring
terrorists to justice.
The Council of Europe continues to be active in the
areas of protecting minorities and fighting intolerance,
racism and social exclusion. Our white paper on
intercultural dialogue, developed in consultation with
State and non-State actors, provides a set of guidelines
for projects such as the Intercultural Cities programme,
where a model of migrant and minority integration at the
local level based on intercultural community-building
was successfully piloted.
Our organization is engaged in an open dialogue
with representatives of Governments, businesses and
civil society on how to safeguard the freedom, privacy,
security and integrity of the Internet. Through the
Internet Governance Initiative, we want the Internet to
be a space for freedom, justice and democracy, and not
a tool for the propagation of extremism and terrorism.
The Council of Europe is strongly engaged in
assisting victims of terrorism through several relevant
conventions and a dozen “soft law” resolutions
and recommendations. We are also very conscious
of the increasing need to develop a convincing
counter-terrorism narrative.
It is the duty of regional organizations to contribute
to the sustained implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. With its
standard-making capacity, the monitoring mechanisms
of its conventions and our technical assistance efforts,
the Council of Europe will continue to be a force for
enhancing the impact of the Strategy.
The President: In accordance with resolution 48/5,
of 13 October 1993, I now call on the observer for the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Mr. Wuchte (Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe): Today is the third time that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) has been given an opportunity to present its
activities in supporting the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
this forum. The invitation to participate at the General
Assembly’s biennial review is also a reminder that
regional organizations have a well-defined role and a
well-received mandate in assisting their participating
States in generating political will, raising awareness
and building capacity in implementing the Strategy.

12-3968423

A/66/PV.120

The OSCE is aware of that challenging responsibility,
and my first main point is that our new Transnational
Threats Department places the OSCE in a position to be
the Assembly’s closest partner in effectively developing
and integrating United Nations strategies among the
OSCE’s 56 participating States and 12 Partners for
Cooperation.
The Transnational Threats Department brings
together OSCE expertise on anti-terrorism, policing,
border security, cybersecurity and other areas that might
emerge in the future. The OSCE continues to support
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and works closely with the United Nations system
and other international and regional organizations to
ensure the Strategy’s implementation. The main OSCE
anti-terrorism objectives fully comply with the Strategy,
thereby making the OSCE an effective supporter and a
regional facilitator of the implementation of pertinent
global efforts. Let me link that to my partner institution
that focuses on the human dimension.
The OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights (ODIHR) supports the implementation
of pillar IV of the Strategy, namely, “Measures to
ensure respect for human rights for all and the rule
of law as the fundamental basis of the fight against
terrorism”. ODIHR assists OSCE participating States in
developing and implementing human rights-compliant
anti-terrorism policies. In particular, ODIHR supports
them in strengthening their law enforcement capacities
to respect human rights through training in countering
terrorism while protecting human rights. ODIHR also
provides advice and analysis on key human rights
issues in the anti-terrorism context and, upon request,
assists OSCE participating States in drafting and
strengthening existing anti-terrorism legislation in line
with international human rights standards and practices.
The OSCE has recognized that security goes
beyond politico-military issues and fully encompasses
the security of the individual human being. The OSCE
multidimensional approach to security does not call for
the balancing of liberty and security nor does it suggest
that liberty, or aspects thereof, must be sacrificed to
achieve security. On the contrary, the OSCE regards
respect for human rights and the rule of law as an
integral element of security. Combating and ultimately
overcoming terrorism will not succeed if the means to
do so are not in conformity with human rights standards.

24

OSCE participating States have pledged to fully
respect international law and human rights standards
when preventing and countering terrorism. They
have reaffirmed, on a number of occasions, that the
struggle against terrorism is not a war against religions
or peoples and that anti-terrorist action is not aimed
against any religion, nation or people. They have also
recognized the crucial role played by civil society in
anti-terrorism efforts and are committed to solidarity
with the victims of terrorism.
Furthermore, other OSCE structures in the
economic dimension, such as the Office of the
Coordinator of OSCE Economic and Environmental
Activities, are also active in the fields of suppressing
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. In
addition, the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the
Media monitors legislation on the prevention of the
abuse of information technology for terrorist purposes
to ensure consistency with freedom of expression and
the free flow of information.
Finally, I would like to pay tribute to the work of
the 16 OSCE field operations that provide, as we say,
an ear to the ground. Those mandated to do so offer
tailor-made anti-terrorism-related assistance to their
host countries.
Let me illustrate a recent example of all the
preceding points. The OSCE has been invited to
participate and has participated actively in the process
leading to the development and adoption of the Joint
Plan of Action for the Implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central
Asia, adopted by a high-level meeting on 30 November
2011. The OSCE’s multidimensional concept of security
enables the organization to address transnational
threats in a genuine, comprehensive way with the aim
of translating political commitments into effective
and sustainable action. It is my second main point that
our 16 field missions can draw on all of the assets I
have mentioned, as well as United Nations or other
programmes, to set up a platform for the sustainable
follow-through by partners who commit to providing
resources.
Returning to today’s main focus, anti-terrorism
in the OSCE, we are active overall in each of the four
pillars outlined in the Strategy. The OSCE’s secretariat,
institutions and field operations implement many
activities and programmes relevant to anti-terrorism.
Let me give the Assembly some examples.

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

As the lead on anti-terrorism issues within the
OSCE’s Transnational Threats Department, we are
the focal point for coordinating the organization’s
anti-terrorism activities. We offer a wide range of
counter-terrorism assistance for participating States
and our partners for cooperation, as part of advancing
the global counter-terrorism agenda. First, promoting
the international framework can be considered as a
genuine success story in that regard. Fifty-two of the
56 OSCE participating States are now party to all 12
universal anti-terrorism instruments that were in force
in 2001. That means that the ratification rate is 96 per
cent. If we add the four new instruments adopted in
2005, the rate of ratifcation/signature of the 16 universal
anti-terrorism instruments is 84 per cent. Of the four
instruments, the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism was recently
ratified by 35 participating States. The OSCE has
developed active cooperation with both relevant United
Nations entities — the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime — in promoting that international
legal framework. I know that many members of the
Assembly will be at the side event later this afternoon.
The OSCE is aware that preventing people from
embracing violence is of strategic importance in
mitigating the threat of terrorism to the maximum
extent possible. The OSCE promotes a multidimensional
and multi-stakeholder approach to countering violent
extremism and radicalization that lead to terrorism.
The organization also facilitates the exchange of good
practices and lessons learned. We focus on specific issues
such as the role of civil society in countering violent
extremism and radicalization that lead to terrorism;
gender and terrorism prevention; community policing
and terrorism prevention. So far, we have organized
nine national, subregional and regional experts’
meetings that addressed those unique issues while
drawing on the OSCE’s multidimensional expertise
and its wide-ranging contacts. We are also currently
developing, with our Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights, a guidebook to provide policy
makers, senior police professionals and community
leaders with guidance on how to leverage community
policing as part of an effective, multidisciplinary
and human rights-compliant approach to preventing
terrorism.
We are particularly proud to report that the OSCE
has been very active with regard to the growing

importance of the Internet, which is an area that is as
well-addressed in the United Nations Strategy. The
Internet can be a key strategic device and tactical
facilitator for terrorists. Terrorists go online to identify,
recruit and train new members, collect and transfer
funds, organize attacks and incite violence.
Building on two Ministerial Council decisions
related to countering terrorists’ use of the Internet,
the OSCE identifies emerging trends and potential
countermeasures by facilitating the exchange of
information and good practices between participating
States, the private and public sector, as well as civil
society. The comparative advantage of the OSCE’s
efforts related to terrorists’ use of the Internet is that they
are embedded within the organization’s broader efforts
to promote a comprehensive approach to cybersecurity.
It allows looking at a specific perpetrator group in a
cross-dimensional and integrated way that recognizes
the interlinkages of cyberthreats and perpetrators and
stresses the need for human rights-compliant responses.
In the last area, the OSCE has developed a
comprehensive programme on travel document
security, which is a cross-cutting programme related
to terrorism, policing and border management.
The programme has been recognized as a best
practice programme of a regional organization by
the International Civil Aviation Organization and
has helped to serve as a model for other regional
organizations. The 50 capacity-building activities in 18
countries organized so far, and supported by technical
assistance programmes, have brought about tangible
results. This is my third, and final, key point. Our travel
document security programme perfectly illustrates how
the OSCE’s activities related to action against terrorism
have not only positive impacts on countering terrorism,
but also in reducing other transnational threats such as
organized crime or trafficking.
In conclusion, the OSCE builds consensus and
political support among its participating States in order
to take comprehensive and effective anti-terrorism
action. The organization contributes to building State
capacity to implement and comply with international
instruments and standards. In addition, the OSCE
supports efforts by other international and regional
organizations, provides a platform for discussions
among its participating States, and promotes security
within a framework based on human rights and the rule
of law.

12-3968425

A/66/PV.120

To reiterate my three main points, first, our new
Transnational Threats Department places the OSCE
in a position to be States’ closest partner in effectively
developing and integrating United Nations strategies
among at least 72 nations. Secondly, our 16 field
missions can draw on all those assets and can take
up United Nations or other programmes and provide
a platform for sustainable follow-through by partners
that are providing resources. Thirdly, our successes
show that the OSCE’s activities related to action against
terrorism have not only positive impacts on countering
terrorism, but also in reducing other transnational
threats such as organized crime and trafficking.
The OSCE appreciates the Assembly’s time and
looks forward to building on those three main areas
with all the partners in the Hall.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
(spoke in Arabic)
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/66/L.53, entitled “The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review”. May I take it that
the Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 66/282).

A/66/L.53

was

adopted

The President: I shall now give the floor to speakers
who wish to speak in exercise of the right of reply. May
I remind members that statements in the exercise of
the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first
intervention and to 5 minutes for the second, and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Schonmann (Israel): It is most unfortunate
that certain delegations continue today to exploit this
important debate in an outrageous and politicized
manner. We are repelled by the remarks made earlier
by the representative of Tunisia. The words and images
used to describe my country bring to mind the blood
libels against Jews from a much darker age. His
comments are shameful and have no place in the Hall.
It is also astounding to hear a lecture on human
rights from a beacon of human rights such as Saudi
Arabia. Indeed, a representative of a country that
discriminates against women and brutally represses
the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community,
where homosexual conduct is still punishable by death,
flogging, stoning, imprisonment or all of the above,

26

should heed the words of an ancient proverb: those who
live in glass houses should not throw stones.
Mr. Lakhal (Tunisia) (spoke in French): In
recalling the terrorist practices inflicted for decades
by the State of Israel on the Palestinian people, my
delegation invented nothing. We merely recalled and
underscored a truth known to all that has been recorded
in the annals of the Organization. The representative
of Israel represents her country as a victim, when it is
the aggressor. She forgets that the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian land is a flagrant violation of international
law, and that the very presence of Israeli forces on that
territory in fact qualifies as an act of terrorism.
The State of Israel resorts to State terrorism. My
own country was a victim of that in October 1985, at
the cost of the lives of 68 people, 18 Tunisians and
50 Palestinians. The most serious point of all is that
State terrorism such as that practised by Israel does not
even distinguish between its friends and those whom
the State of Israel defines as enemies. I shall not cite
examples; the Google search engine can do that.
Moreover, while I do not want to provoke a polemic
about this, the representative of Israel stated yesterday
was that mosques were in fact nests of terrorism. I think
that Israel is in no position to make such an unfounded
assertion.
For us, Israel is practising State terrorism, which
my country vigorously condemns and which the
international community should also condemn as
firmly as possible.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 118?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 11 (continued)
Sport for peace and development
(a) Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic Ideal
Solemn appeal by the President of the
General Assembly (A/66/862)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should now
like to draw the attention of the General Assembly to
document A/66/862, which contains a solemn appeal in
connection with the observance of the Olympic Truce.

12-39684

A/66/PV.120

I shall now read out my solemn appeal.
“The ancient Greek tradition of the ekecheiria,
or ‘Olympic Truce’, born in the eighth century
B.C., serves as a hallowed principle of the Olympic
Games. In 1992, the International Olympic
Committee renewed this tradition by calling upon
all nations to observe the Truce.
“Through its resolution 48/11 of 25 October
1993, the General Assembly urged Member States
to observe the Olympic Truce from the seventh day
before the opening to the seventh day following the
closing of each Olympic Games. This appeal was
renewed in the Millennium Declaration.
“In the 2005 World Summit Outcome, our
leaders emphasized that ‘sport can foster peace
and development’ and encouraged the General
Assembly to foster a dialogue and agreed proposals
for a plan of action on sport and development.
“On 3 November 2005, the General Assembly
held a plenary debate on the agenda item entitled
‘Sport for peace and development’ and also adopted,
with universal support, resolution 60/8, entitled
‘Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal’, deciding to consider this
item every two years in advance of each Summer
and Winter Olympic Games.
“To this end, on 17 October 2011, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 66/5. In that
resolution, the Assembly urged Member States to
observe, within the framework of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Olympic Truce, individually
and collectively, throughout the period beginning
with the start of the Games of the XXX Olympiad,
on 27 July, and ending with the close of the XIV
Paralympic Games, on 9 September, the vision of
which is to inspire lasting change.
“The Olympic movement aspires to contribute
to a peaceful future for all humankind through the
educational value of sport. The Games will bring
together athletes from all parts of the world in the
greatest of international sports events as a means to
promote peace, mutual understanding and goodwill
among nations and peoples — goals that are also
part of the founding values of the United Nations.

“As an expression of these common objectives,
the International Olympic Committee has decided
to fly the United Nations flag at Olympic Park.
The United Nations system and the International
Olympic Committee have strengthened their mutual
cooperation and support through joint endeavours
in fields such as poverty alleviation, human and
economic development, humanitarian assistance,
health promotion and HIV/AIDS prevention, child
and youth education, gender equality, peacebuilding
and sustainable development.
“I welcome the leadership of Olympic and
Paralympic athletes in promoting peace and
human understanding through sport and the
Olympic ideal, and the commitment made by
various States Members of the United Nations to
developing national and international programmes
that promote peace and conflict resolution and the
Olympic and Paralympic values through sport and
culture, education and sustainable development.
“As President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-sixth session, I solemnly appeal to all
Member States to demonstrate their commitment
to the Olympic Truce for the 2012 London Olympic
and Paralympic Games, and to undertake concrete
actions at the local, national, regional and world
levels to promote and strengthen a culture of peace
and harmony based on the spirit of the Truce.
Referring to the original tradition of the Olympic
Truce practiced in ancient times, as described in
resolution 66/5, I also call upon all warring parties
to current armed conflicts around the world to
boldly agree to true mutual ceasefires for the
duration of the Olympic Truce, thus providing an
opportunity to settle disputes peacefully.”
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of that solemn appeal in connection with the
observance of the Olympic Truce?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 11?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

12-3968427
