•

I
j;

l~it

r

I;

I

j5:

UNITED NA TIONS

I NATIONS UNIES

(8
-';' ~

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

,

'821

RECORDS

THIRTEENTH YEAR

si MEETING: 4 JUNE 1958
~me SEANCE: 4 JUIN 1958

"

TREIZIEME ANNEE

•

CONSEIL DE SiCURITE
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

1

d

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Pravls!onal agenda (S/Agenda/El21)
.
Adoption of the ;l.genda .•••......••••.••••••• , •••••••••••••••••.•..••.•••.•.•.
Lel{er da[ed 29 May 1958 from the representative of Tunisia to the President of the Security Council
cancernlng ·ComplaJnt by Tunisia in respect of acta of armed aggression committed against it sJnce
19 May [958 by the French military forces stat:oned In its territory and in Algeria" (5/4013) •••••
Letler dated 29 May 1958 from the represenllHive of France to the President of the Security CQuncll
conCerning:
<IJ -The complaint brought by France agaJnst Tunisia on 14 February 1958 (S/3954)" (5/4015):
<W ~The situation arising out of the disruption, by Tunisill,ofthemodusvlvend\whichhlldbeene:otablished since February 1958 with regard to the stationing of French troops at certain polnl.'; In
Tunisian territory' (5/4015) ••••.•..•••...••••••••••••••.•••.•••..•••..•••
Statement by the President •.••••• , , •.••.••••••••••••..•••••••.••••.•.•••.••.••

~

,
1

Jj
1

,1
12

TABLE DES MATIERES

•

•,

,
i

i,

Ofdre du jour provlsolre (S/Agenda 821) •••••...•..••••••••••••••••••.•••.•••••••.•.
Adoption de l'ordre du jour. ••.•••••• , ••••...•.•••••.•...•• , ••••..•••.•••••••.•
Lettt'e, en date du 29 mal t9513 adreasl\e au President du Consell de securitl\ pill" le reprhentllnt de la
Tunisle, concernant la question sulvante: ·Plainte de la Tunlsie au sujet d'aetes d'llgresslon arm~e
commis contra elle, par lea forces mllltalres fran~lIlses srationnees sur lJon terrltoire et en A1gkle
depuis le 19 mai 1958" {S/4013} .••••••.•••••.••••.•••••.•••.•.•••••.•••••••••.
Lettre, en date dU 29 mal 1958, adressl\e llU President clu ennaeH de securitt par le reprtsentllnt de la
France, concernant:
AI "La plainte formult'e par la France contre la Tunlsle le 14 f.wrler 1958 (5/3954)° [5/4015):
Q) "La situation crtte par la rupture.du fsltde la Tunisie, clu modus vivendi qui s'etait etabll depuJs
le mots de fevrler 1958 sur le stat!onnememde troupes franc;aises m certain" points du terrltoire
tlmlsle,,· (5/4015)•.••••••••••.••••••.•••••••••••••.••••..••••••••• , •.•.
DecI.9.ratlon du Pl'~sldent ••••••••••••••••••••.•••••••••.• ; •••••••••••••••.••..

I

1

12

S/PV.821

•"

i

2

,

r

l

,
Relevart documents not reproduced in full :n the records of the meetings of
the Seclll'tty CowlCil are published in quarterly' supplementl'l to the Official
Recorda.
Symbols of United Nations document9 are composed of capiblletters
cOmbined with figures. Mention of such Il symbol indicatee a reference tu a
Urotect Nations document.

•

• •

Lea documents pertinents qUi ne Bont pas reprodults in extenso dans lea
comptes rendus

..
,(

,

des s6ances du CODe.e{J de sllcuriUi 8(mt publMa datla des

_suppl~ments trimestriels aux Documents officiels.

LeB cotes des documents de l'()rganlaation des Nations Dnles se composent
de le"r68 ma \lBcules et de chiffres. La simple mention dlune cote clans un
texte sign.tfte qu'il 8 agit cl un document de Jl rganlsation.

•
I

,r

,

r

1
,

:?

•

EIGHT HUNDRED AND TWENTY_FIRST MEETING

Held In New York, on Wednesday, 4 June 1958, at 3 p.m.
HUIT CENT VINGT ET UNIEME SEANCE

Tenue cl New-York, le mercredl 4 Juln 1958, d 15 heures.
President; Mr. T. F. TSIANG (China).

President: M. T. F. TSIANG (Chine).

Present: The repreBentatives of the following countries: Canada, China, Colombia, France, Iraq, Japan,
Panama, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ire..
land, United states of America.

Presents: Lea representants des pays au1vants: Canada, Chine, Colombie, France, lrak, Japan, Panama,
SuMe, Union des Mpubliques Boclaltstes S()vi~tiqueB,
Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et drlrlande du
Nord, Eta-ts-lims dlAmerique.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/821)

Ordte du Jour provisolre (S/Agenda/821)

I

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Letter dated 29 May lS58 from the representative
of Tunisia 1:0 the President of the Security Council
concerning: "Complaint by TlUlisia in respect of
acts of armed aggression committed against it
since 19 May 1958 by tho French m1Ulllry forces
stationed in Its territory and in Algerian (5/4013).

2. Lettre, en date du 29 mai 1958, adressee au Presi-

3. Letter dated 29 May 1958 from tile representative

3, Lettre, en date du 29 mai 1958, amessee au Presi-

dent du ConseU de secur!te par le reprilisentant de
la TuniSia, concernant la quelltion sutvante: "Plainte
de la Tunisia au 8ujet d'actes d'agre8slon armee
commis contre elle par les forces mil1t9.lres franQIDseB Btationnees sur son territoire et en Algerie
depuis le 19 mal 1958~ (8/4013).

of FrlUlce to the President of the Security Council
concerning:
~) ~The complaint brought by France against Tunisia on 14 February 1958 (8/3954)~ (S/4,015);
,Q!) ~The situation arising out of the disruption,
by Tunisia, of the modus vivendi wWch had been
estllbli.shed slnce February 1958 with regard to
the stationing of French troops at certain points
in Tunl.sian territory~ (8/4015).

dent du Consell de securlte par le representant de
la France, concernant:
!!) "La plainte formullie par la France contrela Tunisie le 14 flivrier 1958 (S/3954)~ [8/4015];
2) "La situation crMe par la rupture, du fait de la
Tunisia, du modus vivendi qu1s'~tait etOO11 depuis
le mois de fevrier 1958 sur le stationnement de
trDupes fran9n.lSeS en cenalns points du territoire tunisien~ (S/4015).

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de I'ordre du jour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

Letter dated 29 May 1958 from the representat1veofTunisla to the President of the SecurIty
Council concernlng:"Complalnt by Tunisia In
respect of acts 01 armed aggression committed
against It since 19 May 1958 by the French
military forces stationed In Its terrItory and
In Algeria' (S/4013)

Lettre. en dQte du 29 mal 1958. adressee ou
President du Consell de securlta par le representant de la Tunlsle, concernant la question sulvante:"Plalnte -te la Tunlsie au suJet
d'actes d'agresslonarmeecommls contre elle
par les forces milltalres frant;aises statlonnaes sur son terrltolre et en Algerle depuls le
19 mol 1958" (S/40131

Letter dated 29 May 1958 from the representative 01 France to the P resident of the SecurIty
Counci I concerning:
(g)-liThe complaint brou~ht by France against
Tunisia on 14 February 1958 1S/39S41" 1S/401 5);

Lettre, en date du 29 mal 1958. adressee au
President du Consell de securlte par le representant de la France. concernant:
QJ "La plainte 10rmulee par la France contre la
Tunlsle le14 f.evrier 1958 (S/3954)" [S/4015];

(!?:) "The situation arisIng out of the disruption,
by Tunisia, of the modus vivendi whIch had.
been established since February 1958 with
regard to the stationing 01 French troops at
certain points In Tunisian territory" (5/4015)

b) "La sltuatloncreee par la ruptur.e, du1ait de 10
..., Tunisle, du modus vlvend! qui s'etalt ~tabli
depuls le mols de fevrier 1958 sur le statlonnement de troupes 1ranc;alses en certalns
points du terrltoire tunlsien" (5/4015)
1

;
Sur 1'invitation du President, M. Atuned Mestiri,
repr'sentllut de la Tunisie, prend place a la tnble
du Consei!.

At the invitation of the President, Mr.AhmedMestiri,
represFmt.;\tive. of Tunisia, took a place at the Council
~

l.

1. Mr. MESTIRI (Tunisia) (translated from French):
We listened with great attention to the speech made by
the French representative [819th and 82othmeetingsJ.
Basically, it was intended to prove that it was Tunisia
that was guilty of agp;reFlsion againf':t Fl'enchterritory
and French troops, and in particular that the incidents which occurred during the lasttwD weeks of May
were del1berately proV'oked by the Twllsianauthorities
who had Bought by ill-inspired measures to create
conditions liable to cause such incidents. The French
thesis, moreover, was intended to prove above all
lhat Tun1s1a was not in favour of a settlement of the
basic problems, which France, an the other hand,
w1:o1eheartedly desired.

1. M. MESTIRI (Tunisie): Nous avons ecout~ avec une
attention soutenue l'intervention du representant de la
France [819~me et 820~me seances]. Elle tendait en
substance A montrer que ce serait la Tunisie qui serait
coupable d'agression contre un territoire frnn9als et
contre lee troupesfran9aiee8, etnotammentque les incidents graves survenus au cours de ladeuxi~me QUin~
zaine du moie de mai auraientetedeUberementprovoqU~8 par leB autorites tunisiennes, qui auraient cberch6., par des mesures malencontreuses, a cr~er les
conditious propres a engendrer ces incidents. La tMse
fran<;:aise tendait en outre et surtout ~ montrer que la
Tunisia n'etait pas disposee ace r~glementd'eneemble
des problemes de fond que la France, en revanche,
appellerait de ses VallOC.

2. But this is quite untrue. I shall not repeat the
account of the events ofthe last few weeks, which were,
described in detail by my uulleaglte, Mr. Mongl
Slim.' With your permission, I shall merely paint out
in the sequence of events, those fIlcts which are Irrefutable proof of the Tunisian Government's good faith
and of its constant concern to avoid incidents, to limit
them if they should occur, and to do everything possible to prevent tbe worst, that la to say, the extension
of the Algerian war to Tunisia.

2. Or, il n'eo est rien. Je ne reviendra.i pas sur la
relation des evenements de ces derniers joure, qui
vous ont ~M exposi3s en detaii par man coll~gue M.I:ilim.
J e me bornerai, avec votre permission, afaire reSsortIro dans la genese desevenements, iesfaitsqui attestent d 'une far;on irrefutable 1.a bonne foj du Gouvsmement tunisien et son souef constant d'eviter les incidents, de les circonecrire s'ils se produisent, et de
faire le maximum pour ne pas arriver'au pire, o'eet_
a-dire l'extension de la guerre d'Algerfe ala Tunisie.

3. At the 819th meeting, the French representative
drew a picture of the bombing of Sakiet-Sidi...Youssef
which, to say the least, is far from the truth. I shall
1 not give a detailed account of the Tunisian version
of the facts, which has been fully confirmed by reports
from diplomatic representatives at Tunis and journalists f:J;'Qm all over the world, including France, as
well as from officials of the International Red Cross
who went to the spot. On the other hand, none of the
French representative's allegations have been corroborated by the reports in question. But it is not
our intention to discuss this laBue at the IIlomeni.

3. A la 81&eme seance, le repr~sentant de la France
a fait du bombardement de Sakiet-Sidi-Youssef un tableau qui, pour le moins qu'onpuissedire, est bien loin
de correspondre a la reaUM. Jenevousexposerai pas
daM le detail la ,'ersion tunisienne dAR faits, qui a ete,
en tous points, confirmee par les rapports circonstancies des representants diplomat1ques accredites a. Tunis et des journalistes du monde enner, ycompris les
journalistes fran~ais, ainsi que par les representants
de la Croix-Rouge internation8.1e qui se sont rendus sur
lea .lieux. Rlen de ce qu'avallce le representant de la
France Il'a ~ie, par conLrlO, corrobor~ pules rapports
en question. En tous cas, notrepropos n'estpas de discuter de cette question maintenant.

4. Mr. Georges-Plcot then spoke of what he called
lI'Tunisials interference in French internal affairs",
in the form of aid given to the Algerian combatants,
implying th3.t, without this interference and aid, the
war in Algeria would have been over by now. Apart
from the fact that the juridical considerattons put
forward in support of this contention do not in any
way apply to the Algerian case, it is clear that it is
l1{It the asyium granted to Algerians who take refuge
on Tunislan territory, or the slight traffic in arms
that the 40,000 French soldiers guardingourfrontiers
were unable to prevent, which is prolonging the
Algerian war. But in any event, I shall not labour
this point any furtber, and at this stage of the debate
I do not wish to speak of the war in Algeria or its
causes, nor of the origin of the arms or their implicatiouA for Tunisia or the lnternatlollil.l situation.

4. M. Georges-Picot nous aensuiteparH'3decequ'il a
appele "l'ingl!lrI~neede la Tunisie dans Les affairss intl3rieures de la France", qui consisterait a aider les
combattauts aig€lrieul::I, laissant entendre que, sans
cette ingerence et sans catte aide, laguerred'Algerie
serait termtnee. Or, outre que les consid13rations jtu'i~
diques develOPP~es it L'appui de cette th~sene s'appliquent pas du tout au caS algerien, il est clair que ce
n'est pas lIaeile que la Tunisie accorde auxAlg~riens
se refugiant sur son territolre, ni le faible trafic
d'armes que les 40.000 hommes de l'armee fran9aise
elle-m@me, iorsqu'Us g'ardaient nos fronti~res,
n'avaient pu emptlcher - ce n'est pas cette aide qui
fait durer le conflit algerien. Detoute fa~on, je n'insi8terai pas davanta?;e sur ce point et ne veux pas, a ce
stade du debat, parler de la guerre d'Algerie, de ses
causes - ot notulmnent dil laprovemmce des arlll.e5 ni de ses implications par rapport a ia Tunisie, tti de
ses implications internationales.

5. To conclude with tnis point I shall reply briefly
to the French reprcsentatlve regarding the incident
which occurred on 11 January 1958 at DJebel-elKoucha, in the course of which four Frennh soldiers
were taken prisoner by the Algerian army. Contrary
to the French accusatiotls, this fighting took place on
Algerian territory, where the French prisoners were

5. Jl en aurni termine sur ce point lorsquej'aurai repondu d'un mot au representant de la France au sujet
de l'incident Sttrvenu le 11 janvier 1958 a Djebei-elKoucha, au cours duquel quatre Boldats fran9H.is unt
ete faits prisOlmiers par l'armee alg6rienne. Contrairement aux accusations fran9aises, cette bataille s 'est
deroulee sur le territoire algerien, oil ies prisonmers
2

;

;

•

)

,.

,

.

,

•

captured and where Mr. de Preux, the envoy of the
International Red Cross, was able to see them, Moreover, Tunisia asked for publication of Mr. de Preuxlg
report in order to remove any mubt on the subject•.

fran?aIS ont sUi captur~s et oil. M. de Preux, envoye
par la Croix-Rouge internationale, a pu les voir. La
Tunisie a d'ailleurs demand~ que le rapport de M. de
Preux soit publi.e pour lever toute equivoque a ce
sujet.

6. To revert to the situation in Tunisia and to the
steps taken by the Tunisian Government since 8 February 1958, after the bombing of Sakiet-Sidi-Youssef, the
French representative disputes the defensive nature
of these steps and considers them to be the cause of
the ensuing incidents; buttheseprecautionary and protective measures were adopted after the bombing of
Sakiet..Sidi"'You8sef and were strengthened as a result
of the insurrection of the French forces in Algeria.
They were officially notified to the Frenchauthorities
and the Security Council. The French representative
has no grounds to question these measures since
France accepted them and asked the Secretary"General
of the United Nations to ensure food supplies for the
troops. I would add that, contrary to what has been
alleged byMr. Georges-Picot, these measures concern
the whole of the territory of Tunisia, including the
Remada area.

6. Cela etant, et pour en revenir aIasituation en Tunisie et aux mesures prises par le Gouvernement tunialen depuis le & Ievrier 1958, a la suite du,bombarde!!lent de Sakiet, le representant de La France contests
le caract1;re de legitimedMense de ces dispositions, et
les consid~re comme etant la cause des incidents survenus par la suite. Or, ces mesures deprecRution et de
sauvegarde ont ete prises au lendemain du bombardement de Sakiet-Sidi-Youssef et ont ete renforcees Ua
suite de la rebellion des forces fran~aises dlAlgerie.
Elles ont ~te notifllies offic1eLlement aux autorites
fran?aises et au Coneen de securite. Le reprbsentant
de la France n'est pas fonde a mettre en cause ces
mesures, puisque la France lea aaccepteea, invoquant
1'intervention du Secretaire genliral des Nations Unies
pour assurer le ravitaillement allmentaire de sea troupes. J'ajoute que ces mesures,' cont:taLl'sment aux
affirmations de M. Georges-Picot, portent sur l'ensemble du territoire tunisien, y compria la region de
Remada.

7. According to the French thesis, the modus vivendi

7. Ace propos, ai nollS admettons lathesefran~lI.ise,

referred to by the French representative is nothing
more than the sum of the protective measures taken
by the Tunisian Government, supplemented by the
exchange of aides-memoire with the Secretary-General on 16 February 1958. That is our view, and we
cannot understnnd why the French representative
first -contests the modus vivendi and claims that it is
the cause of the incidents, and then invokes it on
its side and accuses Tunisia of violating it, alleging'
this to'be the cause of the recent incidents at Remada;
I confess that in all logic I have difficulty in following
this ,reasoning. The French representative will in any
case agree with us that events as serious as Sakiet
and the Algerian insurrectional movement of 13 May
are sufficiently dlsquIeting to justify such elementary
precautions as TuniS la took.

le modus vivendi dont le representant de la France se
prevaut ne serait autre chose que llensemble des mesures de aauvegarde prises par le GOuVernementtunisien, completees par Pechange dlaide-memoire du 16
fevrier 1958 avec le Secretaire general. C'est bience
que nous pensone. Clest pourquoi nous coroprenons
difficllement comment le representant de la France,
tantet conteate le modus vivendi etenfaiUa cause des
incidents, tantOt slen prevaut, accusant la Tunisie de
Le viol~r et considerant ces violations comme ~tantla
cause des dernJers incidents deRemada. J'avouehlll11blement mon embarras, car )a nlarrlve pas, malgre
une forte dose dlesprlt cartesien, ~ su.!Yrs ce raisonnement. Le repr~sentant de la France conviendra en tout
cas avec nous que des evlmcments de la gravite de
ceux de Sak1et ou du mouvement in8urrectionneld'AIgel' du 13 mai sont sufflsamment inqui~tant.s pour justifier, de la part de la TunJsie, des precautions aussi
SIementaires que celles qulelle a prises.

8. We now come to the recent incidents at Remacla,
in South Tunisia, which led Tunisia to make an immediate appeal to the Security Council. I shall not
describe the events again, for a detailed aCCOU'lt was
given by our delegation at the 819th meeting and is
reproduced in documents 8/4019 and 8/4020 of 3 June
1958.

8. NOlle en arrivons auxrecentsinciclentsde Remada, I
dans le Sud tunisien, qui ont conduit la Tunisla a saisir
sans tarder le COllseil de securite. Je ne reprendrai
pas la relation des ~v{mements: ella vous a He exposee
en detaH par notre d61~gatlon a la 819~D'te shnes et
elle est consignee par ecrltdans les docUlne~tsS/4019
et S/4020, du 3 juin 1958.

9. 1 only want to make it clear to the Council that the
actions of Colonel MoUot, who commands the French
garrison at Remada, were the initial cAuse of these
incidents. It will be remembered that this same Colonel Mollot, who had previously been in the news on
9 February 1958, went so far as to declare in all
seriousness to foreign correspondents who had hastened to Tunis after the capture of the deputy-governor,
that he knew nothing about the independence of TunisIa
and that he was responsible for t11e maintenance
of order in four caidats, or administrative regions.
The journalists were amazed to hear this, not reaLizing
that Colonel Mollot had been in the region for twenty
years and had had acb:nlnistrative responsibilities as a
native affairs officer, that is to say, in practice l as a
governor, until the eve of independence.

9. Je voudrais seulement, pOllr eclairer Is Conseil,
fah"e ressortir que, a l'origlne de eel' incidents, nous
trouvons lee initiatives du colonel Mollot, qui commande la garnison frano;alse de Remada. On se 80Uviendra que clest ce m@mecolonel Mollot, qui a deja
fait pader de lui le 9 f~vrier 1958, qui, devant les
correspondants de presse etrangers accourus de Tunis
a la suite de la capture de l'adjoint du gouverneur,
n lh8sitait pas a declarer, le plus s~rleusement du
monde, qu'U n'~tait pas au courant de l'indeper.dance
de la Tunisie etqu'il ava1tlaresponsabllit6du maintien
de 1'ordre dans quatre cal'dats. (Les caloats -sont lea
circonscriptions administratives.) Les journalistes
etalent aburis d'entendre de telspropos. llsne savalent
pas que le colonel Mollot etait dans la region depuiB
20 ans et avait des respon5ll.bllites administratives en
3

tant qu'ofiicier des affaIres indig~nes, c'est-l-dire,
pratiquement, en tant que gouverneur, jusqu'Ua velUe
de l'indlipendance.
10. We were surprised to hear the French representative expreSs the same idea aa Colonel Mollot
regarding the alleged right to nomadism of the Sahara
un1t~ at Remada; that would be tantamount to saying
that in an area amounting to a tWrd of tbe territory
of Tunisia, the Tunisian army, the Tunisian police
and the Tunisian civil administration are under the
orders of Colonel Mollot. This really cannot be taken
seriously.
n. From an this It is clear that the actIons of the
French military authorities are the direct and immediate cause of the Incidents. Above all, it is clear
that since last February the Tunisian OQvernmenthaa
striven to maintain the status quo or, if you prefer it,
the Ir.OdU5 vivendi, in spite of all inconveniences to
1\mlsian interests, the population, administrative life
and economic activity, for the sole purpose of avoIding any hindrance to the good offices mission, which
remains its major concern.

10. Cleat avec surprise que nOlls avana entendulel'e.
prlisentant de la France d~velOpper la m@me concepM
tion que le colonel Mollot au sUjet d'un pretendu droit
au nomadisme dontjouiralentles unites saharlennesde
RemadOl. Cela l'eviendrait a dire que dans cette zone,
dont la superncie equivaut au tiers du territoil'etuni_
sien, l'armee tunisienne, la poHce tunisienne,l'administra.tion civile tunisienne seratent aux ordres duco-lonel Mollot. Ce nlest vraiment pas s~rieux.
11. De tout cela, 11 apparaf'tclairementquelescausss
directes et imm~diates des incidents sont dues auiait
des a,utoritlls militaires fran9aises. n a,pparal't surtout
que le Gouvernement tunisien slest efford), depuis le
mois de Mvrier dermer, de maintenirle statuguo, au,
si vous le voulez bien, le modus vivendi, aYee tout ce
quill comporte de g~ne pour les int~r~ts de la Tun:sie,
pour la population, pour la vie administrative etl'l;cti..
vU€! ~conom1que. dauA le Reul Souc/. dene riell fa.lre qui.
puiBse gg,ner 1'action des bons offices, qui demeurent
sa pr(ioccupation majeure.
12. Le Gouvernement tunisier., loin de chercber a
compliquer la tAche des bons offices en cr~antdes in..
cidenta, a, au contraire. tout fait pour leur assurer lea
conditions du succes. Car laquestJonessentiellequise
pose nlest pas seulement de recherche.!." les causes
imm~d1ates et dirsctes des incidents; elleestausside
supputer les causes profondeadelllcriseactuelledans
lea rapports Cranco-tunisians. Quel que solt le partt .
que l'or. pourra prendre dans le choixentrela version
fran~ai.8e et la version tunisienne des faits, eten cr.erchWlt ~ situer les responBabil:t~s et a savoir d'ou
viennent lea provocations qui Ont entratn.€l tel ou tel In·
cident, on ne peut eviterd'admettrequelapr€lsence de
l'armlie fraDQaise Sur notte sol, contre notre gr~,
constltue IDle provocation perm.anente 11 notregouver_
nement et A notre peuple. Moralement, aous serions
fond~s a. rlisiater a son emprise par tous lea moyens,
et, au besoin, ~ noUB opposer Ala force par la ferce
pour defendre notre souverainet~et sauvegat'der notre
dign1t~. Juridiquement, MUS serions pleinement clans
le cas de H;gitime derense.

12. Far from seeking to complicate the task of the
good offices mission by creating incidems, the Tuni.stan Government has done everything it could tel ensure Its success. The essential thing, after all, is
not only to ascertain the lmmedJate and direct causes
of the incidents, but also to discover the fundamental
.t"tlasons for the crisis in Franco-Tunisian relatloIlB.
Whatever one's opinion of the merits of the French
and Tunisian versions of the facts and of the attempts
to determine who is responsIble and who provoked such
and such an incident, it cannot but be admitted that
the presence of the French army on our Boil against
our will is a source of continual provocation to our
Government Ilnd people. Morally we would be justified
in offering resistance in evel:Y way and. If DeAd be,
in opposing force by foroe to defend our sovereignty
and ,uphold our dignity. Legally, we would have It
perfect case for seIf-de.fence.

la. When I speak of the presence of the French
army, 00 you real1ze what that means to Tunisia,
an independent and sovereign b'tate? I would like to
have shown you on a map how the Whole of the tern"
wry from north to south, and east to west, is covered
with a network of garrisons, barracks, and cantonments and outposts; It would conVey nothing to you
If I cited the names of Gafsa, Gab~s Bizerta SillX
KSlibia and many more. French aoldi~rs still ~ccupy
a villa barely twenty metres from the residence
of the President of the TunIsian republic, and bave
refused up to the present to evacuate It, even out
of courtesy to the head of a friendly State.

13. Or, quand je parle de lapresencede l'armee fran~
9aise, imaginez-vous ce que cela represente pour la
Tunisie, Etat illd~pel1dant et souvera.l.n?J1auraisvouJu
disposer dlune carte pourvouB montrer comment~tte
occupation couvre I'ensemble du territoire du nordau
sud, de l'est ll. l'ouest, par un r~seau serre de ga.rni~
Bons, de cssernes, de cantonnements, de postes; ce1a
ne vous dirait r1en si je VOllS Citata Gafsa, Gabes, BIzerte, Sfax, K€iUbia, et je ne sais quol encore. Lea milttaires fran9aia occupent encOre unevil1ad1stantedl~
peine 20 mi!'!tres de la residenoe du Prt!lsident de III
Rllpublique tunisienne et se refusent jusqu 'A ce moment
encore a ll~vacuer, neserait-cequeparcoUl't01sieenverS le chef d'un Etat amI.

1'4; It J8 true that you have been told of a reduction
in the strength of the French Army since October
1957, and of a plan for regrouplng forces, etc. But
what concerns us most is the stationing of troops
on Tunisian territory. What we ask for is not a regrouping, hut outright evacuation as a logical and
inevitable consequence of the acquisitIon of our independence. For a reduction or regrouping would have
no psychological or strategic signifioance.As regards
the psychological aspect, we should stIll see French

14. Certes, on vous a parled1unereductiondeseffectiCs de l'arm~e fran~a1se effectu~e depuis oetobre 1957,
on vous El. parl€! d 1unprogrammede regroupement, etc.
Ce dontils'agitpournous,c'estavanttout de l'implantation des troupes sur le territoire tunisien. Ce qw.e
nous demandons, clest, non pas le regroupement,mais
l'evaluatioll pure et simple, CODlme Wle cOrulequence
loglque et ineluctable de l'acquisiUon de notre independance. Car un allegement des eHectifs ou un regroupBM
ment n'aurait aucune slgnificatIor., ni sur :e planp.sy4

,

I
I'

I

•,

uniforms, the more often since freedom of movement
for the French Army la being demanded; as regards
the strategic aspect, in view of its present position
the French Army in Tunisia can reinforce any point
it occupies in the territory and is strong enough to
undertake any action it wishes. The resources at the
disposal of the Tunisian Army are incomparably
smaller. The members of the Council will realize
that the issue is a vital one for us, and constitutes
the basic problem which has to be solved.

chologique. n1 sur le plan straUigique. Du potntde vue
psychologiqu9, nous verrlon.e toujours lea uniformea
fran91lls, et ce d'au.tant plUS souvent que 1'on r~clame
pour l'arm~e franQaise la l1berte de Circulation; au
point de vue strategique, compte tenudesonimplantatiOD actueUe, l'armee franQalsede Tunisiepeutrenforcer n1importe quel point qu1elle occnpe dans le territoira et dispose de mayens suffisants pour entreprendre n'importe quelle action. AucWle compllI'a1sonn ' est
possible avec les moyens dont dispose l'armllie tnnisienne. LeB membres du Conseil verrontqu'il slagita
d'une question vitale pour nous et que c'est lA-le probl~me essentiel quIt! convtent de resoudre.

15. The first question is the following: a foreign
army Is on our soil. What Is its legal status? According
to the French Government, that status is determined
by the General ConventIon between France and Tunisia
signed on 3 June 1950 relating to internal autonomy
and its protocols notwithstanding the provisions in the
Protocol of Ag:.reement of 20 March 1956 which
expressly recognize Tunisia's independence. If the
agreements of 3 June 1955 were fully applied, Tunisia
would have no police force for another twenty years,
would not have an army or a diplomatic Bervice for
a long time, and would not be an independent and
sovereign state and a Member of the United Nations.
It is not the firet time that we have heard this theeis
put forward. Certain right-wing extremists in the
French, Parliament have maintained the same point
of view, aseerting that the Treaty of Bardo of 1881
is still in force since it has never been formally
abrogated. Fortunately, Mr. Guy Mallet, Prime Min- .
,ister at that tbne, answered this claim in a fitting
way and put forward pertinent politice.l and legal
arguments showing that the Protocol of Agreement
between France and Tunisla signed on 20 March
1956 prOVides for "the exercise by Tunisia of its
responsibilities in foreign affairs, security and defence". It was this which eIl!lbled France to be the
first country to exchange ambassadors with us, to
help us to build our army and to submit oUr applica.tion for membership in the United Nations. We
readily acknowledge it.

15. Une armee etrangere se trouve sur notre sol. Une
premi~re question se pose: quel est son statutjuridi-

que? Pour le Gouvernement franQaiB,cestatutd~coule
de la ConvenUon generale entre la Franceetla Tunisie
slgnlle le 3 juin 1955, relative al'autonomieinterne, et
de ses protocoles annexes, nonobstantlefldispositions.
explicites du Protocole d'accord du 20 mars 1956 reconnaisaant 1'independance de la Tunisie. Si les
accords du 3 juin 1955 dev.uent@;tre.appltquespleinement, la Tunisie ne disposerait pas de police pendant
20 ans encore, elle n'aura1t pas encore de ires longtemps une armee, ni davantage une diplomatie, et ne
aerait pas un Etat independant et souverain, Membre
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Ce n'est paB la
premi~re fois que nOUB ententons soutenir une telle
these. DAJa, auParlementfran9ais, c:ertaina extremistee de dro:lte avaient soutenu le m~e point de vue,
affirmant que le· Traite du Bardo, conclu en 1881, etait
encore valable paree que n'ayant pas MA abrogll formellement. JIeureusement. M. GUy Mollet, alors President du Coneeil, avait r€lpondu comme 11 convenaita
cette asserl1.on par des arguments politiques et juridiquee pertinents pour montrer que du Protocole d'accord entre la France et la Tunisie, aign€'lle 20 mars
1956, decoule "l'exercice par la Tunisie de ees r'8sponsahiltMs enmatiere d'affaires ext~rieures, de securlt€l
et de dMense". C'est ce qui a permis a. la France
d'Stre le 'premier pays A echanger avee noUB des ambassadeurs, Anous aider a.constituernotrearmeeet a.
presenter notre candidature a. l'Organisation des Na,tions Untes. Nous le reconnatssone tres volontiers.

16. It will be seen trnit the French Army in Tunisia
has no legal standing,. and that is perhaps Why the
French Government fs S<l insistent thatone should be
given it by the conclusion of El defence agreement
with Tunisia negotiated under pressure exerted hythe
presence of the French Army on our territory.

18. Nous VOyons que l'arIIllle franQaiseenTunisien'a
aueun statut jurldi'l.ue, et cleat peut-~tre pourquoi le
Gouvernement framjaJs insiste tellement pour lut en
dormer un par la conoluslon d'un accord de dMense que
1'on voudrait n~gocier avec la Tunisie soumise ilIa
presBion que consUtue la presence de l'arm~e frahQaise sur notre terrltoire.

17. A second point arises. Besides beIng an encroachment upon our sovereignty, the presence of this army
constitutes a permanent threat to the security of
Tunisia. Here again I shall not dwell on the French
representative 's argument, that an occupied and disarmed Tunisia possessing no aircraft is allegedly
guilty of aggression against the army which occupies
its territory and of waging war in Algeria against
a French army of 500,000 men. We shall next be
told that Tunisia, alone at fault for all the misfortunes which have befallen It, was responsible for the
bombing of Saldet-Sldi..Youssef. I state simply that
the presence of the French armyisa permanent cause
of serious and dangerouli incidents which affect the
security of our country. and it is this that has led
us to appeal to th~ Security Counoil.

17. Une deux1~me question se pose. Cette armee, outre que Ba pr~sence constitue uneatteinteAnotre sou-·
vera1net~, reprssente elle-m~me une menaoe perma.nente A la a&:urite propre de la Tunisie. A ce sujet, je
ne m larr~terat pas il.l'argumentat1ond~veloppeeparl e
reprbsentant de la France et selonlaqueUela Tunisie,
occupee. d~sarmlle, dllmunie ci'avtons, seraitcoupable
d'agreasion envers l'armee qui l'occupe et entreiiendratt la guerre d'Alg6rle, oil se trouve engaglre une
arm€le franQaise de 500.000 hommes. C'est A peiae si
I 'on ne naus ditpas que la Tunisie, responsable de taus
lea malheurs qui l'accablent, s'est fait bombarder ii
Saldet-Sidi-Youssef. Je constate simplement que la
presence de l'arm~e franQa1.s8 eat una cause permanente d'incidents graves et dangereux pour la slrcurite
de notre pays, ce qui nous a amen€ls il. en appeler au
Conseil de sllcurite.
5

18. There is a third question. The presence of the
French army in Tunis:la is a threat to international
peace and security in this area of the world. It is
clear that the war which has heen waging in Algeria
and OD our bOrders for four years and the fact that
the French forces in Tunisia and in Algeria are
under the same command and work in close cooperation (the aircraft which bombed Remada came
from Tebessa in Algeria) constitute a real threat
that the conflict may be extended ta North Africa as
a whole and thus further justify prompt and effective
intervention by the Security Council. I could say
more on this question but I do not wish to risk being
interrupted by the French representatjve and still
less do I wish to tax your patience, Mr. President,
although, as you can see., I have not strayed from
the subject.

18. Une troisttlme question se pose. La presence de
cette armee fran9aise en Tuaisie constitueunemenace
pour la paix et la sticuritll internationales dsns cette
rllgion du monde. Il est ~vident que, la guerre sllvissant en Algerie et sur nOB frontitlre~ depuis quatre
ans, le fait que lee troupes fran9alses de Tunisie et
celles dtAlgerie obelssent au m@mecommandementet
coopl!lrent etro!tement (lea avions qui ont bombarde
Remada sont venus de Tebessa,enAlgerie)concretise
la menace de l'extension du conflit il. l'en.semble de
l'Afrique du Nord etne rend que plus justifiable une intervention rapide et efficace duConseil. desecurite. Je
pourrais parlel' plus longuement de cetie question,
mais je ne voudraia pas m'exPoser au risque dl@tre
interrompu par le representant de la France, et je ne
voudxais surtout pas abuser de votI'e indulgence, Monsieur le President - quolque je nemesois pas l:carte
du sujet, co=e vous le voyez.

19. I have shown, first, that the French army has
no legal status in Tunisia, second, that its presence
is a threat to the security of Tunisia and, third,
that it is also a threat to international peace and security in the area.

19. Nmls venons ains! de voir, prem!r)rement, que
Parmee fran9a1se n'a aucun statut jurLd:lque en Tunisie, deuxi~mement, que sa pr~sence constitue une menace contre la s8curite propre de la TunisLe, et, troisi~mement, qu'elle consUtue en outreune menace contre la securite et la paix interllatlonales dans la
region.
.

20. The good offices mission-to come back to Ltwhich was organized after we brought this matter
before the Council last February, had in fact as its
primary objective the solution of the problems created
by the presence of the French army in Tunisia.

20. Or, precisement, les bons offices - nous yrevenons - intervenus lorsque nous avollS saisi le ConeeU
en fl:vrier demier, ant eupourpremierobjectifde regler lea problemes poses par la prllsence de I' armee
fran/.;aise en Tunisie.

21. No one will cllspute the fact that the central
issue in the entire dispute between France Rnd Tunisia la essentially R political question, In this connexion it has been argued before the Council that
Tunisia has throughout the crisis been reluctant to
accept a political settlement, which France, it is said,
desires, I should like to Show how much patience and
how great a spirit of conciliation Tunisia has shown
in its efforts to obtaLn a friendly settlement with
France.
22. I need hardly recall that Tunisia was the first
to accept the offer of good offices of the United states
of America and of the United Kingdom at a Ume when
its oase was about to be argued in the Sl'curity
Council wl.th every prospect of success, and when
world opinion was unanimous in its support of Tunisia and its Condemnation of the manifest aggression
of which it had been the victimatSakiet-Sidi"'Yousaef.
Need I recall also that Tunisia did not quibble over
the scope and purposes of the good offices mission
or try to focus attention on purely theoretical issues
concerning the respective significance of good offices,
mediation and arbitration?

21, On reconnartra aisement qIJliJ s'agit essentielle~
ment d'une question pol1tique qui se trouve au centre
de I 'ensemble du differend opposant la France et la Tunisie. Et, il. cet egard, on a soutenudevant votre honorable A,ssemblee la th~se selon laquelle la Tunisie se
serait derobee, tout au long de cette crise, au r~gle­
ment polHique que la France, au contraire, 60uhaiterait. Je voudrais montrer combLen la Tumsle a fait
preuve de patience et d'esprit de conciliation dans ses
efforts pour parvenir il. un reglement amiable avec la
France.
22. Dois-je rappeler que la Tunisie a ate lapremi~re
il. accepter lea bans offices des Etats-Uills d'Amerique
et du Royaume-Uni alors que sacauseallait~tre plai...
dae devant le ConseU de securite avec toutes les chances de succr)s, alors que l'opinion mondl.ale HaltunaDime A la soutenir et ~ condamner l'agression
caracterisee dont elle avait ete l'objet il. Sakiet-SLdiYoussef? Dols~je rappeler encore que la Tunisie n'a
paS cherche a faire de chicane pour limiter la port~e
et le domaine des bons offices, n1 A s'arrMer A des
consid~rations purement tb~oriquea sur la signification respective des bons offices, de la m~atioD et
de.l'arbitrage?

23. The Tunisian Government s~re~ n~ eHort to
facilitate the task of the distinguished persons whom
the United States and United Kingdom Governments
appointed to brIng Tunisia and France together, and
to avoid any further reference of thJe dispute before
the SecurLty Council. It was the first to accept the
proposals in the compromise suggested by the good
offices mission and was gratified that the French GQv"
ernment of Mr, Gaillard was also ready to accept
them,

Le Gouvernementtun1sienn'amenag~aucun effort
pour faclliter la tache des personnalitks emlnentes que
les Gouvernements des Etate-Unis et du ROYllume-Uni
ont d~sLgnees pour rapprocher la Tunisie et Is. France
et ~viter que le conflit ne soLtde nouveau portl3 devallt
le Conseil de aecurite. n a ~M le premier a accepter
les propositions contenues dans le compronrls Lsau des
bons offices, et il s'est f~llcit~ que le gouvernement
fraru;ais de M. GailIard se soit montre, Ason tour, prllt
il)es accepter.

24. The Tunisian Government regretted the fall of
Mr. Gaillard's Cabinet on the good offices issue. Its
first-and natural-reaction_ was to refer the matter

24. Le Gouvernement tumsien a accueilli avee regret
la chute du cabinet Gaillaxd SUI' la question des bons
offices. Sa premi~re reaction - cela eat ~t~ 1~g:ltLme

.'

,t

•
"

'.

,

'~

,

23.

,

again to the Security COW1cil w1thout delay, but it did
not do SQ. Instead it waited patiently for the outcome
of the French ministerial crisis and continued to
hope, despite everything, that the next government
would accept the findings of the good offices mission.

-- aurait lite simplement de revenir aussit8t devant
le Conseil de slicurlt~. Neanmoins, 11 ne l'a pas fait.
n s 'est contentli d'attendre patiemment le d~roulement
de la crise ministedelle fran9aise, gardant, malgr~
tout, Pespoir de voir le prochain gouvernement reprendre 1\ son compte lesconclusions desbons offices.

25. In a message to the ·Tunistan people on 24 April,
President Bourguiba showed that he was prepared to
hope for the best in the case of Mr. P£1imUn on the
strength. of an article which the latter had written
tn a French newspaper, Lea Nouvelles d'AIsace. When
Mr. Pflimltn was called upon to form a government,
our hopes of a settlement with France r03~. Unfortunately they were once agatn to be disappointed.
On 13 May,1958 when Mr. Pflimlin presented himself for investiture in circumstances with which we
are all familiar, he went no further in his references to
,Tunisia than the vague suggestions whiCh were passed
on to us by the French representative and made no
mention of the main issue of the good offices mission.
26. Then two major events sharply increased the
tension: the incidents provoked by the French army
stationed in Tunista and the French army rebellion
in Algeria. Those were two new factors which the
Tunisian Government could not ignore because they
affected the well-being of Tunisia and its very existence
as an independent and sovereign state. It was impossible to wait any longer.

25. D~s le 24 avril, le pr~sident Bourguiba, dans Wl
message au peuple tunisien·, accordaitunprlijugefa.vorable il M. Ptliml1n sur le vu d'unarticle ~crit par ce
dernier dans unjoUl'nal franc.;mis: les Nouvelles d'Alsa~. M. PflIml1nayantete designepour denouer la crise,
notre espolr de voir les choses s'arranger avec la
France grandissalt. Malheureusement, notre attente
aHalt ~tre encore une fols d~c;me. Le 13 mal 1958,
M. pflimlin se presentait il. 1'investiture dans les conditions que 1'on connaft et se bornait, en parlant de la
Tunisie, a tenir lea propos vagues que nous a rapportes
le representant de la France, sans parler duprobteme
essentiel del'! bans offices.

26. A partir de ce moment-H., dell"\( livenements Importants ont brusquement augmente la tension: les in~
cldents provoques par l'armee f-ranlfalse stationnAe en
Tunisia et la L"ebellion de 1'armee franc;aise d'Algerie.
n y avait 111 deux facteurs nouveaux dontle Gouvernement tUl1isien ne pouvait pas ne pas tenir compte: le
salut de la Tuniste et son existence m~me en taut
qufEtat independant et souverain en dependaient. n
n'litait plus possIble d'attendre plus longtemps.

27. On 14 May Mr. Ladgham, the Secretary of state
to the President and for National Defence, and Mr.
Mokkade~, the Secretary of State for ForeignAffairs,
drew the attention of Mr. B~nard, the French Charg~
d'Affaires, to the new situation created by the insurrection of the French army 1n Algeria agatnst the
Paris Government and to the Tunisian Government's
concern at this turn of events, because of the risk of
joint action by the French forces in Algeria and the
French troops in Tunisia; they also urged him to ask
his Government to state its position with regard to
the withdrawal of troops and the results of the good
offices mtsston. On 20 May further urgent representations to the Same effect were made to Mr. Blinard.

27. D~s le 14 mal,M.Ladgham,secretaired'Etatil.l:lI.
presidence et ala defense nationale, etM. Mokkadem,
secrlitaire d'Etat aux affairea etrangeres, attlraient
l'attention de M. Ee-nard, charge d'affaires de France,
sur la situation nouvelle crMe par l'insurrection fomentee par l'armee iral'll;aise d'AIg6rIe contre le gouvernement de Paris et les preoccupations qu 'elle donnait au Gouvernement tunislen, en raison du risque
.d'action concerte.e entre lea mHltaires fran9a1s d'Alg~rie et les troupes frlU'l9aises de Tunisle: Bs le pre8~
saient en mtlme temps de demander a. 80n gouvernement sa position sur L'evacuation et lee resultats des
bans offices. Le 20 mai, une nouvelle d~marchepre.s­
sante (;tait effectuee dans le m~me sens aupr~s de
M. Bt'inard.

28. On 21 May. President Bourguiba himself received
the French Charg~ d'Affaires andrequestedhimtoask
the new French .Government to make known its views
on the memorandum of 15 March concerning the good
offices mission. In the meantime the situation had
deteriorated and become explosive. Mr. B~nard went
to France and returned on 25 May after consulting
his Government. He was received by President BOUIguiba the same day and informed him of the French
proposals. The proposals were, however, vague and inconsistent and Mr. B~n.ard was not in a position to
provide the further infOl'mation for which he was
asked, in partIcular a time-table for the withdrawal
of the French troops. The Tunisian Government's
request fa r further information cannot properly be regarded as a counterproposal as is suggested in the
French explanatory memorandum. [S/4015)

28. Le lEindemain 21 mai, le prAsident 13ourguibare~
cevait lui~meme le charge d'affaires de France et le
prialt de demander au nouveau gouvernernentfra.nc;ais
de dire son sentiment sur le memorandum dU15 mars
rlisultant des bans offices. La situation s'~tait entretemps aggrav~e et Stait devenue explosive. M. Benard
se rendait en France etlitaitde retour le 25 mai, apr~s
avolr pris contact avec son gouvernemen't. n Mait rec;u
le jour m~me par le president Bourguiba etlui faisait
part des propositions fraTIl;a1ses. Mats ces proposi'tions €ltaient vagues et incons1stantes, et M. Benard
n '~tait pas en mesure de fournJr les preciSions demandees, et, notamment, un calendrier de 1'evacuation des
troupes fran",aiBes. Cette dema.nde de precisiollB formulee par lA Gouvernement tunisien ne saurait ~tre
consideree ~propl'ementparler comme des contrepropositions, aiMi que l'lndique le memolre explicatif
pr~sent~ par la France [8/4015).

29. The following day, 26 May, Mr. mnard met the
Tunisian Secretary of State to the President and for
National Defence and the Tunisian Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs and gave them details of the_

29. Le lendemain 26 mai, M. Benard rencontrait le
Secretaire d'Etat tunisien a la presidence et Ala d€lfense nationale et le Secretaire d'Etat awe: affatres
l!trang~res et leur donnait des indications detaillees
7

i

I
i

French proposals. The further lnformatlon revealed
the inconsistency- of the proposals. It was simply
a question of a regrouplng-a regrouplng and not a
withdrawal_and a reductIon tu forces of exactly
2,OOQ men out of a total of 22,000, while in return
the Tunisia~ Government was asked to undertake to
discuss the status of the Bizerta base and to cancel
various precautionary and safety measures taken
after the bo'llbing of Saki et. The Tunisian Government
could only rejeetthese ridlculoll8propoeals and pointed
out that no proposals were acceptable, which did not
at least cover the whole of the arrangements put
forward in the good offices memorandum of1SMarch.

"sur lea propositions fran~aiBes. Cas pdcisions rev~­
laient 1'lncOllBistance de ceB propositions.n llta1t simplement question d'un regroupement - je die bienregroup em ent, et non evacuation - etd 'un alMgement visant exactem6ut 2.000 honunes sur un effectif total de
22.0()(), avec, en contrepartle, un engagernentdemande
au Gouvernement tunielen de disouter le etatut de la
base de Bizerte et de rapporter les diverses mesures
de precaution et de sauvegarde prises au le:tdemain du
bombardement de Sak1et. LeGouvernementtunisienne
put que rejeter ces propositions derisoires, en indiquant que seules ~taient acceptablf!s des propositions
reprenant au moins l'ensemble des dispositions conteDUes dans le m~morandum du 15 mars iSBu des bOilS
offices.

30, It was then and only then th.at the Tunisian Government decided to make a further appeal to the Security Council. In anwuncing this final decision, President Bourguiba, after summarizing the course of
military and diplomatic events since 8 February,
clearly explained that Tt:nisia, in view of the sudden
deterioration in the situation and having exhausted
all IXJ881ble forms of action at the dJplomatlc level
and haVing made approaches through the SecretAryGeneral of the United Nations and urgent appeals to
friencily Governments, had no alternative but to return
to the Security Council. In other words, hefore coming_
to the Security Coum.:ll, we made every possible
effort in' the way of conciliation in the hope that our
cause would be heeded, flrst, by France and then by
our mutual friends, the United states of America
and the United ,Kingdom, which were kind enough to
offer us their good officos. It is plair. that there is
no truth in the allegation that our Government has
shown a formalistic and legalistic attitude.

20. C'est alors, et alors seulement, que le Gouvernement tunisien so rlis\>lut ~ en lI.pp.eler de Ilouveau au
(OMen de s~curit~. AlJ1lon~ant eette ultima d~ciBjOn,
le prilsident Bourguiba, apres avoir fait I 'historique
des ev~nement3 survenus sur le plan militaire et diplomat:lque depuis le 8 nvrier 1958, expliqua.ttclairereent que la TuniAie, devant l'aggravation -auMto de la
situation et apres avail' epuise toutes lea voies de reCG'lrS possibles sur le plan diplomatique et sur le plan
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies aupres du Secriltaire g~neral et effectue des d6marches pressantes aupres de gOllvernements amis. n'avait plul'! d'autre alternative que de revenlr devant le Conseil de securite.
C'est dire que, avant de nousprtisenterdevantle Conseil, nous avons fait toutes lea tentatlves de conciliation possibles dansl'espoir que notre cause seraitentendue, d'abord par la :France, enauite par nos amis
communs, lea Etats-Unis d'Amerique et le RoyaurneUni, qui nous ontofferlleurs bons offices. On volt done
blen <l.u'11 n'y a pas, dans l'attitudedenotre gouvernement, je ne sals quel esprit processlf ou prDc6durier
que l'on voudrait noUB attribuer.

31. Reference has been made t6 a recent development, the message sent by General de Gaulle, the new_
Head of the French Government, to President Bou~
guiba. With all respect to the Headoftbe French Government, I aU'l. bound to say that this message containa no now and positive elemtlllt. The Head of the
Tunisian State replied to the message in courteous
terms and stated: "It is essential that our respective
intentions should be clearly defined."
'

31. Je sats bien qu'on aparled'uned~marcherecente
faite sous la forme d'un messageadr6ssf!.le2 jutn [Jar
le g€lneral de Gaulle, nouveau chef du gouvernement
franQais, au president Bourguiba. Le respectquenous
devonB -au chef du gouvernement franQa1s ne nOUB interd1t cependant pas de eonstater qu'll n'Y a aueun
el~ntent poSitU' etnouveaudanssonmessage - auquel,
du reste, le chef de l'Etat tunislen n 'a pas rnanqu€l de
repondre courtaisement en dieant: "TI im[Jorte de
defirrlr, dans la clarte, ::loa intentions re13pectlves. '11

32. It i.e clear that the 1\mjsian Government has, up
to the very last minute, patiently and consistently
tried to settle the existing difficulties between France
and Tunisia by friendly understanding.

32. Ainsi, 11 appara!t cla1rement quec'estleGouvernement tun1slen quI, jusqu'au dermel' moment, a d~­
ploye des efforts patients ettenaees pour resoudrepar
une enten~e amiable les diffIeult~s peadantes entre la
France et la 'I'u.llit;le.

33, There are, however. limits to everything, even
conciliation, and beyond those limits not only our
sovereignty but our dignity aB II free people would
be impaired snd we would be una.ble to accept furlher
hum.1l1o.tlon.

33. Mais 11 Y Il des Iimites ~ tout, et notamment lla
conciliation, llmitea au-del~ desquelles ce r.'est plus
notre souverainetli qui serait atteinte, mats notre dignlt6 de peuple libre, qui, autant que les autres psu..
pIes, ne aaurait supporter plUB longternps I 'hwniliation.

There is another thing which is even more intolerable to us. to be treated as an immature people
on which advice, exhortations to wisdom and lessons
In international good behaviour a.re condescendingly
lavished with varying degrees of sincerity. We can no,
longer tolerate the paternalism that leads Mr.
Goorgea-Ploot to say that France has shownitsconfi- I
dence in Tunisia by giving It lts independence. It is
not a mark of generosity to restore !.!J a ,People the

34, 11 y a quelque ch08e qui n0W3 est eoeore plus insupportable, cleat d'~tre tra1t6s comme des peuples
mineurs 8uxquels on prOdigne £Lvec une oondeflQGndanco
plus ou moins einc~re 1es consells, leB recommanda..
tions ~la ,sagesse atles IEtQona de bonne conduits internationale. Ce paternallsme qui fait dire I M. Georges..
Picot: "La France a fait confiance b. la Tunisie en lut
donnant son Ind~endancell, nOllS ne pouvon!\ le sup..
porter. Ce n'est pas fa1re preuve de g6n~roBit~ G':W

_34.

8

,

,,
•t

"

""

I

,

I,
"

I

,"
t

r

'.

•

;,

,,
f:

i

I

'natural right to independence and freedom of which It
was deprived for almost a century. Paternalism may
have been an attractive Idea to the nineteenth century
conquerors who invented colonialIsm and brought itto
Asia and Africa but It must be discarded in the
modern world in which all nations, large and small,
are equal before the law and there is no place for
superiority complexes of any kind.

de resUtuer A un peuple un droit naturel qu'on lui a
ravt depuis un si~cle envlron, son droit il Plnd~­
pendance et A la liber±e. Le paternalisme etait
peut-Hre une conception ~ la mode chere il ces conqu~rants du xrxllme siecle qui ont Invente le colonlaHsme et Pont instaurll en Asie et en Afrlque; ce n'est
plus une conception de notre temps, ou les nations,
grandes et petites, sont egales en droit etoil. doit @t:re
banni tout complexe de superiorite.

35. Our dispute with France does not concern the
possession of territory or the settlement of a minor
issue. It relates to a vital issue onwhich our existence
as an independent and sovereign State depends. In
this dispute-if it were by mischance to degenerate
into a trial of strength-we know full well that we
have not the same resources as France and that our
economic and mtutary potential carmot equal or evenbe
set against that of France. On 0= side we have only
right and the pnnciples of the Charter. Our only
strength Is the unshakable faith of a small nation
which Is determined to safeguard its sovereignty and
dignity at any cost. Our hope Iles in the support'
and the backing which we are asking this Council to
give us.

35. Nous ne sommes pas en conf1it avec la France
pour la possession d'un territoire oupour le r~glement
d'un titige secondaire, mais bien pourunequestionvitale dont d~pend netre existence en tant qu'Etat iodependant et souvera!n. Dans ceconflit-sipar malheur
11 devait degtmerer en epreuve de force - nous savoI!S
tr~s bien que nous n'avona pas lesm~mespossibll1tt;s
que la France ni un potentiel economique et milltaire
egal au sien, Oll au mofnssusceptibledelui Mre oppose. NOllS avoUB simplementdenotrecOtiHeclroit et les
principes de la Charte des Nations Unies. Notre saule
force est la foi inebranlable dlune petite nation resolue
il sRuvegarder coate que collte sasouveraineM et sa d1gnite. Notre chance, c'estl'appuietlesoutienque noUB
so1l1cltons de cette noble assemblee.

36.

We await Hs decisions with confidence.

36. Nous attendons avec Seren1til ses decisions.

37. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (translated from
French): I shall not reply in detail at this juncture
either to what was said at the preceding meeting or
to what we have heard today, as I have a proposal
to put forward and its adoption would make any detailed reply on my part at this stage pointless. There
are, however, a number of general points to which I
shculd like to refer very briefly before making my
proposal.

37. M. GEORGES-PICOT (France):Jene repondrai en
dl§tail pour le moment ill il ce qui a ete dit au COurB de
la pr~cectente seance ni Ace que nousvenons d'entendre, ayant une proposition Afaire qui, sielle est adoptee, rendrait inutile que j'entre actuellement dans les
details. ,n y a neanmoins quelques points que Je
voudrais relever tr~s brI~vement avant d'~noncer ma
proposition.

38. The Tunisian representative has told us of the
findings of varIous journalists concerning certain incidents. In 0 = opinion, their findings are not conclusive, because only one sIde was ever heard.
France has repeatedly proposed the establishment of
Franco-Tunisian commissions of inquiry, possibly
under the ,chaIrmanship of a neutral, to study the
incidents and make known thair conclusions. As this
proposal was rejacted by Tunisia, there are no findings we can consider accaptable.

38. Le representant de la Tunisie nous a parM des
conclusions I/.uxquelles seraientarrives des journalistes sur certa.1ns incidents. Ces conclusions n'ont pas,
il notre avIs, une valeur absolue, parce qu'on nla jamals entendu qu'line des parties il ce sUjet, et qu.e la
France, il plusieurs reprIses, a propose des commissions ctlenqu€lte franco-tunisiennes, presidees mtlme
par un neutre, pour etudier les incidents et axriver il
des conclusions. Cette propOSition ayant ete rejetlie
par la Tunisie, n n'Y a aucune conclusion que nous
puissions accepter.

39. The Tunisian representattve attrtbuted to me the
statement that France bal1eved that, without TunIsIa's
aid to the Algerian rebels, the war would be over by
now. That is not what I meant to say and I was misunderstood. What I said was that the incidents In
question-frontIer Incidents which TunisIa oonsiders
vIolations of the sovereignty of its aIr space-were
provoked by and result from the support given by
Tunisia to the Algerian rebels. In this oonnexion I
should like to quote the legal maxim, which reflects
the wisdom of our forbears, that no one has grounds
for complaint If he suffers only the consequencas of
his acts. And that is what is happening in very many
ca'ses in the incidents in quesU<?n.

39. Le reprl§sentant de la Tunisle m la fait dire que, si i.
la Tunisie ne donnait pas son aide ilIa rebellion algerlenne, nOllS considererions que la guerre serait termin~e. Ce nlest pas ce que jla! voulu dire et j 'a! lite
mal comprts. Ce que j'ai dit, clest que,dans lea incidents dont n a etli question - incidents de fronti~res,
incidents que la Tunisle qualified'atteintesillasouverainetli de son espace aerien - n y a des evenements
qui sont provoques, qui resultant de llappui donne par
la Tunisie aux rebelles algeriens. Je voudrais clter ~
cet 6gard cet adage de droit qui refleWt hien la sagesse de nos p~res, et selon lequel IInul ne saurait se
plaindre qui subit seulement la consequence de ses actea ll• Or, c'elit cela qui se produttbien sauvent dans
les incidents dont nOlls avons entendu parler.

40. Nor did I ever say that the status quo, that is to
Say the measures taken last February, were the cause
of the present Incidents. I said that these incidents
'were due to change in the status quo.

40. Je n'al jamais dit non plus que le statu quo, les
mesures prises en fWrier dernier, lltalent la cause
des incidents actuels. J1ai dit qu':I.1s eta1ent dus aux
modifications qui avaient He apportees l ce statu guo,
9

,

i;

i:.

41. Dl au tre part, je crois qurn est inuttle dediscuter
la question de-la valeur dustatutjuridiquedes troupes
franQaises en Turusle et des acccrds qul ont ~t~ passes.
Nous pOUl."rions pol~mlquer longuement Ace sUjet, mus
je croisque la Tunisie el1e-m~me a convenu que l'th'acuation des troupes fran9aises de Tunisie ne pouvaitse
faire_que d1une fallon digne et sans entraves. Ce n 1est
pas An enfA'rmant lea troupes frlUllfa.1S&S dans Iours
cantonnemer.ts et en prenant toute une s~rie demeaureS vexatolres ~ lool' egard qu'on faciliteracette~va­
cuatlon,
42. D'autre part, naus n l avonB pas dit que la Tunisie
s.'~ta1t d~l"ob~e l des arrangements. Ceque nous avons
cot-stare, clest que, cbaque fois que la France a chercM l negociel." un arrangement avec la Tunisie, des
incidents Be sont produits qui ant emp~ch.e que leB n~­
gociations n 'aboutissent l un accord. J enral pas besoin
d'inslster sur lea eI~ments qui ont int~r~lemp@cher
un accord entre la FrlWce tlt Id. TunisIe: ls fecLt Cui
prodest.

41. Furthermore, I bl'llieve that no useful purpose
would he served by discussing the exact legal status
of the French troops in Twusia and oHhe agreement£con~luded in that connexion. We could- argue on that
subject for a long time, but I think that Tunisia itself
has agreed that the French trol>PS caD omy be ev~"
cuated from Tunisia :tonourably and without let or
hindrance. Their evacuation will not be made easier
by blockading them in their barracks and harrassing them by Cl. series of vexa~iou3 measurBS.
42, FurtherIIlore, we did not say that Tunisia was
reluctant to enter into any arrang-ementa. Our point
was that whenever France tried 10 negotiate an agreement with Tunisia, incidents occurredwhich.prevented
the negotiat!o:lS from leading to anything. There is no
need for me to emphasize that It is to the advantage
of certain elements to prevent agreement between
France and TUlllsia: i:s fecit cui prodest,

,!

43. Le repr~sentant de la Tunisie a par16~galement,
lla fin de BOil exposll, de pa1ernalisme. n pretend que

43. At the end of his statement the TuniSian representative spoke ofpaternal1sm. He claimed that France
was tryIng to give Tunisia lessons. I am sorry if
I said anythbg to give that 1=prcsB10n. but I think
that an examination of the statements that have been
made on both sides will show that in most instances
it MS not been the French who were giving lessons
to others.
44. In my vlew, there is no point in our contilullng
to argue about these questions (or if the proposa.l
that I am about to maks is adopted, we shall have an
opportunity to say anyt'ling that we may have to say
to each other dUring be subsequent conversations,

la :France veut donner des 1e90n8 a la Tumsie. Je ragrGtto si j'a! pu dire des cboses qui outdonn6 cette·
impression, mals je crois que, sil'onreprenaittoutes
les dllclarations qul ant llt~ faltes des deux cMes, on
verrait que ceux qui donnentdes let;ons 8exautres, le
plus souvent, ne sont pas lea Franlfais.
44. n ost inutilc,je crais, que nous conUuuions A po16mlquer sur caB questions si la proposition queje vats
vous faire maintena-nt eat adopt~e, CIU' nous Il.urious
l'occasion alare de nOUS dire ce que nous pouvons avail" I
a nous dire au eours des conversations qUipourra1e:1t
se derouler.
45. Depuis notre dernJ~re r~nion, commel'arappeU~ tout a l'heure le representant de la Tunisie, le gen~
ral de Ga.uUe a envoye au president Habib Bourguiba,
pr<1sident de la Republlque tunisienne, le message suivant:
IAyant I:tBBurn{\ le gouvernement de la Htipubllque
fram,alse, je m 'empresse de veus exprimermon intention de regler avec vaus, si vous en ~tea cl'accord,
lea difflcul~s actuelles entre nce detl." pays et lea
cO:1.dltiona de leurs bans rappoIts pcur l'aven1r.

45. Since our last meeting, as the Tunisian representative mentioned, General de Gaulle has sent the
following message to President Habib Bourguiba,
the President of the Tunisian Republic:

'Having a:'lsumed the Government of tho French
Republic, [hasten to i.nform you of my intention,
with your agreement, to settle with you the present
difficulties between our two countries and the conditions for good relations between them in the future. '
IUntn such time afl we are able to do so, I believe
that both OUT Governments should avoid any action
which might aggravate the present situation. I am.
giving orders to this effect to all the French authorities. 1 ha.ve the honour to be, etc. Signed:
General de Gaulle ft

"En at-ttlndant que !lOUS puisslons le falre,jepense
que nos deux gouvernements dolvent ev1ter tout ce
qui risque draggraver la situation du moment. Cleat
ce que je pIes erIe, pour ma part, a toutes autorlt~a
frr.n9aiees. Cordialement VOUB. Sign6: ~n~ral de
Gaulle. "
46. Qu'a r~pondu A cet appal le chef de l'Etat tunisien? Il a d~clarll le 3 join:

,
,
I.,

f
,
,

,
,•
,

,

,
,

,•
•

r

a

46. How did the Head of the Tunisian state respond
to this appeal? On 3 June he. said:

ft[n order to create the conditions necessary for
the settlement of the present difficulties between
OUl' two cauntries and the restoration of good relations between them. it is essential that our reSpective intentions sh(mld be cleady defined."

~Pour oreer les conditions necessaires au r~gle­
meut des dIfflcult~a actuelles entre nos deux pays et
ilIa restauration de 1JOIlB rapportl:l entre eux, j] lmporte de definir, dans la clarts, nos intentions respedlves. "
47. Comment pourrait-on mleux le flrlre, cOmnlent
pourrait-on mieux d!ifinir dans la clart~ les intentions
reapeotivoa de la France et de la TuniB1e,qt1'en p·oursllivant lea conversations directes, pulsque tel est le
d~sir q,u'exprime clllirementpour sll.partleGouvernelIumt fran9a1s?
48. Repondant d'autre part par avance au souhait du
pr~aident Hablb Bnurguiba, le gemkal de Gaulle a
adress~ au general Gambiez, le 2 juin, unmeseage lui

47. What better way is there of doing this and defin...
iug clearly the reBpedive intentions of FrancEj and
Tunhl:la than by contlnutngdirect convorfllltlo:l.6, aB thtB
Is the French Government's manifest desire?
48. General de Gaulle had, moreover, met Presideltt
Habi\: Bourguibars wIshes in advance by sending to
Gen~ral GambIez, on 2 June, a message orderIng him

10
7

I~

>

I•
•

to avoid any action on our side that might aggravate
the present situation and adding that, as far as the

prescrivant d 'eviter tout ee qui, de notre part, pourrait
aggraver la !;ttuatiQIl actuelle, ot il a ajollte ((!.l'on co
qui concerne les forces, le statu quo dolt ~tre provisoirement rnaintenu, quelque patience que cela exige
d'elle.s. Les ordres donnes par le general commandant
lea troupes u:angaises de Tunisie sont - ot jo cite le
texte meme de cet ordre - ITd!€lViter toutaccrochage,
l molns d'attaque :nettant gravement en danger lasecurite du personnel et des installat:lons militalres".

forces were concerned, the status quo should be
provisionally maintained no matter what patlence that
might require on their part. The orders given by
the General commanding French troops in ·~·untsta
were-and I am quoting from the text of the orderlit 0 avoid any contact, except in the eveniof an attack,
seriously endanl;ering the safety ofmilitary personnel
and installations".
49. The French Government's desire to avoid inci..
dentB an.d to maintain the statug quo is therefore
manlIest. It Beems to me that this is equally true of
the Tunisian Government, for, in his message to
General de Gaulle, President Bourgulba also stated:
11 am glad l... l to inform you that I share fully
your anxlel.y and yOUr desire to avoid anything that
might aggravate the situation. The Tunisianauthol'ities are complying with the orders that my Go.......
ernment has consistently issued. IT

49. Le d~slr du Gouverllement fran~ais d'eviter les
incidents et de malntenir le statu qUO est done bien net.
n me parart aussi clair de la part clu Gouvernement tunis1 en, puisque, dallf; son message au general de Gaulle,
Le pdSident Bour&Uiba. indiquait egalement:
"Je suts heureux I•••1 de VOll.8 faire conn.artre gue
je pariage entii!rement vos preoccupations et votre
aouet d'eV1ter tout ca qui risqued ' aggraver la situation. Lea autorit~B tunistenneB observent ilcet egard
les preBcrtpuons que mon gouvernement aconstamment Mictees."

50. In these circumstances there can be no doubt
of the sincerity of Fratlce's intentions to settle by
friendly negotiationfl-and here I would agair. quote
General de Gaulle-"the present difficulties between
our two countries and the oondltions for good rela~
Hons between them in the future".

50. Aucun doute ne sauraJt donc subslster dans ces
conditions en ce qui concerne la sincerite des intentions franQalses de regler par des negoctations amiables - et je reprendJ; le texte mlhne du gcn61'al da
CauUe - "les d1fficultl!s actueHes entrenosdeuxpays
et lea c:ondit1onB de leurs bans rapports pour l' avenir".

51. I therefore have the honour to propose to the
Security Council that this debate should be adjourned
for two weeks in order to allow these conversations to
take place. If tJ.:.is proposal Is ackJpted, r see no need
for me to say any more at 1.1118 meeting.

51. Dans ces conditions, j'ai l'holll1eurdeproposerau
Conseil de s~curit~ un ajournement aqulnzalne du pr~­
sent debat, pour permettre a ces conversations de se
derouler. Si catte Proposition est adoptee, je ne vois
pas la necessitepour moi de pourSUivre cette intervention plus avant.

52. The PRESIDENT: The list of speakers is ex"
hausted. Does any member wish to speak?

52. Le PRESIDENT (traduJt de l'anglais): La listedes
orateurs est epuisl3e. Quelqu ' un demande-t-ilIa pa"
role?

53. Mr. JAMALI (Iraq): I should like to kr.ow the
reaction of the Tunisian delegation to the proposal made
by the reprC3sentatlve of France.

53. M. JAMALI (Irak) [traduit de I'anglais]: J'aimerale connaftre l' attltude de la d~1I5gation tunisienne a
l' llga~'o Op. la proposition du representant de la France.

54. The PRESIDENT: The Council has heard the
formal proposal made by the French delegation to
adjourn the discussion of the present agenda item
for a fortnight.

54. Le PRESIDENT (trnduit de l'auglais): LeConseil
est sais.i d'une proposition formelle de la d~l~gation
franQaise: ajourner a qulnzaine le present d~bat.

55. The represeDtative of Iraq has asked whecherthe

55. Le repr~sentant de l'lra.~ademandeaurepresen­
tant de la Tunisiede dire ce qu1ilpeuse de cette propo'"
81tion. Jedonne la parole au representant de la Tunisie.

repre.sentative of Tunisia would he good enough to tell
the CouncU how he feels a;x,ut this proposal. I call
upon the representattve of Tunisia.
56. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French):
The Tunisian de1egat'on has no objection in principle
to the French representative's request. However, in
order to avoid any misunderstanding, I think that I
should remlnd the Council bat rule 33. sub-paragraph
3 of the Security Catmcll 's rules of procedure states
that meetings must be adjourned "to a certain day or
hour".•

56. M. SLill (Tunisie}: La d6Mgation tunisien:le n'a,
en principe, aucune objection il.la demande que vient de
formuler le representant de la France. Mllis,pour evlter toute equivol:pe, je crois devoir ra.ppeier que Falinea ~ de l'article 33 dur~glementinterieurdu Conseil
de securite precise que la proposition d1ajournement
de la S~ance dOitrendre "AajoUl"uerla s";ance A lUL jour
ou iI. une heure determines".

57. T am not lCutitled to participate ID the voting,
but as I was asked for my opinion r am gLvtng it.
In order to abide by the rules of procedure the Council's decision shoUld indicate be date of the next
meeting. A('cordlngly. jf the Security Council.agrees
and if the French representative has no objection,
it would be best to speCify that the debate on this
item on the agenda is adjourned until 18 June.

57. Je n'a..! pas le droit de partiCLper au vote, mats,
lltant donn{!quc 1'onm'adelualldemon avia,jc 10 donne.

La c..l3cision du Conaeil, pour etre conforme au rll~
glement interJeur, devra.ft done i1td:lquer la date de la
prochatne seance. Par consequent, si leConseil de secur1t~ est d'accord et OIi1e l·epre:lCmta.nt de la France
n'y voit pas d'object1OD, II serait preferable depreclser que la discussl0n du point de I 'ordl'e du jour est
ajournee au 18 ju1n 1958.
11

5-3. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I 'anglais): Je conside~
rarai que, III In n 'y apllS d 'objection, 1~ discussion de la
question a l'ordre du joux est ajourn~e au 18 juin.

58. The PRESIDENT: I shall assume. if there is nO
objection, that the discussion of the question I>U the
agenda can be adjollrn.ed until 18 June.

n e:'! est rollsi deciQ~.

It was so decided.
59. The PRESIDENT: With the takingofthia decision,
it only remains fol' me to expre3B the good wishes of
the Council for the success of the negotiations whioh
are to be undertaken between France and Tunisia.

59. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de Panglais): CettedflciBlon etaot prise, i1 name rel3teplus qu'a exprlmer tous
lell vceux du Couseil pour le suoces des negociations
qui vont s'ouvrir entre la France et la Tunisie.

eo. I note with particular interest that th~ head of
the French Government, in hig message to President Bourguiba, specifically undertook to prevent
an:}' action on the part of Frenchauthorlties that might
aggravate the situation. I also note that President
Bourgulba has resIxmded In a sp[rlt of ready co·operation,
51. Before concluding, 1ahouldUke to thank the representatives of France and Tunisia for the moderation
of their statementS. They have spoken 8trongl~· and
clearly, but all their statements were animated by the
deslre for a friendly and amicable settlel'llent of the
UlIflculties.

60. Je rel~ve ave~ un inttirMpnrticul1er que le chef du
Gouvernemeot fran~aiS, dans 80n message aupr€lsident
Bourguiba, glest express~ment engagll l emp'€!cher
toute action des a.utorit6s fra.l1J;aiS~l:l qui risquerait
d'aggraver la situation. Je note aussi que lepr~Blderrt
Bourgutba a fait preuve, dans sa r§pollSe, d'un grand
esprit de coop6xauon.

Statement by the President

_D6clarotlon du Pr-esident

62, The PRESIDENT: I wish to rBmlnd tne Couu<Ji!
that we agreed at our preceding meeting to postpone
DUT m.oetIng on the Lebanese oomplaln.t to Th.ursday,
5 JUle, which is tomorrow. However, we dld not fix the
nour of the meeting. I suggest that we should meet

62. Le PRESIDENT (tradult de l'anglais):Jerappelle
au Conseil qu'a lll.preclidente seancenou611vonll decld1i
de remettre le d~bat sur la plaiote du L1ban au jeudi
5 juin, c'est-il-dire a demain. Toutefois, nous n'avons
pas fixe Ilhp.Il't"B de la !i~aneo. J 6 propQ.se au Consell Ull
se r~unir demain a. 15 heures.

,
•

61. Avant de conelure, je voudrais remercierleBre~
pr~sentlUlt8 de la France et de la Tumsiede 111 mod6raUon de leuxs declaratiol1s. as ant parle avec force
et clarte, mals tout CB qu'IlS oot ditB'inspiratt du deair de regler les difficultes a. l'amill,ble.

tmllorrow at 3 p.m.

11 en est ainsi d~cid~.
La seance est levee illS h. 10.

It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

•
•

..,
,

;'"

r

I

,,.

,

•

12

SALES AGENTS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
AI01nI11w.~""DunINE

!dllo... t 5"dom.,t.ono, SA., Al,ho '00,
Bvon.., Aile•.
AUUAAllA.AUSTRALlE
M.lbou,ne Unlve"ifjl ".", 369/illol>"
d..le SI,e,'. M.. lbou,ne C.I.
AUnR1A-AU1I'CKI
Oe,.. ld & C..., O,obu 31. WI.n, I.
B. WUlle"l"f', MO'ku, Slt1!~\I.. t.o"e 10,
5.. ),I,u'•.

ULGIUM.BElOIQU!
Ag.no, .1 M,IIogo,l.. do

10 P,o"e,

5..... '~.22, 'u. du 'e.lIl, 8,~~.II...
W. K, S.. l'h L SU", 71.7S, lIo",..".d
Adolplto-Max, '",xenu
BOLIVIA.IOlIVIE
L111"'lo S.le..l.h.. Co,lll .. 972, l<l Po~.
BRA21L-IR'ESll
U",o.l<l Asl., Ruo M<l~I.o 9a.~, c.. r~a
P..,l..! 3191, _11> d. J..... l'...
BURMA·BIRMANIE
eu""",. Covt. Uo.k C.p.l, R""II""n.
Cl'nON-CE'nAN
l<o~. M~II" ao"k>~op,A.IO', N.w,pop ...
~f Ce~lon, P.O. Bu 244, C.. ro,.bo.
C."Itll_~NtLl

Edlto,I.. 1 01.1 p-Ocmco, A~umodo 57,
Sonl1"go.
LlbT.,.r" I""." C•• l:lo 20$, Sonll"go,
CHINA·CHIJU
Th Wo,ld Book Co., Lld., 1'9 Chun"
KI"G R.."d, 101 Sec~on, T.. I,.~, T..lwon.
111. Co .. meldol P,e.., lld., 211 Hon"n
Id"
nllhol.
COLOMBIA.(oLOMllIE
tlbT.,I" lo,hllol., log .. l'\>.
lIb.o·ln Am.'I.... Med,llln.
L1b,,,,.r.. Nndonol, L,do., B.u,on.. ul'lo.
COSTA lie",. COS1A·IICA
Im",e..lo y Llb,."o T,el"', Ap""odo
1313, Son J.....
CUll.:
Lo c.... hti'", O·R.,'Jly ~5'. Ln Hob..no.
CUClI0510VAKIA·lCHECOSLOVAQUIE
~ ..k••lo••n'H 5pl"'""I,I, N/i'od"1 I'I'fdo
9, P,.h.. 1,
DINMARK·DANEMARl(
Eln". M.n~"o"'d, Lld., N."o-.. ode ~,
K'b.,h..vn, ~,
OOMINICAN REPUBliC.
IEPUnlQUE DOMINICAIN!
L1b,.,I.. Domlnl<o.o,
~9. Clo.
dod T,"llIlo.
IiCUADOR·lillUATEUR
L1b.. ~o CI."II" ..., Guoyoqul! &. GMlo.
EL SALVADOMALYADOR
Manll,1 No,e. y'Clo., 10. Ave"ldo
37, Son 5..1.. .10,.
flll'OI'IA·mUOPlli
In'e,•• 'lonol P,e.. Ageney, ~.O. Box
I~G, Adrll. ,&bob",
fINlAND.FINlAHD!
Ak.t.omlne. tl'I"knuppn, ~ '<e,ko.","tu.
H.hlnkl.
'RANU
Edltlo,", A. P~don •. 1:1, .... Soumol,
Pod. Ne).
GERMAN'I'.AUEMAGNE
R. ebon"hmidt, S.hwon,hole, St,o".,
59, F,ukfu,t/M<lln,
~I ...,' a. M.", .., H.~p"l'o". '01,
Be,lln.SChonobe';'
AI.x"nd., H",e, Spi.g.lgo.." 9, WI••.
h"de".
E. Sno(b"h, o."."J.n.',~.. ~ ~O,
1(~ln Cl).

S"..

M.".d.,

'u'

w.

GHAHA.
lInl,o-"lfy collego .ool",hop. '.0. 11""
4. ,",<hlm..to. ACCfll,
GRflCE.GUCE
K"u'fIlI"n. BOB~,h.p,
SI.. dl". 51'..1,
A'hlno,.
GUAnMALA
50dedod lc..nomi,o.f!nonti.,o, ~"Av,
14.33, Ou ..temole CI'y.
NAlrI
Llb"ht. "., 10 Co,,,,.ell.", 101\. po.,.le
111.8,Po" ..,u,P,ln.e,

a

HO~DURA5

llb"r1. ~.,o''''TI,uo. l~,,<lQ,,110'
HONG KONG-HONG·KONG
Th. Swindon look Co., l ' Nothon R.. ad,
K",.loo.,
ICELAND·IstANDIi
aokove,zlu. SllIlu,o' !~m""d"oeo, H.
f" ......hITII"••\\ 18, R..l'kjo,lk.
INDIA.IND!
Orl.r! LO"lItloe" Coloutlo, Bombo" Mo.
d,o., New Oelhl .. Hyd ••• b...l.
O~'o,d s.ook .. 5to'Iooe'1 Co., NIW
Delhi & e"I'oll".
P. V<lodo<ho'1 .. Co., Mod,,, •.
lUDO NESIA·INOOt/fS lE
f7embe"gunon, Lld" Gunll ... Soho'l 84,
Dj.. kc,tn,
IRAN
"0.11It", ,jB~ F",do",1 Av""ue, r"f,e.on.
IRAQ.IRAk
Mo.k,.,l.', hob'no", B"ghdod.
IRELAND-1RLAHOE
Sto,Ion.,..,. OffI••, D,bJln.
ISRAB.
Blum,'.ln·, ~ook, ... , .., l'd" 3.5 Allenb,
lood, lel Avlv.
ITAlY.ITAlIE
Llb ..,:o Comml.. lororl.. 50n.onl, Vi..
Gin., C.,,,~.nI1~,I"''""'.'"l~ng.,... o,e
A,onld. do Bt.,do 15. Romo
JAPAN·JAPON
Mo.u ..n CO"Fony, Lld., 6 Torl.N!.I>o",.,
NI"~n"'o,hl, r"kyc.
JORl)AN·JOItDAN1E
JO"F~ I, &ohou. & Co" Oo"UI.l('luh,
lo~ M, Ammon.
KOJU"'·CORe~

hl·Yoo P~hll.htnll ~o., Lt"., 5, 2.KA,
Ch.ng~o, Suol.
LEBANON_lIBAN
I<:heye'" Collollo look Coo".'''1I''e, 3:.1.
3~, ,u, "U.., lIel'ol.
L1BUIA
J. M"nol", K.mora, Mo••o.lo.
lU;>;tH,1l0llRD

lib... ;,i. J. Sc:i1umm", lux.lI"~oo,g,
MEXICO·MfXIQLlE
~dilod.l H~ ... ~" S.A" 19T1.. ,lo Mo,io<o\
41. Mhl,o, O.P.
MOROCCO.MAROC
,",."" d'~llId•• "' cl. po,!icl~..
lnduo1'lo-J1o .. a, 'uo M!'hoo.-Bellol'"
Robot.
NUHIUANOS·PA YS.IAS
N.V. """.tinu' Nijhofl, loog. Voo'r"ul
'I, ',~G,,,vonhog•.

,;.n'

NEW nAlAND.NOV\l~LL'.lElANO'

Unlt.d Nolio"' A"odel;'" 01 Now 1...•
I.. nd, C.P,D. 101" W~lltngl"n.
NORWAY·NORVEGf
)01.." G,um1t Ton"",
9".hgt. 7A, 0,1•.

O,de" .,.d i.~oi,/o. "om «Io""Ie, ".~ ••••olor o~.""
n..' y.f b.". oppoi,'ed moy h

h...

..n/ fo .. 5..1....d Ckc"t"/fo"

Sod/Cln, UolI.d Nalio"l, Now York, tJ.S.A.1 or Sol.. Se<l;oo,
Un;le'" .~.. tron.Cm••• PoJol. d••Nol(.n., G.,..o, S",II. . ,lond,

Litbo-in V.N,

'.

,,,K1STAl\l

T"" Pakl,t<" Co_op.,c!!•• e.. ok So<1.t~,

D"c"', Eatt '"kl"on.

P"bll.h ... 1:"I'od, lId., ta~or••
Tho",o' & lhomo', I(ar".~i. 3.
MNAMA
1"... Menend.%, Apa,t,,<lo tOS2, A•• aA,
'u, 21_SI. '000.,,6.
',UAGUAV
A~.ndo da Llb•• ,I'" d. Salvador Nlue,
C"II. PI •. Fro.,<o No. 39,'3, AluMI"•.
PUl!.PEROU
Ub,.rla Int.raaeloM,t dol I".r~, S.....,
U .....

PHILIPPlNU
Alomor'. look Sla'@.. 769 IlIIol A•• nuo,
Manila.
I'OIlI\JGA~

Li",a,!" R.. d·l~u ••• 186 Ru. Aut••, L1"
hoo.
$\IHio.,POlll·iINQAPOUR
Th. Ch, Boo< Star., lld" C.. llyor Quay.

SPAlN.UPAGNE
lIb.o,t.. Mund1.',onoo, CO".Il" 37, Ma.
d,ld.
llb,.,!o Bo"h, Il Rood" Unlv"rlldcid,
80 ... 1000.

5WE[lEN·5UEDE
C. E, frU .. '. Kungl, Ho.b<:o'hand.f ,01,_11,
F,.d.~ata. 2, St"<kl,,lon,
SWITZERlAND-SU1BE
lib,,,lrlo poy... S.A., l"o,onno, Go.,""".
flon' Rov.ho,dt, KI"\1I0". IT, ZU,I<h I.
WAILANJ)·lHAlLANllf
P,om"". MU, Lld., !5 Chok,o,."t it;>"d,
W"t Tuk. B01Qkok
TURKIT·TURQUlE
Lib'oHe Hu,h.ne, ~69 100lklol Cod<l••I.
B.yoglu, hto,bol.
UNIOli Of SO\flM AfRICA·
UNJON 5UD.AUlCAINE
'VBn Scholk'. Book".'. (I'!,.), Lld .. B.~
71.t. P,-o.\o'\".
UNION OF 50VII;l SOCIAliST
lfPUlll.ICS·UN10N OES lIPUBLIQUES
iO~IAllSTU 'OVIIlIQUEI
M.. hd,no,odnoy" K"l'lGo, Smolen.k"y"
Plo,hchod. Mo,k.o.
UNlTEO ,ARAE REPUBLIC.
UPUBUOUE UAIIi UHI.
L1b'ol"e "L" Ronnl"o.c. d'Egypt.", 9
Sh. Adly Po.hJ, Col.o.

UNlTEO KINGOOM.ROYAUME.UNI
H. M. ~t"llon.'Y O!fl«, P·O. Don 569.
London, S,E.1.
UNITEO HAlES OF AMUIC ....
nAYS.UNIS D'AMUIQUE
Inl.,nOlln"nl 00." ....... S."'''e, c.lumblo Uni•• "ily P,.". 196(\ B,oo"-'l,
N.w Yo,k 17, N. J.
URUGUAY
R.n,e'.o•• ,io" d. E~',n,I"I.,. P,.I. H,
O'EII", PI •• o Cogonero lJ~~. ,. pi"oo,
l,I.,.le.id• .,.
IIEN.HU!lA
lib"rlo del E'le, Av. MI,,,ndo, Nn, $1.
Eclf. Oolipoo, C.. ,o'o'.
IIIET.NAM
";b,.. ;.j._PoP~I"I. XII<' Th'" 185.
~u·D", B.~. 283, Soig....
YlIGOS;A VIA·YOU<lOSLAVIE
CMk",jevo z"loi:b., Ljubljeno, slo••• !••
D"o"'''
P.odo,"c.,
Ng01loven.ko
~nl;lIo, T.rolij, 17/IL BouQ"d.
p,e'.j.!o, 5, T,g B,,,",vu i Judln'ho,
70greb.
[59!!]

I

."

,T.,

)1 ~

'u.

Le• • 0m",o"Jo, .t de",o"Je. d. ,.n";~~,"monf. ~m"ft.m' .re

poy• • ~ ;) "'.. 1510 P'" ""0," de dope.ljo".' ,..... n! 'f,e
.d,o"fo, 6 I. Sodlon d .. • '""'U 01 d. 10 "".-In!>.flon,
O,gon;lOl;on d" No,r.n, IIftj", Ne...·YOlk rEl.I•.Uni, d'A"'·
,Iqoo!, Ou ,; 10 Se.Hoc d.. ~.",.., e.gonhonoo de' No'io"'
Unl.,. Poloi, 01" N ..
Ge., •• e (Su'''.)'

f,·.,n',

PriCE: $L!.S. 0.15; 1/- stg,: Sw Jr, 0.50'
(or equivalent in other CllrreT.cies)

6227-Seprember 1959-1,675

,"
J
