United Nations

S/PV.5498

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5498th meeting
Sunday, 30 July 2006, 11.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De La Sablière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. García Moritán
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Ikouebe
Ms. Løj
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Pereyra Plasencia
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mlynár
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-44873 (E)

*0644873*

S/PV.5498

The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Israel and Lebanon, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) and Mr. Mahmoud (Lebanon) took seats
at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to photocopies of a letter dated 29 July
2006 from the Secretary-General, which will be issued
as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/2006/595.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency, Mr. Kofi Annan.
The Secretary-General: Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for arranging this meeting on very short
notice.
We meet at a moment of extreme gravity, first
and foremost for the people of the Middle East, but
also for the authority of this Organization, and
especially the Security Council. As the Council is
aware, during the night the Israeli air force bombed the
village of Qana, in southern Lebanon. That village is
no longer in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). We
therefore had no United Nations personnel nearby at
the time of the attack, although Chinese engineers and
two medical teams have now managed to reach the

2

area. They are helping to clear the rubble and are
giving treatment to survivors. I am therefore relying on
the Lebanese authorities for my information.
Preliminary reports say that at least 54 people have
been killed, among them at least 37 children.
We must condemn this action in the strongest
possible terms, and I appeal to the Council to do
likewise.
I am deeply dismayed that my earlier calls for the
immediate cessation of hostilities were not heeded,
with the result that innocent life continues to be taken
and innocent civilians continue to suffer. I repeat that
call once again from the Council Chamber, and I
appeal to the Council to do likewise. I send my deepest
condolences to the families of all the victims of
violence — in Lebanon, in Israel and in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Gaza.
This tragedy has rightly provoked moral outrage
throughout the world. Regrettably, some Lebanese
people have turned their anger against the
Organization. Earlier today a large number of
protesters broke into our headquarters in Beirut and
briefly set it afire. I am glad to say that the fire was
quickly put out. As of now, three staff members have
been reported injured — and, I am glad to say, none
critically. The demonstrators have now left the
building, after intervention by the Lebanese armed
forces. I am deeply grateful to the Government of
Lebanon for that prompt action, as well as to the
Speaker of the Lebanese parliament, Mr. Nabih Berri,
and other Lebanese leaders whose statesmanlike
appeals for calm were decisive.
The United Nations House is the hub of our
humanitarian activities in Lebanon, which will
continue throughout the country. But, naturally, we fear
similar reactions elsewhere in the region or in the
wider Islamic world. I appeal to the authorities and
people in all countries to respect and ensure the safety
of United Nations personnel. I appeal to everyone to
understand that we are doing our best to help, through
diplomacy, humanitarian action and through the efforts
of UNIFIL, which, as all are aware, suffered tragic
losses only a few days ago.
The tragic events in Qana remind us that 10 years
ago over 100 people who had taken refuge in that same
village suffered a similar fate. We must deliver the
region from this seemingly endless cycle of violence.

06-44873

S/PV.5498

In the last 18 days several hundred Lebanese
citizens have been killed, the vast majority of them
civilians and at least a third of them children. During
the same period hundreds of thousands of Lebanese
have had to flee their homes, many of them under
heavy shelling. Meanwhile, over 50 Israelis have died,
including 19 civilians; and the population of northern
Israel has been subjected to intense and continuous
rocket fire. Thousands are now in shelters. It is
important to stress that both sides in this conflict bear a
heavy responsibility, and there is strong prima facie
evidence that both have committed grave breaches of
international humanitarian law.
The present fighting began on 12 July with an
unprovoked Hizbollah attack on Israel and the
kidnapping of two Israeli soldiers. Since then,
Hizbollah has continued firing rockets indiscriminately
into northern Israel from positions apparently located
in the midst of civilian populations. No one disputes
Israel’s right to defend itself, but by its manner of
doing so it has caused, and is causing, death and
suffering on a wholly unacceptable scale.
As the Council is aware, I have repeatedly
condemned all actions that target civilians. The High
Commissioner for Human Rights has reminded all
parties that they may be held accountable for any
breaches of international humanitarian law. But the
most urgent need is to bring the fighting to a halt
without further delay. For that, the Council has a
solemn responsibility. Action is needed now, before
many more children, women and men become
casualties of a conflict over which they have no
control. I therefore reiterate my call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities, to allow desperately needed
humanitarian relief to reach the victims.
While that is happening, we can work together on
the political framework needed for a lasting ceasefire
and a sustainable solution, the strengthening of
Lebanon’s Government, the disarming of all militia and
the implementation of all Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006). I
will work with the Council on the development and
deployment of a stabilization force to support the
Government of Lebanon in its decision and
responsibility to extend its authority throughout the
country.
I know there are differences among Council
members about the precise sequence of actions needed.

06-44873

I beg them to set those differences aside and come
together on the most urgent point: the immediate
cessation of hostilities.
I should also share with the Council that, this
morning in my conversation with Prime Minister
Siniora of Lebanon, he told me his Government had
taken a decision that it would no longer engage in
further diplomatic discussions and efforts to find a
solution without a ceasefire. I asked him whether the
Government as a whole had taken that decision, and he
reaffirmed that it was the decision of his Government.
The other information that I would like to share
with the Council is that UNIFIL did receive a request
from the Israel Defense Forces for the population of
two villages — Ramyah and Ayta al-Shab — to be
evacuated before sunset today. Of course, UNIFIL has
refused to evacuate the villages, indicating that it does
not have the capacity to do so. These requests have
often come, where their assistance is required, from the
Government of Lebanon. That is something I thought
members should know, to let them understand the
dynamics in the region and in the south.
Let me conclude by stating very clearly and
briefly that the authority and standing of the Security
Council are at stake. The authority and standing of the
Council are at stake: people have noticed its failure to
act firmly and quickly during this crisis. Today’s events
at the Economic and Social Commission for Western
Asia (ESCWA) were in part an expression of that
frustration.
For the sake of the people of the region and of the
Organization, I urge the Council to act, and to act now.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.
Mr. Mahmoud (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We
thank you, Mr. President, for quickly convening the
Security Council this morning. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his renewed appeal for an immediate
ceasefire and his call on the Security Council to take a
position on the current situation.
We meet today as innocent blood continues to be
shed, as we hear mothers cry, awaiting the burial of the
children-victims of Qana. We have come to ask, “When
will the killing machine stop?” This week is the third

3

S/PV.5498

in which acts of killing and destruction have continued.
Now, the hamlet of Qana once again meets its fate with
Israel, 10 years on — Qana, that peaceful, quiet
hamlet, where children, women and old people sought
refuge, attempting to keep their spark of life alive in
the darkness of the shelters.
Israel’s shells do not recognize the innocence of
children or the sanctity of life. Rescue workers have
pulled more than 60 corpses from under a residential
building. More corpses continue to be pulled from the
ruins, mostly women and children, and thus the final
number of victims of the latest Israeli massacre has yet
to be tallied. Undoubtedly, in their conscience, in their
deepest heart of human hearts, the members of the
Council all know that Israel is committing war
massacres. Israel is committing atrocities against
humanity. The regrettable fact that such massacres
have yet to be addressed by resolutions of the Security
Council does not mean that the truth is to remain
hidden.
This tragedy came at a time when the
Government of Lebanon, in consultation with friendly
States, was seeking a window to resolve the crisis
raging in Lebanon. The Prime Minister of Lebanon,
Fouad Siniora, on behalf of the united Lebanese
Government, set forth Lebanon’s understanding of the
seven-point plan, beginning with an immediate
comprehensive ceasefire. However, it seems that Israel
has other solutions: solutions of shells and aircraft
bombing children; solutions of siege preventing
medication and food from reaching civilians in their
villages; solutions of collective punishment and
collective killing; and challenging the will of the
overwhelming majority of the countries of Council
members, and all countries of the world, calling for an
immediate ceasefire.
Now, after the massacre — after many massacres,
after the second Qana massacre — in respect for the
dignity and the will of the Lebanese people, in memory
of the martyrs who fell today and who have fallen
during the past three weeks, we believe that it is
neither viable nor acceptable to consider solutions
before an immediate comprehensive ceasefire.
The Lebanese people who demonstrated in the
streets and squares of Beirut last year, who called for
truth, independence and freedom — the Lebanese
people that the Council supported in its many
resolutions, whose democracy and vitality the Council

4

proclaimed and welcomed — are today, with one voice,
mourning their martyrs. Together with their
Government, they are calling upon the Council to bring
and end to the firing immediately, without delay, and to
undertake an effective and serious investigation of this
massacre and of the massacres that Israel has
perpetrated on the land of Lebanon over the past three
weeks.
We are committed to the United Nations. We
believe it to be a haven for the weak and the victims of
injustice, more than a podium for the strong. Will we
find in the Security Council what the wounded
Lebanese people seek?
The Lebanese Government, through its Prime
Minister, has addressed the diplomatic corps. I will
now read out the Prime Minister’s statement.
(spoke in English)
“I shall be brief. This is the time for action,
not talk. With the backing and support of the
entire nation, we have left no stone unturned and
no avenue unexplored in our sincere desire for a
rapid and comprehensive ceasefire and an end to
the lethal rampage and carnage carried out by the
Israeli army over the past 18 days in their
systematic determination to destroy Lebanon. We
were confident that the seven-point plan I
proposed at the Rome Conference would be
supported by all peace-loving Nations.
“Instead, the Israeli response has been yet
another massacre of innocent women and
children in the town of Qana, which suffered a
similar human tragedy 10 years ago, when Israel
cold-bloodedly murdered more than 100 civilians
who had taken refuge at the United Nations
outpost there. They called it ‘Grapes of Wrath’.
What principle of warfare will they invoke this
time? Why, we wonder, did they choose Qana yet
again? Perhaps this time we should call it ‘Grapes
of Hatred’.
“We can only reassert that there is no place
on this sad day for any discussion, other than our
call for an immediate and unconditional ceasefire
and withdrawal to behind the Blue Line, as well
as an international investigation, without delay,
into the continuing Israeli massacres in Lebanon
in violation of international laws and conventions
and basic human decency. We cannot be expected

06-44873

S/PV.5498

to negotiate or discuss anything else while the
ruthless, pitiless sword of the Israeli war machine
continues to drip with the blood of innocent
women and children.
“I also ask you — and this is why I called
you here today — to urge your Governments,
especially those who are members of the Security
Council, to back our request for an immediate
meeting of the Security Council and our call for
an unconditional ceasefire.
“Finally, I would like to assure you that,
while we can understand the anger being
expressed during the spontaneous demonstration
at United Nations House that you have been
witnessing on your televisions, we deplore the
attacks against the building and ask the
demonstrators to express themselves peacefully.
United Nations House is a house for all Lebanese.
“Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, I know
that, deep within you, in your heart of hearts, you
know that Israel is committing atrocities on a
scale that your conscience cannot tolerate. So do
pass on the truth — the whole, unadulterated
truth — to your Governments and organizations
and urge them to move swiftly to ensure an
immediate,
unconditional
ceasefire
and
withdrawal to the Blue Line and to back our call
for an immediate meeting of the Security
Council.”
(spoke in Arabic)
I express the hope that Security Council members
will support Lebanon’s call for an urgent Council
meeting and the call for an immediate ceasefire and for
an immediate investigation into the massacres
perpetrated in Lebanon by Israel.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Israel.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for honouring us with his presence.
This is a horrible, sad and bloody Sunday. This is
a day on which we mourn and grieve, together with the
people of Lebanon, at the deaths of the innocents and
civilians in Kafr Qana. Those people, including women
and children, who were killed in this horrible, tragic
incident may have been killed by Israeli fire, but they
are the victims of Hizbollah: they are the victims of

06-44873

terror. If there were no Hizbollah, this would never
have happened. If Lebanon were free of the
stranglehold of that monster, this would never have
happened. And, while we mourn the deaths of those
people, we must stress that Israel has never targeted —
and in this particular case did not target — innocent
people.
Kafr Qana has been a hub for Hizbollah for a
long time. Hizbollah has been launching missiles and
rockets at Israel from Kafr Qana. We will make
available to the Security Council a film that shows
Hizbollah launching a rocket from right behind a threestorey house: a civilian residence very similar to the
one that was hit today in Kafr Qana. That is the sad
reality.
Israel has repeatedly beseeched the residents of
Qana to leave. I would not be surprised if Hizbollah
made them stay. We are dealing with a ruthless,
cynical, cruel enemy, one of the most monstrous terror
organizations that this world has ever known. They
have no regard for Israeli life, and they have no regard
for Lebanese life. They do not care about the people of
Lebanon. They have infiltrated every fibre and every
cell of that country, so that, in the words of my
esteemed Lebanese colleague who appeared on United
States television only last week, “You cannot
distinguish in Lebanon between Hizbollah and the
Lebanese.” In his words, Hizbollah is everywhere; in
his words, Hizbollah has infiltrated and become part of
Lebanese society.
But there is a huge moral disequivalence between
the two sides. While our enemies — who only today
have launched more than 100 missiles at Israeli towns
and villages — specifically target women and children
in order to kill them, we are defending ourselves in this
brutal war. And sometimes, tragically, as happened
today, women and children get hurt, because they are
used as human shields by Hizbollah. Hizbollah has
homes in Lebanon that house missiles — in which the
family sleeps with a missile. When you sleep with a
missile, sometimes you do not wake up in the morning.
In Israel, we have homes that are equipped with air raid
shelters to save people from bombs; in Lebanon, they
have homes that they equip to launch missiles, taking
into account that those people could be killed.
Today, we say that we are truly sorry for the
people of Lebanon and for the people who were killed.
I have never heard Hizbollah say that they are sorry for

5

S/PV.5498

a single Israeli — woman, child, elderly person,
civilian or innocent — who has been killed. Never.
Why? Because they target us specifically. That is their
declared aim, and that is what we are fighting. And
while for us every dead Lebanese child is a horrible
mistake and a tragedy, for them every dead Israeli child
is a victory and a cause for celebration.
I am saying emphatically at this table that I
would not be surprised, because of their cynicism and
brutality and total disregard for human life, if this is
exactly what Hizbollah wanted to happen. I would not
be surprised if this is something that they wanted and
wished for precisely today, the day when Secretary
Rice is in the region trying to reach a settlement.
Because members of the Council know better than I
that on any given day when we are so close to reaching
a settlement, the terrorists, the extremists, the
fundamentalists snatch it away from us, because they
do not want a settlement.
And I must say that I feel that what is happening
around this table today is exactly what they wanted to
happen. Today, while there is mourning in Israel and in
many other places around the world, there may very
well be jubilation in Tehran, in Damascus and in the
Hizbollah strongholds, because this is exactly what
they want to happen. They want the Council to be
called up to arms and to seize the fire. They want it to
do exactly what it is being asked to do today. They
want the Council to react the way in which it does.
I know that these are harsh words, but I believe
them with all my heart. I beseech members not to play
into their hands, not to provide them with what they
seek while they sacrifice their own people as human
shields and as victims.
And today, of all days, I would like to ask my
Lebanese friend: tell your people, the brave people of
Lebanon, the Government that you represent and your
brave Prime Minister, for whom we have a lot of
respect, that the demonstrations held today in Beirut
should not be against the United Nations; they should
be against Hizbollah. Hizbollah is the one that has
caused you all this pain. Hizbollah is the monster that
you have allowed to grow. If you had taken care of it
before, if you had deployed your forces in the south,
this would never have happened. And if the Security
Council had enforced resolution 1559 (2004), this
would never have happened. Tell your people to
demonstrate not for blood, but for peace and for hope.

6

If we want to live together in this tough
neighbourhood and in this blood-ridden region, we
need to create a culture of hope rather than a culture of
violence. We need to create a culture in which the
children who were hurt in Qana would have been at
school today rather than huddled together as hostages
for Hizbollah — a culture in which the children of
Qiryat Shemona would have gone to school today
instead of being scared and huddling in bomb shelters
because of Katyusha rockets. We need to change the
culture of hatred. We need to teach our children about
hope. And we should not let what happened today —
tragic and horrible as it is — change the facts and the
truth. And that is that Hizbollah must be totally
disarmed. Otherwise, if there is a ceasefire today and if
Hizbollah remains with its capabilities and its huge
arsenal of arms, it will raise its ugly head again. And it
will rise not just against us and against the people of
Lebanon, but against the whole region and civilization
as we know it. Do not let Iran and Tehran, the sponsors
of Hizbollah, have their day. Make it clear that this
must end — not that hostilities and fire must end, but
that terror and Hizbollah must end, because until they
do, there will be hostilities and there will be fire, and
more innocents will pay the price.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Mahmoud (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I
apologize for taking the floor a second time.
What good is it to try to deflect attention from the
real massacre, its causes and the source of the fire? The
Lebanese Government has from day one been calling
for a ceasefire. Only an immediate ceasefire will give
civilians from both sides of the border a chance to be
saved from what has been taking place. Even the
humanitarian truce suggested by the Secretary-General
before the weekend was rejected.
It has been clear from the very beginning that it
was not Hizbollah that was the target. It was Lebanon
that was the target. Infrastructure was targeted and
hundreds of civilians were killed before Israel even
took up any campaign against Hizbollah and its
positions.
The Prime Minister has emphatically denied the
allegation that rockets were fired from near the area
that was bombed. In Ramyah and Ayta al-Shab,
civilians will attempt to go to sleep tonight in fear of
Israeli action, after their warning. There is the potential

06-44873

S/PV.5498

for a new catastrophe in southern Lebanon if a
ceasefire is not declared.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

06-44873

In accordance with the understanding reached
earlier, I should now like to invite Council members to
informal consultations following the adjournment of
this meeting.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

7
