UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

24 MARCH

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2334) . . . , . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . , . , , , . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . , . , , . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14917) . , , . , , . , . . . , . , . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . , , , , . . . . .

I

WPV.2334 and Corr, 1

NOTE
,

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly SL,pp/emJnts of the OJficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsolntions
trrtd
Decisions of the Sewrity
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2334th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 24 March 1982, at 3.30 p.m.
Mrs. Jeane J. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America).

Prcsidcrzt:

from the representative
reads as follows:

PrPscJnt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

1. Adoption
2.

“I have the honour to request the Security Council to extend an invitation to the representative of the
Palestine Liberation
Organization, to participate
in the deliberations of the Security Council on the
item ‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’
in accordance with the Council’s usual practice.”
3. The proposal by Jordan is not made pursuant to
rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but if approved by the Council the invitation to
participate in the debate would confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) the same rights
of participation
as those conferred on a Member
State pursuant to rule 37.

agenda (S/Agenda/2334)

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14917)

Adoption

of Jordan ]S/14Y20] which

4. Does any member of the Council wish to speak
on this proposal‘?
5. Since no other member of the Council wishes to
speak at this stage, I shall make the following statement in my capacity as the representative of the
UNITED
STATES.

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14917)

6. As recently as 23 February [2331st mc’eting],
I explained why we oppose the special procedure that
has been employed to give the PLO the same rights of
participation in this body as if it were a State. In fact,
the PLO is not a State, and no departure from the
rules of procedure may be justified. Adapting rules
and procedures to achieve the political goals or to
serve the political interests of any group weakens the
Council and the United Nations itself. The United
States has never interposed an objection to the Council’s hearing the representatives of the PLO or any
other interested group on discussions of matters
before the Council to which they are able to make a
contribution.
Rule 39 of the rules of procedure is
designed to accomplish the objective of hearing persons who speak on behalf of non-governmental entities.
It achieves this purpose. No departure is necessary or
justifiable.

I. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Egypt, Israel, Pakistan, Senegal, and the Syrian Arab Republic in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, 1 propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

7. For those reasons, the United States requests that
the proposed invitation be put to the vote. We shall,
as in the past, vote no.
8. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT.
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak,

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 23 March
1

I shall ti,ke jt that the Council is ready to vote On the
pl~l~pl~sill by Jordan.
14. we ;lre meeting tod;iy in the Shi\doM’ of ;I d;ll’k.
hideous and uncharted destination
which confl‘0nth

In,firl*cH//‘: Chin;,, Guyana,

Ireland, Jordan, Panama,
Polirnd, Spain. Togo, Uganda, Union of Soviet So&llist Republics, Zaire

and truly portrays
occirpied
Arktb

,.lgtritl.st: United States of America
,.l/>,tr~/it~ill,y: France, Japan, United
Cjreat Britain and Northern Ireland

Kingdom

territories
victims.

As

the syStem;ltiC

m:ll’tyI.d()fn

and

their

Pdcstiniatl

illld

1 hnve

stated

WpCUtedly

bCfi)I*C

Of the
t)thcl’
tllc

Security Council and elsewhere, 1 c;\Il think of IIO issllLL
in the entire broad spectrum of Middle Lnst conflict
which is more loaded with potential and itlCVitat~l~
disaster than the subject of the pITWIll
cl~nlplitiI~t
and debate.

of

15. Ugly and brutal as the present situation is in
occupied Jerusalem, the West Bank, the Gaza StI’iP
and the Syrian Golan Heights, the mnnifestatiW1~
which I have underscored in the letter addreSSed to
the President on behalf of the Group of Arilb StLllch
members of the League of Arab States are hut the tip
of the iceberg, the tremors which precede i1 v&.xlnil:
eruption, For the victimized
Palestinian
inhabit:mts
of the occupied territories are more convinced th;in :tt
any time before that their demonstrations,
with thtil
chests bare-in the face of the wanton, inhuman :lnd
indiscriminate use of firearms and other lethal ilnd
sadistic devices by heavily armed Islacli
troops.
police forces and hate-mongering
intruding settlersare symbols both of adversity and of defiance,
of
despair and of unshaken determination,
whntcver’
may be the cost or the sacrifices which the Israeli
racist Fascists have been inflicting upon them and upcjn
their bretheren in dispersal for almost IS years.

y. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter dated
23 March [S//4Y2/ ] from the representative of Jordan,
which reads as follows:
*‘I have the honour to request the Security Council to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States, to participate
in the consideration by the Council of the item
‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’, in
accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure.”
IO. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to accede to this request.

16. The Israeli invaders can only seize and hold on
to the occupied Palestinian territories and reduce the
proud Palestinians to slavery and to eventual tcrrc>ristic massacres and expulsion
over the people’s
dead bodies, even though the only arms the Pulestinians possess are an indomitable
spirit, individuwl
and collective self-reliance and stones. In this resolve
they will be joined by their Palestinian
brethren in
dispersal and by their Arab brethren everywhere.

I I. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today
in response to the request contained in a letter dated
22 March from the representative of Jordan to the
President of the Council [S//49/7]. Members of the
Council also have before them documents S/14912 and
S/14916, which contain the text of two letters dated
19 and 22 March. respectively, from the representative
of Jordan to the President of the Council.

17. It is at present an uneven fight, which only it
people hardened by colossal adversity and the will to
survive can even countenance with resolve and eyuanimitY. The battle for occupied Arab Jerusalem, the
West Bank, the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights :md
their people has begun-or
more appropriately
h:~s
intensified-and
will not end until the y&e of one of
the longest and worst occupations in history is terminated. One would have thought that solemn CounCil resdutiOns 242 ( 1967) and 338 ( l973), which mandated Israeli withdrawal from the occupied territor-ies
a decade and a half ago, should have been enforced
long agO. Instead, the Israeli occupiers
have been
given the time needed to colonize and dig their heels
in deePer and deeper every day, thereby foreclosing
any meaningful options for a feasible peace.

12. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): As this is the first
occasion I have had to speak in a formal debate before
the Council this month of March, I wish to extend
to Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick my most sincere congram
tulntions on her assumption of the presidency. She
has already conducted the work on the informal and
no 1~s important variety of issues of which the council has been seized with pragmatic wisdom, expedition and detachment. I am confident that her diplomatic skills will stand her in good stead.
13. I should also like to express the deep appreciaIiOn Of mY delegation to her predecessor in the presidew. Sir Anthony Parsons, for his wisdom, extended
2

18. It is imperative that the total picture in the occupied territories should be put and understood in
‘proper focus lest the lines between the forest and the
.trees be blurred.

villagers: and obviously they are doing these things
not for security reasons or through divine inspiration,
as they allege, but in order to be the unofficial arm of
the occupation authorities when they deem the time
ripe to commit wider atrocities to induce expulsion
-all too reminiscent of the massive terrorism which
resulted in the tragedy of 2 million Palestinian refugees
still in dispersal after 33 years.

19. The eruption of the situation in the West Bank
was, on the face of it, triggered by a reckless and lawless act in which the military and so-called civilian
Israeli apparatus of Fascist-like oppression forced
its way into the municipality
of AI-Bireh town and
forcibly ejected the duly elected mayor and the councillors from their premises, replacing them by an Israeli
colonel. How can an Israeli colonel become a mayor?
That is something which gives food for thought, This
totally unprovoked act of brutality and illegality was
naturally responded to by peaceful demonstrations
and sit-ins, largely by teen-agers, elderly women and
even children of only 10 to 12 years of age. Substantial
portions of the adult population between the ages of
17 and 45 have been, over the past 15 years of occupation, incarcerated at varying intervals in Israeli gaols
or torture chambers-a
quarter of a million people in
all, according to Israeli sources: and this was published
in the Israeli newspaper A/ Hunzishnzar and is substantiated by our own figures.

22. The intensification
of Israeli State terrorism and
its instrument-armed
settlers’ terrorism-are
not
being perpetrated in a vacuum. The objective of the
Israeli authorities in instituting a reign of terror is to
subdue and paralyse the will to resistance and the
steadfastness of our people under occupation as a
prelude to imposing their version of administrative
self-rule and emptying the territories of their lawful
inhabitants as a final step in Israel’s officially declared
objective of annexing the rest of the occupied territories--they
have already annexed Arab Jerusalem
and the Golan Heights. That they have not as yet
enacted annexation of all the territories is not out of
respect for anybody but because they want all the
land but not the people who inhabit the land. Thus, the
Israeli occupation is tightening the screws to speed
up the process by striving to strangulate
the inhabitants militarily.
economically
and psychologically
by savage means. This is an ordeal which every citizen who lives in the West Bank and the other occupied
territories has to undergo day in and day out. The
bitter fruits of the Camp David accords pertaining to
the rights and very existence of the Palestinian people
are now all too clear for all to see-as we have all along
maintained, totally convinced that this would come
to fruition.

20. The professional classes, with no opportunities
for practising their professions, and the farmers,
whose lands and water were ruthlessly and systematically expropriated, were compelled to seek gainful
employment abroad to support their families and offspring at home. But even that family assistance has
been barred by the occupation authorities, as has
Jordanian, Palestinian
and collective Arab assistance-even to the municipalities.
This has resulted
in one of the most massive and cruel separations of
families in the contemporary era. An Austrian lady who
is closely familiar with the situation told me a few
days ago that wives are living like widows and children’
like orphans because their breadwinners are away
toiling to sustain them. The rate of infant mortality
.due to malnutrition
and lack of medical care is an
appalling 160 per 1,000 as against 40 per 1,000 in Israel,
and possibly less in Jordan. Medical experts, in two
published bo,>ks, have also disclosed that long-term
endemic diseases have afflicted our people in the
occupied territories, who before occupation had a
record of which they could be proud.

23. What is happening in the occupied territories is
resistance by our valiant and unarmed people to thwart
Israel’s determination
to annex their territories and
squeeze them out by all means at its disposal. Israel
certainly has a timetable and is following that timetable meticulously and in accordance with a plan of
implementation.
This is an act of genocide by other
means. One can commit acts of genocide by starving
people, by depriving them of water, by subjecting
them to intolerable terrorism, by a variety of means.
But the ultimate objective of obliterating the national
existence of the remnants of the Palestinian people
on their national soil is being pursued notwithstanding
world public opinion and all the resolutions which the
General Assembly and the Security Council have
adopted over the years if not over decades.

21. The complaint contained in document S/l4917 of
22 March describes the turmoil which has today
entered its sixth day-and,
regrettably, today also
claimed dead and wounded in various parts of the
occupied Palestinian
territories-and
the strikes,
the curfews and the indiscriminate
use of firearms
against civilian and unarmed demonstrators, even at
funerals and burial places, resulting in scores of dead
and injured. But no less sinister are the acts of deliberate provocation, including abduction and torture
unto death-as in the case of the teen-ager from Sinjel
village-by armed intruding settlers who built an illegal
Israeli settlement on the confiscated lands of those

24. The masterly inaction and complacency of the
highest executive organ of the United Nations have
already created an untenable and impossible situation
which inevitably will pose in the not too distant future
a grave threat to peace and security and renders any
talk about a peaceful resolution to the overall conflict chimerical, meaningless and, I would say, outright deceptive-in
spite of the Arab world’s declared
commitment,
as expressed at the Bhagdad Arab
3

31.

summit and at other forums, to a just and comprehensive peace based on Israeli withdrawal from the
occupied Arab territories, in accordance with the
Council’s own resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (l973)q
and the restoration of the full rights of the Palestinian
people-the
rights of return, self-determination
and
the establishment of their own State On their own
national soil in Palestine, and nowhere else-whose
sole representative is the PLO.

Mr,

TERZI

(Palestine

Liberation

~IIwIiz~ltilIn):

Madam President, I should like at the outset to tbunk
of the PLO.
you for inviting me, the representative
to participate in the
consideI*ation
of the situation
in
the occupied Palestinian territories and the plight of
the Palestinian people under military oCClqX~tion and
alien domination,
and.
thank all the members

to extend that invitation.
people,

greatly

appreciate

through
of the

yOLIq I ShoLlld

Iike

to

Council who joined in
My people, the Palestinian
the invitation
:lt this
pal-

titular time.

25. It is imperative to understand, before the point
of no return is reached, that it is futile to talk about
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
in the abstract when the Israeli occupation has over
the past I5 years been pre-empting and torpedoing
them, and delineating its own racist solution on the
ground. The Israelis are undisguisedly determined
-and our people see it with their own eyes every dayto seize the Palestinians’ territories and resources,
including water almost to the extent of 95 per cent of
underground springs and other sources, and to dispose of the Palestinian people when nothing is left
for them to survive on.

32. Madam President, I am sure that the Council.
under your leadership, will assume its reSpOnSibi1itie.S
and respond positively to this momentous SitLliltiOn.
33. It gives me great pleasure to address the Council
at such a very critical moment, when scores of 0111
children and women-our
entire people under military occupation-are
being subjected to acts of State
terrorism and vandalism,
Repressive measures are
applied and escalated against our people: the rattle
of
machine-guns, paratroopers,
barbed wire. tear gas
grenades, curfews, breaking into stores, rape, arrests
-you name it.

26. When we look again at the magnitude of the
Israeli occupation’s
cannibalization,
erosion and
dismantling of the Palestinian people’s dwarfed remaining enclaves in their ancestral homeland, we see
that this has indeed reached terrifying-even
terminal-dimensions:
it amounts at present to between
35 and 40 per cent of the total area and still continues
unabated. That is a jump of 10 per cent over the
most recent findings, those in the report of 1980
[S/f42681 of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979), a report which we
hope
will be taken up by the Council and updated.

34. What is more serious is the loss of life, the flow
of blood of innocent people of all ages, as a result of
Israeli atrocities and criminal acts.
35. As the representative of a permanent member of
the Council, you might feel that you have the duty, in
addition to your responsibilities
and functions
as
President, to uphold the moral values of the founding
fathers and the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.? One of those rights is the right of everyone
to life, liberty and the security of his person.

27. We request the Council to shoulder its solemn
responsibilities
towards the Palestinian people and
their territories, which have been a trust in the hands
of the community of nations passed on to the United
Nations from the League of Nations.

36. The situation
in the occupied Palestinian lands
is deteriorating-not
that it has been any better or more
Promising at any time since 1967. My brother from
Jerusalem, the representative
of Jordan, has *just
enlightened the Council on the current events, and it
would be rather tedious if I were to produce here all
the United Nations documentation
issued and endorsed by the Council on the acts of aggression and the
violations committed by Israel, the occupying Power,
Whst
our
Palestinian people and other Arab peoples
in other occupied territories,
such as the Syrian
nntionals in the occupied Syrian Arab Golan Heights,
where not even the International
Committee of the Red
Cross was permitted to bring food and medicine to
help the Syrian nationals under siege.

28. The duly elected municipal council of Al-Rireh
should be reinstated, and Israel should cease forthwith its brutal acts of oppression, confiscation and
bloodshed, which are continuing to this day in violation
Of h%latiOnal
law,
the inalienable political and
human rights of the indigenous people, and the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949,’ which is categorical
in
providing for the safeguarding of the rights of the
civilian population under occupation.
Above
all,
hwver,
the Council should ensure
by all means at its disposal the termination of Israeli
occupation, which in some two months will have
lasted 15 long years: to the suffering people, an eternity.
29.

37. The United Nations, as a result of the reports of
the General Assembly’s Special Committee
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Population of the Occupied Territories,
is replete
with facts about Israeli brutality and policy rind &signs
to eliminate the physical presence of our people from
our own homes, our homeland in Palestine, to make

30. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
on whom I now call.
4

room for Zionist invaders. I need not recall here that
the founders of Zionism declared that the realization
of their Zionist project is predicated on the prerequisite of the elimination-you
may call it spiriting
across, thinning away or transfer-of the Palestinians.
The current Government in Tel Aviv with its Herut
majority
has been acting on the same designs since
1916, when Jabotinsky
declared that the Zionist
project can be realized only with an “iron fist”.

tinians and seek acquiescence from the neighbouring
Arabs. By “legitimation
from within” Milson means
the creation of a body of quislings or collaborators.
42. I do know that Cowmcnt~rry
has a rather good
readership,
particularly
among the “intellectuals”,
and sometimes it even appears dressed in green-especially if it is March and St. Patrick’s Day. Be that as
it may, Milson admits from the outset that the parties
to the Camp David accords:

38. The latest acts started a few weeks ago, when
schools were closed and school-children arrested; all
these things have been described in Security Council
documents.
The brutality escalated and acquired a
more concrete form. In Nablus, on 7 March, Israeli
soldiers fired at demonstrating students. One student
received a bullet in his stomach and another in his leg.
An Israeli army spokesman said, “soldiers fired into
the air to break up a stone-throwing demonstration
protesting
the continued shut-down of Bir Zeit University.”
But two elements here are clear: the student’s
stomach could not have been that high in the air, and
the real cause for the demonstration
was the shutting
down of the University.
So the students were not
anarchists; they were exercising their legitimate right
to demonstrate and to protest against the arbitrary act
of the military governor in shutting down their university ,

“have not been able to reach agreement on any of
the principal questions in dispute. That is not surprising when one considers that the representatives
of the people for whom the autonomy plan is intended
refuse to take part in the talks and, indeed, reject
the whole idea.”
43. I have no intention of analysing any further what
Professor-General
Milson said. My question to you,
Madam President, is: What is in the Camp David
accords for the Palestinian people that might tempt ot
induce us to accept such accords?
44. I should like just to recall some historical facts.
When the Special Committee
on the Exercise of the
Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, which
was created by the United Nations,.’ presented a programme of action-and
that programme of action
was subsequently endorsed by the General Assemblythe Palestine National CounciI welcomed the recommendations, including the programme, and considered
them as a positive and constructive step towards the
attainment and free exercise of our inalienable rights
and a major step forward towards peace.

39. I say “military governor”, because it is nothing
more and nothing less. The military governor is a
general in the army, but he is also a professor at the
University
and he should know better. And I believe
that all members of faculties in educational institutions know how students manifest their reaction
against whatever they believe and indeed know to
he wrong,

“Civil administration
does not mean that this is
an administration
operated by civilians but an
administration
dealing with the affairs of civilians.
It reflects the understanding that the separation of
executive functions between military and civilian
affairs would better suit the needs of the population
and the policy aims of the Government.
But of
course we hope and believe that the atmosphere in
the area will be such that moderate people, pragmatic people, will be encouraged to join the peace
process, and in that respect we may be in a sense
preparing a political atmosphere which may be
conducive to the full implementation
of the Camp
David accords.”

45. On I October 1977, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America came
out with their joint statement on their endeavours to
achieve peace. The PLO again welcomed the move
and saw in it the light at the end of the tunnel. But,
unfortunately,
it was the United States Government
which retracted its commitment
and then, suddenly,
plans surfaced for separate agreements and an approach to achieve comprehensive
peace-so-called,
However, the plans proved to be non-productive-or,
rather, counterproductive.
The substance of the
Camp David accords annuls the existence of the
Palestinian people and denies us all individual rights,
such as the right of return, and national rights, such
as the right to self-determination
and independence in
our own homeland, in Palestine. Yes, Milson is right.
We, the PLO, the internationally
recognized representative of the Palestinian people, did in fact reject
the accords, and I think that we have the right to
oppose sue h projects.

41. It is this same Menahem Milson who, in a
“study”
and “design”
published in the May 1981
issue of Cornrnrntof-y -and I take it that a lot of people
here know what Commentary
is-concludes
that it is
only through “legitimation
from within” that he can
help realize the Zionist dream, subjugate the Pales-

46. It might seem odd that the future of the Palestinian people was to be determined by others, and that
the Palestinians-as
if we were fossils-were not even
consulted. Frankly, we are not the acquiescing and
passive type when it comes to the defence of our rights
and our survival,

40. In the Jerusalem Post of 21 February, that same
professor-general
defines his role as follows:

5

47. A lot has been said and many meetings have been
heId among the triumvirate of the Camp David accords.
For them, the issue is interpretation: for us Palestinians, it is substance, To the readers of C()VllnP/~t~~,:Y~
. my answer to Professor-General Milson’s question
**Why does the PLO totally reject Camp David?” is:
Camp David is predicated
on ignoring the Palestinian
people,
annulling its rights and denying it the free
exercise of those rights-inalienable
rights that have
been identified and affirmed by the international community. In the defence of its rights and in its struggle,
to attain them the Palestinian people does not have to
be pressured either by “patronage money” or by
“physic;ll
terror and intimidation”,
despite what
Professor-General Milson tries to convey in an attempt
to convince his readers.
48. The history of the British Mandate is only a vivid
proof. Our struggle has taken several forms: demonstrations, strikes, even a general strike that lasted
180 days in 1936. I feel it is my duty to say to Milson
and his readership that there is no need to pressure
our people: our love for freedom, our love for our
country and our love for independence are inborn.
49. But Milson arrives at the conclusion-a
sound
conclusion in a way-that through a joint effort of the
United States and Israel conditions should be created
to subjugate the Palestinians, thereby creating what
he calls the chances for peace. In his opinion, the
“permanent solution of the Palestinian problem must
ultimately be struck between Israel and that political
entity whose centre is Amman”.
50. Does this concept, this policy, this ideology,
reveal the real goal-namely,
forget about and do
away with the Palestinians?

So far 11 numhcr IlZlVC hCCT1 killal
and ;I very gl’t’at n~lmll~r
have been in.jured. This is in addition to cSpl’0pl’iiltion of land. the establishment
of colonial Settleinstitution\,
ments, the closing of educational
universities and schools. the disbanding of llnim.
rind other meusures of oppression and tCrI‘OI’.
by

lsl.;leli

people.

army bLlllets

“Our people under occupation
cxcrcises it.r
legitimate right to resist racist occupation
and
declares its total re-jection of all projects that the
forces of occupation try to impose by force: among
these projects is the civil administration
and the
autonomy. By its heroic struggle our people asserlt
its inalienable rights, including the right to return.
the right to self-determination.
the establishment
of
its own independent State with Jerusalem 21%its
capital, and at the same time our people affirms its
support and commitment
to the Palestine Liberation Organization, its sole legitimate representalivt:
and leader of its national struggle. We appeal tu
you, and through you to the world community.
to
peace- and :iustice-loving
people and people keen
on maintammg the sanctity of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of
Human Rights. The Palestine
Liberation
Organization would recall that all measures undertaken
by
the Israeli forces of occupation,
its continued
occupation of land, its aggression against our people
and our national and human rights and our institutions-all these acts are in defiance of internationat
norms as contained in the Charter of the United
Nations. In addition, these illegal acts assume that
the continued illegal occupation
is a lasting jhit
rrwmpli
by virtue of oppression and force.
“It is no secret that these barbaric acts of the
Zionist racist forces against our people and OLII- rights
is fully supported by the United States of America
on all levels, be it military,
economic, political or
diplomatic. This is also reflected in the position of
the United States of America within the international
Orgynization.
Such a position
only encoilrages
continued aggression and justifies all pretexts for the
Persistence of Israel in its acts of terrrlr and other
oppressive measures against our people and OLII
children.

51. There are 4 million of us Palestinians, and
believe me. we are not dormant and we are not pas:
sive. And at this stage I wonder, if there were any
need for a plebiscite among the Palestinians undel
occupation, do YOU not think that the results of such
a Pk&xik
are very clear from what is happening
now under occupation?
52. This morning I handed the Secretary-General
a letter dated 23 March from Yasser Arafat, Chairman
of the Executive Committee of the Palestine LiberdNl OIgaIliZatiOn and Commander-in-Chief
of the
Armed Forces of the Palestinian Revolution. It reads
as follows:

“In my name, in the name of the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
and in the name of the Palestinian
Arab people,
I appeal to you, Mr. Secretary-General,
and to the
United Nations, all its organs and institutions,
to
assume its responsibility
in conformity
with its
Charter and its resolutions and put an end to this
Zionist aggression against our people and our
inalienable national rights. We trust that the just iind
legitimate struggle of our people will meet with your
support and the support of the United Nations.”

“The situation in the occupied Palestinian territories is exacerbating. The racist Zionist forces of
occupation pursue their oppressive actions against
the population and against professional social,
educational, trade union and other institutidns in the
West Bank and Gaza. The Government

Palestinian

of Israel

has decided to increase heavily the presence of the
Israeli army in the occupied territories with instructions to impose the most severe brutalities on the

53. Public opinion in the United States is cognizant
of the true facts. Only yesterday T& Cliristitrn
Sc~ic~rtc*r
Moniior
in an editorial said:

6

“Who is to blame? It would be hard to sort out
the rights and wrongs of any one incident. But few
would quarrel that the underlying cause remains the
Israeli military occupation of the West Bank and
the failure to give the ruled Palestinians the right
of self-determination.
Palestinian
Arabs indeed
take up stones against Jewish settlers. They feel
themselves the helpless victims of an Israeli policy
which, more and more, seeks to subjugate them-by
expanding Jewish settlements in the West Bank,
by trying to implant a pro-Israel civil administration,
by harassing Palestinian
educational and family
life,”

note that some of your former students, who are incidentally nationals of the region we are discussing
today, are attempting to put into practice the teaching
they received from their illustrious teacher. Today,
on behalf of your Government.
you have the task of
applying that law. Of course. I will be told that this
is an irony of fate, but with the faith in peace that
inspires you, I am sure that you will be able to reconcile these two exigencies: theory and practice. Even
more, through the responsibilities
your country bears
as a permanent member of the Security Council for
the maintenance of peace in the world, I am sure that
you will help us to find a just and comprehensive solution to the problem we are considering today.

Of course, The Chsistitrn SC-irncc Monitor says more
than that and 1 am sure everyone here knows how
to get that newspaper in order to read the entire editorial,

59. A tribute must also be paid to your distinguished
predecessor, Sir Anthony Parsons of the United Kingdom. He succeeded in conducting the proceedings of
the Council last month in a manner that compelled out
admiration. Coming, as he does, from that island which
a poet has compared to a precious stone set in a silv&
sea, Sir Anthony Parsons, who laboured so long in
the Middle East and was concerned with the affairs of
that area, did a great deal to contribute to the restoration of peace there.

54. The United States may feel constrained, but we
believe that the Security Council does have powers
vested in it by the Charter of the United Nations. It
is our belief that the Council should rise to the moment,
stop the flow of blood of innocent human beings and
prevent further exacerbation of the situation. The PLO
does believe in the efficacy of the Council and of the
United Nations. It can assume, and in times of need
it has assumed, a positive role and improve situations.
What exacerbates situations is the lack of respect for
the decisions of the Council and failure to carry out
such decisions.

60. From December to this very day, the Council
has quite properly been faced with the consideration
of the situation in the occupied Arab territories. The
AI-Bireh events, if they are to be properly understood,
should be placed within a general context, that is, that
of the whole Middle East question, and underlying
it the Palestinian problem.

55. Prompted
by the need to bring peace to the
land of peace, we appeal to the Council to take prompt
action. A resolution adopted by the Council, even by
unanimity,
may not be accepted and carried out by
Tel Aviv, but at least it will strengthen and justify our
faith in the United Nations and its noble mission
and cause.

61. I am sure you will recall, Madam President,
that in this context the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, of
which I have the honour to be Chairman, in its report
to the thirty-sixth
session of the General Assembly,”
made concrete and objective proposals, all stemming
from the desire to find a just and honourable solution
to the Palestinian question. These recommendations,
as you are aware, were approved by the General Assembly by a very large majority. They are the following.

56. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Senegal. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
57. Mr.
SARRE
(Senegal) (intp,‘p,‘etation
jiwn
FrcntV?): I should like first of all to express my gratitude to the members of the Council who have been
kind enought to permit me, in my two-fold capacity
as representative
of Senegal and Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, to participate in this debate,
which is important because it assuredly has an impact
on international
peace and security.

62. First, the Palestinians
have the right to return
to their homes and to recover the goods of which they
were stripped; secondly, they have the right to selfdetermination
without outside interference and the
right to national independence and sovereignty; thirdly,
they have the right to create an independent State in
Palestine; fourthly, the question of Palestine is at the
very heart of the Middle East problem and no solution
to this problem can be contemplated if it fails to take
account of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian
people: fifthly, the exercise of these inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people will contribute also to a final
solution to the Middle East crisis; sixthly, the participation of the PLO, the representative of the Palestinian people, on an equal footing with all other parties
on the basis of General Assembly resolutions 3236
(XXIX) and 3375 (XXX), is indispensable in all efforts, I

58. Madam President, I should also like to convey
my sincere and warm congratulations to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of March. The various posts you have held in
the past and the post you hold now are all so many
guarantees of the success of our work. Indeed, for a
long time you taught law in American universities.
That was a veritable apostolate and we are happy to
7

and a drastic change in the balance of power in favour
of the Israeli entity, on the other. The net results of
such developments.
both political and military. have
been to encourage Israel to accelerate in an unpre.
cedented manner its policies and practices of colonization in the occupied Arab territories, the absorption
of Jerusalem and, last but not least, the annexation of
the Syrian Golan Heights.

at all meetings and in all debates and all conferences
on the Middle East organized under the auspices of
the United Nations:
seventhly, the acquisition
of
territory by force is inadmissible and Israel consequently has an obligation
to withdraw totally and
rapidly from all the occupied Arab territories; eighthly,
the fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949’ must be
applied: and ninthly, all States in the region have the
right to live in peace.

69. The Council has been convened urgently to face
a tragic situation affecting the lives and the property,
as well as the future, of millions of Palestinians, the
victims of Israeli aggression since 1948. The Council
is invited to shoulder its responsibilities
and carry
out its duties, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, in the most ominous context-that
of the declared policy of Israel calling for the final
liquidation of the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories as well as of those in exile. The Council is
also called upon to consider the situation in the Golan
Heights, where the occupying authorities are committing barbaric acts. The Council should not forgel
that threats by Israel to invade southern Lebanon
before a certain date-which
I am not going to mention-add
to the complexities
of the situation in the
area.

63. I wanted to set forth all these recommendations
because we believe that, in the light of what I have
just said, everyone will agree with me that any approach-past,
present and future-to
solve this
crisis must necessarily take account of the elements
I have outlined. We also believe that this is the time
for the Council to take up all these recommendations
and put them into effect. Any delay in carrying them
out will only serve to increase tension in the area, as
borne out by the cycles of violence which have been
triggered off there, with all their untold consequences.
64. But until such time as these measures are applied,
the Council must also take all necessary measures to
contain the events in Al-Bireh. In this regard, the
Committee
believes that the draft resolution submitted for the Council’s approval will contribute to
this.

70. The symptoms
of Israeli rapacity arc daily
news: more settlements:
more confiscation of Arab
land: the arming of Israeli civilians to attack Palestinians; the closing of universities and cruel crackdowns on students and their professors: the shooting
at peaceful demonstrators
resulting in the deaths of
many teen-agers; and the assassination of Palestinian
individuals without any justification.
The disbanding
of the Municipal
Council of Al-Bireh and its replacement by Israeli military rule-a new gauleiter-is
an
indication that the Israeli occupation authorities have
embarked on the process of annexing the West Bank
bit by bit. In addition, Israel, whose talent in manipulating the markets is undisputed, is creating such
conditions in the West Bank and Gaza as to force the
educated Palestinians
and Arab skilled labourers to
emigrate, since the development of the West Bank is
supposed to serve exclusively the interests of the
Jewish settlers.

65. Madam President, in the course of your brilliant
university career you have always taught law; in your
present post you practise it. Therefore, we appeal to
you: Please work for the triumph of right over might.
Work for the restoration of peace in that region which
gave the world the eternal message of peace and
fraternity which we have all learned through the
revealed religions. Peace and justice have been implanted in all minds today; it is a powerful idea. And,
as was so well put by a great French thinker and writer,
“no army can stop an idea whose time has come”.
I have quoted Victor Hugo.
66. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
67. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
Madam President, I wish to express my congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of this
distinguished body. I should also like to express my
admiration
for the diplomatic
skills of your predecessor, the representative of the United Kingdom.

71. We should like the Council to consider in depth
the Israeli oppressive policies in the Golan Heights.
Soon after the Israeli occupation authorities annexed
the Golan on I4 December 198 1, adecision that both the
Security Council and the General Assembly declared
null and void, the Israeli military authorities began
speeding up the process of annexation through the
use of suppression, terrorism and harassment. As of
the first of this month the carrying of Israeli identity
cards by Syrian nationals in the Golan Heights became
compulsory.
Information
on those repressive measures has already been communicated to the SecretaryGeneral and circulated as official documents of the
Security Council and the General Assembly.

68. In 1976 the Middle East conflict entered a new
phase as a result of the Camp David process-a phase
in which it has been ever since then, and which is no
less cruel than previous phases and which is even
much more dangerous not only with regard to regional
security but also with regard to world peace and
security. This new phase is ostensibly characterized
by the widening of the area of conflict, on the one hand,
8

72. We should like to inform the Council that, as a
result of resistance of our nationals and their refusal
to bow to Israeli diktat, the towns and villages of the
Syrian Golan Heights have been sealed off and the
Israeli authorities are preventing essential food and
medical supplies from reaching the population in an
effort to break up the general strike which started on
14 February and is still being strictly respected despite
all the Israeli punitive measures. Most of the Arab
leaders of the Golan Heights are still being held in
detention in Israeli gaols. Whole towns and villages
of the Golan are still under a rOgime of curfew and
isolation.

to the Golan. is a decision which, according to our
understanding of the Israeli character, had already been
taken by the Zionist land-grabbers.
76. Do we have to examine the Zionist mind in order
to grasp that it is the duty of the United Nations to
normalize Israel itself? For Israel is the anomaly of our
region, and anomaly is deeply rooted in the Zionist
racist doctrine.
77. The Syrian Arab Republic is entirely committed
to the Charter of the United Nations, but that is not
true of Israel, whose leaders’ obsession with Judaizing
all occupied Arab territories is best illustrated by a
call uttered by Begin exemplifying a dictatorial imposition of Israel’s jurisdiction
over everyone of the Jewish
faith. I have quoted it on an earlier occasion. He said:

73. To portray the character of the Israeli occupation authorities I wish to bring to the Council’s attention the following statement made by Mordechai
Zippori,
Minister of Communications
of Israel, as
reported on 17 February by Reuters:

“We call on the young generation, in the homeland and in the Diaspora, to arise, go forth and
settle. Come from the East and the West, the North
and the South, to build together Eretz Yisrael. There
is room for millions of returnees to Zion.”

“KIRYAT
SHMONA,
Israel-Communications
Minister
Mordechai Zippori said today that ‘the
Golan Heights is ours and anybody who regards
himself a Syrian should be allowed, in a democratic fashion, to move to Syria.’ He made the
statement to reporters in the northern Israeli town
after a tour of the Heights.”

What sort of State are we dealing with? What ideology?
78. The history of Israel must be considered in its
proper context, a context that has been and remains
essentially colonial. It is an outgrowth of a Western
colonial incursion of the nineteenth century against
Asia, Africa and Latin America during the West’s
hectic race to carve out colonies and to build empires.

Since you, Madam President, are a believer in Israeli
democracy, I draw your attention to this notion of the
Syrians being allowed, democratically,
to lose their
homeland,
their property, their homes. This is the
character of your ally.

79. Likewise, from the outset, violence has been
implicit in Zionism, an inherent characteristic of this
movement,
which is purely political and purely colonial. Post-State
Zionism was a force which deliberately and systematically
aimed at perpetuating
violence and conflict in the Middle East region. The
architect of the Zionist doctrine, Theodore Herzl,
confided in his Ditrrks,
published after his death in
f904, that military power was an essential component
of the Zionist strategy and that the land of their choice,
by then Palestine, had to be acquired by armed conquest. But then Herzl was realistic enough to admit
that the original natives of Palestine were the greatest
obstacle in the Zionists’ way, an obstacle which had
to removed by any and all means. To hear Herzl speak
of the Arabs, one hears the ruthlessness and the
inhumanity
of the man who founded the movement,
as well as the philosophy of his disciples who rule
Israel today.

74. In order to understand the problems we are
facing in the Middle East as a result of the Israeli
intrusion we must always try to analyse the Israeli
mind and its understanding of the meaning of “peace”.
In the Israeli perverse perception, the occupation of
Arab territories and its corollary annexation-even
without having to shoot people-is
being portrayed as
an act of normalization,
as was stated by the Israeli
representative
[set S/1482/, prrra. S], as the rectification of an anomaly: and surely, in the Zionist racist
mind, it is regarded as an act of “purification”.
And in
a recent speech reported in the 18 January issue of
Nr\t*.s~l~rk,
the Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Yitzhak
Shamir, the head of a terrorist gang of the
past, and of the present, declared:
“We want peace, but only in conditions which will
enable us to continue our existence, and this means
the Golan Heights, Judea and Samaria within the
boundaries of the land of Israel”.

80. Herzl speaks of “spiriting the penniless population across the border-while
denying it employment in our own country.” He instructs that “both the
process of expropriation
and the removal of the poor
must be carried out discreetly and circumspectly.”
And after advocating that property owners should be
cheated and not given anything back in return, he
advises his followers “not to expel the native population before putting them to some use, “such as”

75. The Council is therefore called upon to draw its
conclusions
from a statement by one of the most
involved policy-makers
of the Zionist entity. It is
quite clear that Israel considers its existence as a
negation of Arab existence, whether in the Golan, in
the West Bank or in Gaza or elsewhere. Therefore,
the annexation of the West Bank and Gaza, in addition
9

exterminating
wild animals like snakes, to which we
Jews are not accustomed.”
One can go on forever
analysing the perverted mind of a Zionist whose words
have become dogma to the present rulers of a State
called Israel.
81. Nor was Herzl. the father of Zionism, the exception to the rest of the Zionists, all of whom planned
and continue to plan Israel’s long-term strategy of
terror, ter’ritorial expansion, subversion and provocation G,v-ir-r+s the Arabs. Moshe Sharett, considered
a founding father of labour Zionism, is yet another
example of an Israeli leader whose published PPI~soI~~~/
Ditrrirs illustrate the Zionists’ decision to occupy what
they call “the rest of Eretz Yisrael”. The DirrrG~s
disclose that Israel’s decision to expand to six times
its size in 1967 was taken as early as 1954, that the
decision to create a small puppet State in Lebanon was
taken as early as 1954-55 and that plans to carry out
subversive and terroristic acts in other Arab countries,
particularly in my country, Syria, date back to the
mid- 1950s. Once out of office Sharett became haunted
by acts of violence and terrorism for which he and his
colleagues were primarily responsible. He confides in
his Llirwie.s:
“*The phenomenon
that has prevailed among us
for years and years is that of insensibility to acts
of wrong, to moral corruption . . . We don’t have a
moral approach to moral problems but a pragmatic
approach to moral problems . , . Once, Israeli
soldiers murdered a number of Arabs for reasons of
blind vengeance , . . and no conclusion was drawn
from that, no one was demoted, no one was removed
from office . . . . Then there was Kafr Kassem,
Equally those responsible have drawn no conclusions . . . And then came the amnesty for those of
Kafr Kassem, and such conclusions could be drawn
again, and I could go on like this forever . . .”

their hatred? We are a generation of settlers and
without the steel and the helmet and the cannon
cannot plant a tree or build a house. Let us not shrink
when we see the hatred fermenting and filling the
lives of hundreds and thousands of Arabs who sit
all around us. Let us not avert our gaze, so that oul
ktnd shall not slip away. This is the fate of our
generation. the choice of our life-to
be prepared
and armed strong and tough-or
otherwise, the
sword will slip from our fist, and our life will be
snuffed out.”
84. The speaker is now dead, but his generation is
still alive, bringing up a generation that is even less
sensitive to suffering and more than ever bent on
violence, a militaristic
society dedicated to carrying
on the Zionist colonial mission. As one British analyst
put it: “Force for the Zionists is not merely punitive
it is also purative”-and
it may be curative. A recent
example of this is the case of the annexation of the
Golan Heights, exactly what the Israeli representative
calls “normalization”.
85. Some apologists for the Zionists have tried to
persuade world public opinion that the crimes committed against the Arabs, particularly the people of
Palestine, may be justified by the Nazi crimes committed against the Jews and others in Europe during
the Second World War. They argue that Nazi crimes
cannot be expiated except at the expense of the Arabs,
an argument that is totally false and inhuman-false,
because the Jewish programme was elaborated and
became operational long before the Nazis committed
their crimes against a sector of the European population, both Jewish and gentile: and inhuman, because no
crime perpetrated against humanity can be washed
away by other, equally hideous crimes. On his deathbed, the philosopher Bertrand Russel had this to say
about the twisted reasoning I have just described:
“We are frequently told that we must sympathize
with Israel because of the suffering of the Jews in
Europe at the hands of the Nazis. I see in this no
reason to perpetuate any suffering. What Israel is
doing today cannot be condoned, and to invoke the
horror of the past to justify those of the present is
gross hypocrisy. Not only does Israel condemn a
vast number of refugees to misery: not only are many
Arabs under occupation condemned to military
rule: but also Israel condemns the Arab nations, only
recently emerging from colonial status, to continuing impoverishment.”

Sharett concludes:
“All this must bring about a revolt of the sense
of justice and honesty in public opinion: it must
’ make the State appear in the eyes of the world at
large as a savage State that does not recognize the
principles of justice as they have been established
and accepted by contemporary society”.
X2. All Israeli leaders, despite their hypocritical cries
for peace, realize that Israel is doomed to everlasting
conflict with its neighbours, and Moshe Dayan was one
of those who understood that that which came into
being by violent and unnatural means could only survive and prosper by violent and unnatural means and
that a nation born by the sword must survive by it.
to Israeli soldiers, Dayan,
the spirit of Israel, said:

86. We hold the United States of America responsible for the deterioration of the situation in the Middle
East in general and in the occupied Arab territories
in particular, for without the unlimited military, economic, financial and diplomatic support it has extended
to Israel, that racist entity would not have been able
to apply the law of the jungle in our area.

“Let us not today fling accusations at the murderers. Who are we that we should argue against

87. We keep warning that the Arab masses-the
Arab people-cannot
recognize any interest which

83. In a speech delivered
who typified and embodied

10

does not take into consideration the national interests
of our nation, paramount among which is the libemtion
of occupied Palestine and other occupied Arab territories. including Jerusalem. In other words, Arab
interests are not negotiable: liberation is not negotiable.
Until and unless this reality and this Arab determination are recognized by the United States. the Arabs
will view American policy as being dictated by Israel
and the powerful Zionist lobby in the United States.
And yet we do put the blame not only on the Zionist
lobby, however powerful it is; we consider that the
imperialist
system that the United States is extending
over the globe has an equal responsibility.
88. Peace-a slogan of the Israeli spokesman-has
a meaning. Peace for the Arabs is the following. Peace
in the Middle East cannot be established unless it is
a just peace, based on two elements: first, the total
and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from all occupied Arab territories,
including Jerusalem; and
secondly, the exercise by the Palestinian people of all
their rights-right
to self-determination,
right to
return, right to establish of their own national homeland-state-in
Palestine, under the leadership of their
sole representative, namely, the PLO, whose presence
the United States voted against.
89. Israel should not be permitted by the Council to
continue its grave violations of international law. The
only avenue left open to us is the Security Council,
and the Council’s obligation-by
now it is indeed an
obligation-is
to apply mandatory sanctions against
Israel under Chapter VII of the Charter, particularly
those measures that are provided for in Article 4 I.
The Council must remove the Israeli aggression and
adopt a resolution, here and now, recommending that
Israel be expelled from the world Organization because
of its persistent violations of the principles of the
Charter.
90. The General Assembly has already taken a step
forward towards the imposition
of sanctions after
it declared that Israel is not a peace-loving Member
State, We believe that the Council should take into
consideration
the will of the majority of the United
Nations,
as expressed in General Assembly resolution ES-q/i.
Unless those punitive measures are
applied against Israel, it will persevere in its policies
of occupation and annexation to create a greater Israel
stretching from the Nile to the Euphrates-a
racist
State from which each and every non-Jew is to be
expelled.
91, Most of the members of the Council feel-and
have expressed the feeling--that Israel is posing a grave
threat to world peace and security. They wished to
put an end to that danger, but were prevented from
doing so by the misuse of the United States power
of veto on behalf of the lawless State.
92. We are extremely worried by pronouncements
mildc by important United States personalities on the
fulurc of the United Nations, A group of prominent

international
affairs experts, including three formel
Democratic Secretaries of State-Dean
Rusk, Cyrus
Vance and Edmund
Muskie-issued
a report
on
Tuesday calling for the United States to reassess its
policy towards the United Nations within the framework of American foreign policy. I quote from the
Jewish Telegraphic
Agency. I read the report, and it
states:
LbWhile stressing that our interdependent
world
needs the United Nations and the principles initiated
in the Charter, and that it continues to be in the
American interest to use the United Nations as a
significant foreign policy forum, the group of experts
urged the United States to be prepared to act, alone
or with others, outside the United Nations in the
light of the deterioration
in the capacity of the world
body to deal impartially
and effectively with questions of world concern.”
93. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on whom I now call.
94. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): Madam President, at the
outset permit me to pay my respects to you on you1
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. Over the past year you have won the admiration of all those who have experienced first-hand
your vast knowledge, your wisdom and perspicacity,
your intellectual honesty, your forthrightness and your
principled stand on the issues facing us here at the
United Nations. I personally have also been greatly
privileged in acquiring in you a valued and trusted
friend.
95. You, Madam President, represent in the Organization one of the most powerful nations in history,
I represent one of the smallest on earth. There is a
tremendous disparity between our two nations in terms
of physical size, as well as in military and economic
power. Yet our two nations share the illustrious
spiritual
heritage bequeathed
to mankind by the
prophets of Israel. Together we stand in our struggle
for the preservation of the fundamental human freedoms and human rights in our world, for the equality
and brotherhood
of man, for the intrinsic dignity and
value of every human being, for social justice, for the
equality of all nations great and small, for the peaceful
settlement
of international
disputes and for peace
among nations.
96. It is this shared dedication of our two nations
to these values and ideals that binds our two countries
and our two peoples in bonds of solidarity and lasting
friendship.
97. Let me also take this opportunity of presenting
my compliments
to the representative of the United
Kingdom who conducted the Council’s business last
month with his usual courtesy and aplomb.
98. There has developed in the United Nations a
tradition of proclaiming
international
days connected

with

Various

United

Nations

aCtiVitieS.

May

population
through the use of a secret police
known for its brutality. Assad’s Syria has shown its
real face in the crucial encounters in recent years: thr
forcible takeover of Lebanon and the violent SUppITSsion of all internal opposition in Syria itself. It hns no
compunction
in
carrying
out
mass itrWsts.
Iityhlg
siege to large cities and indiscriminately
bombarding
them, kidnapping,
murdering
and torturing
thosr:
who happen to disagree.
tryls

1 sU@est

that this is a fitting day to be designated the international day of hypocrisy. For even by the notorious
standards of the Organization the exercise being
played
out here today is the height of hypocrisy. How
else can a person
in his right mind interpret a most
urgent
request for the Council to meet when that
request emanates from those who over the years not
only have brought unmitigated disaster to the Palestinian Arabs but have also decimated their ranks?

104. Since 1976, between 30.000 and 50,000 p~plr:
have been killed or maimed by Syrian forces in Syriil
itself and in Lebanon. No Council meeting-urgent.
emergency, or otherwise-was
ever requested tcl
discuss those massacres and mass detentions.
Incidentally, the number of those arrcstcd without trial
in Syria today stands well above 10,000.

99. It appears that two such countries have tried to
out-do each other in calling for this most urgent
meeting. As a result, those two well-known soul-mates,
the representatives of Syria and Jordan, have been
vying for this honour. In the event, it would seem that
Jordan has won out and has managed to out-distance
Syria.
100. If Jordan’s opprobrious record is not yet sufficiently known by members of the Council, let me mention just a few highlights. During the 19 years in which
it occupied Judea and Samaria, between 1948 and
1967, the Jordanian Government deliberately curtailed their economic and educational development
so that the Palestinian Arabs living in Judea and
Samaria could not compete with the primacy of the
territory which became the Kingdom of Trans-Jordan
in 1946 and which previously had been the eastern
part of the Palestine Mandate. Hence, from 1948
to 1967, agriculture in the areas concerned was kept
at a subsistence level. Industry was virtually nonexistent and no infrastructure was developed. The
Jordanian occupation authorities oppressed the local
population and brutally suppressed the riots which
broke out at frequent intervals. During those I9 years,
hundreds of Arabs in Judea and Samaria were killed
and wounded by the Jordanian army,
101. During its rule, Jordan also took steps to fragment Judea and Samaria. The three civil governors
appointed by the Jordanian rkgime in the Jerusalem,
Nablus and Hebron districts controlled most municipal
functions. The mayors were appointed from among
‘the council members, and the local governor, the
Mllhqfiz, was ASO authorized to influence the electoral
processes,
102. Jordan’s attitude
towards the Palestinian
Arabs persisted after l967-and if proof is needed
one has OnlY to recall the ruthless killing of thousand;
ofpalestinian Arabs in Jordan in September 1970, when
hundreds of them came fleeing across the Jordan River
to find refuge under Israeli rule.

105. Among the illustrious acts of the heroic Syrian
army of occupation in Lebanon are the massacre of
erstwhile allies, the leftists and the Palestinians.
and
the violent struggle with the Christian groups dtlring
1978, when large Christian quarter-s in Beirut were
destroyed and between 5,000 and 10.000 people were
wounded. No Council meeting was ever requested
to discuss those acts of heroism.
106. And let us not forget such insignificant details
as Syrian commando operations in the northern I3ekaa
in the summer of 1978: as well as the siege and bombardment of Zahlk and Christian East Wcirut last
year, which exacted 5,000 casualties. No Council
meeting was convened to discuss those acts of hrutulity either. The Syrians did not refrain from murdering
political opponents in Lebanon, among whom were
Kamal Jumblat, members of the Gemayel family and
other leading figures. While all these activities were
going on in Lebanon, the Syrian rbgime suppressed
insurrections in Aleppo, in northern Syria, through
the use of tank and artillery barrages, destroying
entire sections of cities and villages. Trade unions were
forcibly disbanded and hundreds wet-e killed and
wounded. Some 500 prisoners at the Palmira Prison.
the majority of whom were members of the Muslim
Brotherhood, were massacred on 27 June 1980 in
retaliation for an attempt on the life of President Assad.
which had taken place the day before.
107. These efforts to maintain the Assad rCgime at all
costs
.f.l spread
m . beyond. . the borders of Syria. Members
or me syrlan opposition abroad were murdered during
the period from July 1980 to March 1981. includinti
Salah al-din Al-Bitar, a former Prime Minister
o?
Syria, who was killed in Paris, and the political refugee
Abdul Wahab al-Bakhri, who was murdered in Jordan.

103. Let us consider the other protagonist of the
Palestinian Arabs. It is the totalitarian dictatorship
of
the Assad brothers in Syria, a narrow, ethnic minority
rkgime supported by bayonets and indiscriminate
Cruelty and terror.
This indeed is a country
that knows
no liberty of expression, a police-State which supPresses all individual liberties and strangles
the coun-

108. We also know the sinister role played by the
notorious brother of President Assad, Colonel Rifa’al
Assad, over the last several years, First, Brother
Rifa’at’s storm troopers were especially prominent in
the bloody quelling of the uprising of the Muslim
Brotherhood in the city of Hama last month. The city
12

’

-

was first divided into quarters and then given over to
Rifa’at’s troops, which mercilessly pounded, destroyed
and rooted out any humans left alive under the ruins.
More than 10,000 victims have accounted for this
most recent hysterical paranoia against any opposition, According to The New York Times of today, the
old part of the ancient town of Hama, with its centuriesold Islamic landmarks, was almost totally destroyed in
the fighting, with bulldozers now razing the remnants
of the buildings.

I 12. The record of the terrorist PLO is no less remarkable in its total disregard for human life, both Arab and
Jewish, in the pursuit of its barbarous aims. All this
of course is common knowledge and requires no
elaboration.
By contrast, Israel has committed itself
to and has been working for the establishment of full
autonomy for the Palestinian Arabs in Judea, Samaria
and the Gaza District on the basis of the Camp David
framework for peace in the Middle East.
113. Israel has had to overcome obstacles at every
turn in its pursuit of peace. Its initiatives have been
repeatedly rejected and refused by Arab countries,
supported in their re+iectionist attitude by certain
Powers outside the region. After a peace agreement
was signed between Israel and Egypt, those rejectionist Arab rCgimes not only gave expression to theil
opposition to it but even harnessed the United Nations
-an organization dedicated under the Charter to the
promotion of international peace and the advancement
of harmony among nations-to
their bellicose ends
aimed at turning the United Nations against its very
raison d’itre. However, this Arab attitude notwithstanding, Israel has been consistent in its efforts to
create an atmosphere of greater understanding and
co-operation in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District.
Thus, for instance, in 1976 for the first time in the
history of Judea and Samaria three municipal elections were held. The candidates in those elections were
given every opportunity
to conduct their campaigns,
irrespective of their political views. Unlike the Jordanian occupation authorities,
Israel did not try to
influence the election results.

109. Incidentally,
in an interview with the Middle
&st
magazine of London, the Syrian Minister fol
Foreign Affairs Khaddam explicitly blamed Jordan
for its involvement
in Hama, claiming that “he has
evidence that the gangsters of the Muslim Brotherhood have a base in Jordan”. That was reported by the
Associated Press on 23 February.
1 10. All these facts of Syrian barbarity cannot be
erased by mendacious statements of the Syrian representative, including his pseudo-scientific and pseudophilosophical
ramblings, all punctuated by his customary clarity of mind and elegance of style. I would
only like to remind him that he has omitted from his
source material and documentation
the Protocols of
TOP E/dPrs of Zion, that crude anti-Semitic forgery of
the Tsarist Russian secret police from the turn of the
century.
I 1 1. This indeed is a shocking record of the Syrian
and Jordanian rCgimes’ inhumanity against their own
citizens as well as against Palestinian Arabs and Lebanese citizens. Against this record of brutality and
inhumanity
of Jordan, Syria and others it is clear why
any fair-minded
observer must watch with disgust
and contempt the display of hypocrisy to which the
Council is being subjected by the representatives of
Syria and Jordan, who in their statements-like
other,
. equally sanctimonious
statements already delivered
and yet to be delivered-have
raised wailings over
the alleged predicament of the population of Judea and
Samaria.
These sentiments of disgust were aptly
summed up as follows in an editorial in the Nc1c1 York
Post of today, 24 March:

114. A further important
and positive step was
taken when a civilian administration
took over the
duties formerly handled by the military administration
in these areas. By setting up the civilian administration, Israel seeks to create the framework for a Palestinian Arab autonomy which would eventually take
over from the civilian administration.
115. For the first time since June 1967, a local Arab
leadership has arisen in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza
District which believes that it is not bound by orders
emanating from the terrorist PLO. These local Arab
leaders are willingly
and successfully pursuing a
path which indicates their desire to live in peace with
Israel and which repudiates the PLO methods of terror
and violence,

“Here we go again on another whirl through the
Luna Park of distorting mirrors at the Security
Council.
“Syria calls a special session to condemn Israel
for dissolving the PLO-run city council of El Bireh
on the West Bank and for firing on stone-throwing
demonstrators trying to provoke disturbances before
next month’s crucial handover of the rest of the
Sinai to Egypt.

116. The PLO and its supporters in the Middle East
and beyond have viewed this development with great
alarm and apprehension since it would ultimately mean
the dashing of their hopes to terrorize the inhabitants
in these areas. Having been conceived in violence and
barbarism and nurtured on bloodletting in the worst
tradition
of its Husseini predecessors, the PLO is
desperately
trying to “discipline”
the Palestinian
Arabs by exacting submission through fear. To the
question put to Farouk Kadoumi,
one of Ardfat'S
henchmen, by the Beirut weekly Monday Morning of

“But who condemns Syria for sending 8,000 soldiers, bombers, tanks and helicopters to subjugate
Sunni religious opposition in the large Syrian city
of Hama last month, causing an estimated 1,000 civilian casualties before the situation is brought ‘under
control’?”
13

28-29 June 1979, as to “what measures are you taking
to prevent repetition of the disastrous rash of political
assassinations which occurred in Palestine between
1936 and 1939?“, the following reply was given by
Mr. Kadoumi:
“It must first be said that the PLO and the Palestinian people in the occupied territories and outside
them know very well how to use such methods to
prevent certain personalities from being diverted
from the revolutionary
path. Our people in the interior recognize their responsibilities and are capable
of taking the necessary disciplinary
measures
against those who try to leave the right path. The
PLO is keenly interested in having everyone stick
to the path of the revolution under the PLO bannet
-the PLO will take all measures needed to prevent
any personality or group regardless of identity from
striking out in a different direction. That is OUI
policy”.

refrain from co-operating with the civilian administration and to intimidate any local leader or resident who
believes in peaceful coexistence with Israel and in the
peaceful settlement of all the outstanding issues. One
of those who unswervingly and dutifully followed this
PLO command
was Ibrahim Al-Tnwil. the former
mayor of AI-Bireh. It was he and his PLO masters who
were directly responsible for the recent disturbances in
Judea and Samaria. Some three weeks ago, the PLO
had students take to the streets to burn tires and throw
rocks. In some instances, hundreds of people attacked
small units of soldiers, who sometimes had no choice
but to protect themselves from death or injury by
firing shots into the air. As a matter of fact, in the
first of these so-called student demonstrations,
much
was said about an injury caused to one of the “demonstrators”. It turned out that the “student” in question
was actually a professional agitator.
120. Israel regrets the loss of any human life, without regard to nationality,
religion or creed. The responsibility for this loss of life rests squarely and exclusively
with those who have engineered and masterminded
violence in Judea and Samaria in recent weeks.

The meaning of these words is clear. They require no
elaboration.
117. Since its inception in the mid-1960s, the terrorist PLO has operated by and large outside the major
centres of the Palestinian Arab population, basically
because the message of the PLO to the Palestinian
Arabs was and is destructive and sterile: it held and
holds no promise for the lives of the Palestinian Arabs
of the present and future generations. Many Palestinian
Arabs fear a PLO takeover since it could spell only
war and destruction.
But those who have had the
temerity to resist the terror sown by the PLO were
intimidated
and subjected to assassination attempts.
They thus feared for their very lives, The many examples that come to mind on this subject clearly demonstrate the kind of persuasion the PLO is apt to use
against those who do not concur with its destructive
philosophy. The systematic PLO campaign of death
and terror to intimidate and silence those Arab leaders
who oppose terrorism and who favour peace with
Israel has resulted in a long list of slayings, including
the slaying of Yusuf Al-Khatib,
the head of a village
association in the Ramalfah area, and of his son in
November
1981; the slaying of Muhammad
Abu
Warde, the Deputy Mayor of Jabelieh, in the town
of Gaza in November
1980: the slaying of Sheikh
Hashem Khuzander, the Imam of Gaza, in June 1979;
and the slaying of’ Abd AI-Nur Janho, a member of
the Ramallah municipality,
in February 1978. All of
these local leaders who died at the hands of the PLO
were guilty of only one sin-openly
supporting peaceful coexistence with Israel.

121. Responsibility
for the unrest that has recently
spread in Judea and Samaria must to a large extent
be shared by the Government of the Palestinian Arab
State of Jordan. Just over two weeks ago, the Prime
Minister of Jordan, in his capacity as Martial
Law
Administrator,
threatened the inhabitants
of Judea
and Samaria with treason charges and death penalties
if they favoured peace with Israel122. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
Jordan on a point of order.

of

123, Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I feel impelled
to
raise a point of order. The representative of Israel has
taken the licence of violating the norms of international
conduct by deliberately falsifying the officially recog
nized name of Jordan by referring to it as the Palestinian State of Jordan. I request that the representative
of Israel respect and abide by the rules of procedure
and the norms of international
conduct by calling a
member State of the Council by its proper name, which
is Jordan or, if he wants to give the full name, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
124. The PRESIDENT:
Israel to continue.

I ask the representative

of

125. Mr. BLUM (Israel): It is strange that the representative of the Hashemite Kingdom of the Palestinian
Arab State of Jordan should object so strenuously to
the characterization
of his country as a Palestinian
State. I have in front of me a book entitled Pu/c>stine
(rrzd the United Ntrtions and authored by Mr. Hazem
Zaki Nuseibeh, and on the dust jacket of that book
the first words are the following: “Hazem Nuseibeh
is a Palestinian”,
Well, I would assume that if he is
here as the representative
of a member State, it is

I IX. The most recent attempt by the PLO to silence
an Arab leader occurred on I2 March 1982, when a
barrage of bullets struck the home of Mr. Fahri Issah
Ismail, a member of the Village Association of the
village of Bitunia, in the Ramallah area [S/14Y/O].
I 19. The orders issued by the PLO to the Arab leaders
of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District were to
14

-

.

certainly his State, for otherwise one would have to
assume that he is a diplomatic
mercenary. I do not
believe he is one. He very appropriately,
as a Palestinian,
represents the Palestinian
Arab State of
Jordan126. The PRESIDENT:
of Jordan.

of the nations they represent. Would the representative
of Israel please proceed.
135. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Madam President, I fully
concur with your suggestion. Responsibility
for the
unrest that has recently spread in Judea and Samaria
must to a large extent be shared by the Government of
Jordan. Just over two weeks ago, the Prime Minister
of Jordan, in his capacity as Martial Law Administrator, threatened the inhabitants of Judea and Samaria
with treason charges and death penalties if they
favoured peace with Israel by participating in village
associations. Among other things. the order, according
to the Jordan news agency PETRA, of 9 March, states
the following:

1 call on the representative

127. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I have to reiterate
that the representative of Israel should be ruled out of
order. I am proud to be a Palestinian: I am proud to
be a Jerusalemite whose family has been in Jerusalem
for 14 centuries, unlike the representative of Israel,
who came to the Holy Land probably 20 or 25 years
ago. I have the honour to represent Jordan as its
Permanent
Representative.
There are many Palestinians who, since their dispersal and after having
been denied the establishment
of their own Palestinian State in accordance with resolution 181 (II),
adopted by the General Assemblg on 29 November
1947, have been working for all the neighbouring
countries-but
primarily
to restore the Palestinian
people’s right to create their own State, which is still
on the books and which must be created. It is the
creation of that State which Israel had to pledge to
respect in order to be granted admission to the United
Nations.
128. The PRESIDENT:
of Israel.

“I give those who were deceived by this scheme
one month from today to withdraw from these
organizations.
Anyone who remains, joins, campaigns for or works for them in any form after this
delay will be prosecuted for treason and will be
brought before the competent courts which will
pass the required sentences. The maximum penalty
will be death and the confiscation of all immovable
and movable properties.”
[Sre S//@/O]
136. What we are witnessing today is a concerted
effort on the part of Jordan and its long-estranged and
rediscovered
bosom friend, the terrorist PLO, to
eliminate any emerging and promising alternative to
the PLO method of violence and terror.

I call on the representative

137. The constant provocations on the part of both
Jordan and the PLO to subvert any movement towards
peaceful coexistence in the region have never been
more apparent than in the recent developments in
Judea and Samaria.

129. Mr. BLUM (Israel): It would seem that Mr. Nuseibeh is abusing the procedure of a point of order.
He is in fact right: not many, but the majority of the
citizens of Jordan are Palestinian Arabs and the majority of the Palestinian
Arabs are Jordanian citizens
-which
of course goes a long way to prove my point.

138. The calling of this meeting itself is nothing but a
cIear attempt to engender additional tensions and to
attract support for the provocations
inside those
areas.

130. Responsibility
for the unrest that has recently
spread in Judea and Samaria must to a large extent
be shared131. The PRESIDENT:
I think that we should
proceed with the substance of the matter before us.
132.

I call on the representative

139. We shall certainly not be surprised to witness
the usual procession of so-called peace-loving, democratic and liberal States, such as Cuba, Viet Nam,
Afghanistan and East Germany, reviling Israel at this
table, Their participation
will fittingly underscore the
true intentions of the sponsors of this performance.

of Jordan.

133. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The substance of the
matter in brief is that every spokesman in the Security
Council should address a member of the Council or
any other member invited to address the Council by
the official name of the country which he represents.
.Anything which deviates from this elemental rule is out
of order and I am sure that all the legal experts would
agree with me on this point.

140. A framework
for the peaceful coexistence
between Jew and Arab is now clearly emerging: the
PLO, Jordan and their ilk are conspiring to destroy it.
The greater the promise for Jewish-Arab understanding
and co-operation, the greater the combined rejectionist
effort to see it terminated. The terrorist chiefs, as well
as the leaders of Jordan and their rejectionist friends,
are obviously gnawed by the fear that the Palestinian
Arabs might strike out in a different direction, aimed
at peaceful coexistence and mutual accommodation
with Israel in a spirit of reconciliation
between the
two fraternal Semitic peoples.

134. The PRESIDENT:
I think that we should
proceed with the substance of the matter before us.
I may say that it does strike me personally as a very
sound idea that all Member States at the United Nations should always be addressed by the proper names
15

141. If the Council truly wishes to encourage the
promotion of peace in our region, it must surely welcome this newly emerging positive outlook in Judea and
Samaria; it must surely support the promise of reconciliation, rather than condone, even by implication,
violence and fear; it must surely call upon those responsible for the instigation of terror and tension to
desist from their provocations. Thus-and
only thuswill the Council have discharged the task entrusted
to it under the Charter of the United Nations,

148. In the occupied Palestinian territory
in the
West Bank, the Israeli occupation authorities pursue
a plan of intimidation,
elimination
and liquidation
of
the indigenous
Palestinian
people. They have attempted to propagate the myth of the non-existence’
of the Palestinian
people. With such futile, naive
attempts the Israeli occupation authorities have come
out with their innovating practices designed primarily
to frustrate the legitimate national aspirations of the
Palestinian people and to further evacuate inhabitants
of the occupied Palestinian territories so as to implement the colonization and settlement plans,

142. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

149. Those policies, as correctly described
Wclshington Post of 23 March, are aimed at

143. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): Madam President, allow me at the outset to extend to you on behalf
of my delegation and in my own name congratulations
on your assuming the presidency of this august body.
I am confident that under your capable leadership,
and given your sagacity, the Council will conduct
its business with all smoothness and efficacy.

in T/jc

“expanding the Jewish presence on the West Bank
and sliding over eventually to annexation.
This
entails shrinking the Arab presence and creating
conditions to induce members of the Arab majority
to abandon their homes.”
150. The illegal and unwarranted Israeli move to
dissolve the Municipal
Council of Al-Bireh and the
expulsion of Mayor Ibrahim Al-Tawil are only reminiscent of similar actions against the mayors of Hebron
and Halhoul.
Again the increasing death toll among
the Palestinian
inhabitants
of Nablus, Ramallah,
Hebron and East Jerusalem evokes memories of the
tragic events of June 1980 and the attempts on the
lives of the mayors of Nablus, Ramallah and AI-Bireh,
condemned by the Council in its resolution 47 I ( 1980).

144. My country, Egypt, maintains a high level of
friendly relations with your Government and people
based on mutual respect for the principle of national
independence
and sovereignty.
You represent a
country and people whose dedication to the values of
human dignity, liberty and independence
has profusely enriched the advancement of mankind. I am
confident that you will be inspired by those traditions
in upholding the supreme value of the right to selfdetermination
of the Arab people of Palestine and its
right to live in full dignity, freedom, independence and
nationhood. This will be a culmination
and in fact a
coronation of your strenuous efforts throughout the
past years to help achieve a just, comprehensive and
peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

151. In my statement before the Council
1980, I emphasized the following facts:

of 5 June

“repressive
measures in the occupied territories
have destroyed all the Israeli arguments that the
maintenance of security in the occupied territories
should remain
the exclusive responsibility
of
Israel. Under the Israeli military administration,
Palestinians
have been denied their rights, their
security has been endangered, their homes have
been destroyed and their lives have been threatened.
It is therefore imperative
that the Palestinians
themselves should now be responsible for security
affairs in the occupied West Bank and Gaza, within
the framework
of transitional
full self-government . . , The Palestinian people should be enabled
to exercise their inalienable rights, including their
right to self-determination.
Those, in our view, are
the steps essential for the creation of the necessary
conditions conducive to the achievement of a just,
comprehensive
and lasting settlement,

145. Yet again an appalling flow of news on death,
tortures, massacres, oppression and suppression in
the occupied Palestinian territory in the West Bank
is besetting this body, which represents the conscience
and will of the international
community
and stands
as a guarantor of international
peace and security.
146. Yet again Israeli policies and practices in the
*occupied Arab territories are creating further challenges and obstacles which will undermine sincere
attempts to achieve a peaceful, just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.
147. The Middle East region has since June 1981 and
even before then been witnessing crisis after crisis
caused by systematic, predetermined
Israeli moves
against Arab countries-Iraq,
Lebanon, Syria-and
against the Palestinians
within and outside their occupied territories. Those moves are obviously designed
to impose military and political domination
on those
countries and to consecrate new sfcritLs rrwornplis
under Israeli occupation.

“Genuine
peace can never prevail as long as
[2226rh tneeting,
military
occupation
exists,”
parcls. 90 crnd 911
152. The general strike now prevailing in the occupied
Palestinian territory of the West Bank is a natural
expression of resistance against iron-fist policies
16

- -

perpetrated by the occupation authorities, and therefore those resistance movements are only a natural
product and consequence of military practices. Palestinian protests against incessant inhuman injustices
are a natural response of unarmed oppressed people
subjected to all kinds of atrocities and humiliations.

in defending international
law and legality and
[Palestinian] human rights, and to put an end to the
policies and practices of Israel in the occupied
Arab territories.”
[2?16tl1 tncrting,
ptrr’c~~. 70
rrnd 71 ]

“Peace with Egypt alone, whatever its value-and
it is great-whatever
its significance-and
it too is
great-is
not and cannot be a substitute for just
peace among all parties to the Arab-Israeli dispute,
foremost among which is the Arab people of Palestine.

153. The Israeli military
occupation is the real
underlying
cause and prime mover of these tragic
events, as was cogently highlighted by The Christirrn
Sriancc
Monitor
in its editorial of 22 March:
“few would quarrel [with the fact] that the underlying cause remains the Israeli military occupation
of the West Bank and the failure to give the ruled
Palestinians
the right of self-determination.
Palestinian Arabs indeed take up stones against Jewish
settlers. They feel themselves the helpless victims
of an Israeli policy which, more and more, seeks to
subjugate them-by
expanding Jewish settlements
in the West Bank, by trying to implant a pro-Israeli
civil administration,
by harassing Palestinian educational and family life.

“If the relationship of Egypt to Israef, which is
now entering its third year after 30 years of wars,
bloodshed and thousands of victims, is today one of
coexistence and reconciliation
and a clear landmark on the road to peace, the relationship of Egypt
to the Arab nation, in spite of the fact that today it
is undergoing certain difficulties,
is a relationship
that is centuries and generations old and is based
on a common language, religion and culture, a
common past, future and destiny. It is a relationship that is national, immutable
and eternal and
transcends any disagreement or crisis and, in the
view of Egypt, is not at variance with the relationship of a peace based on justice between Israel and
the Arabs.“S

“The loss of life in the West Bank does more than
evoke sadness. It points to dangers-of
growing
Arab bitterness, of uncontrollable
violence.”

156. The increasing tensions in the West Bank created
by heavy-handed Israeli practices further escalate a
deteriorating security situation in the Middle East and
adversely affect prospects for an early, peaceful and
comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
These practices conducted against the letter and
spirit of the fourth Geneva Convention,’
norms of
international law, relevant United Nations resolutions,
and principles and purposes of the Charter should be
strongly condemned
and declared invalid by this
body.

154. Egypt sees and finds in these Israeli policies a
deIiberate attempt designed to dehumanize the Palestinian people, to depopulate the occupied Palestinian
territories,
to make them less and less suitable as
potential
sites for a Palestinian homeland. Increasing
international
opinion in favour of a Palestinian State is
met with increasing Israeli determination
to foreclose their option by redoubled efforts to Israelize those
occupied territories. Israel annexed Arab Jerusalem,
confiscated 40 per cent of the total area of the West
Bank, implanted more than 100 Israeli settlements and
siphoned
off water resources. It expelled a large
number of potential leaders. It is forcing Arab cities
and viIlages to connect into the Israeli electric grid
and water network-all
in a race to abort the idea of
Palestinian
nationhood and to foreclose the possibility
of Palestinian independence.

157. The question of Palestine has been and remains
the core and crux of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Egypt,
among other Arab States, cannot overlook or ignore
the adverse effects and consequences of these policies
on the peace process. This prevailing
aggravating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory in the
West Bank is a direct corollary of the adamant Israeli
rejection of the recognition or acknowledgement
of
the existence of an independent Palestinian national
entity and a direct product of the intransigent
and
stubborn Israeli rejection of the conducting or undertaking of an objective and constructive dialogue with
the Palestinian national entity, based on the principles
of mutual recognition and coexistence.

155. The position of the people and leadership of the
Arab Republic of Egypt on the situation in the occupied Palestinian and other occupied Arab territories
has been amply elaborated in my statements before the
Security Council on 16 December 1981 and the General Assembly on I February 1982:
“The peace which Israel presumably seeks, and
which we in Egypt endeavour sincerely to realize,
cannot but remain an unfulfilled delusion if Israel
persists in such acts, which dissipate all possibilities,
though meagre, of reconciliation
or coexistence.

158. The dynamics of the peace process have to be
maintained-in
fact, energized-or
else we shall again
face a fatal stalemate which would inevitably
entail
a total collapse of the regional security structure. To
overcome a likely impasse in this historic achievement
of the peace process, we have to promote energetica]]y

“We also call upon the United Nations and the international community to live up to their responsibilities
17

and faithfully this principle of mutual recognition between the Israelis and the Palestinians. This is not an
argument to be dismissed lightly. This principle of
mutual recognition should be enhanced and supported
by a parallel, direct, constructive and serious dialogue
to be initiated between the United States of America
and the Palestinians.

optimist sees an opportunity
in every calamity and
a pessimist sees a calamity in every opportunity.”
No doubt we prefer to be optimists.
166. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan. 1 invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement,

159. These are the starting points for overcoming
an impasse which threatens to frustrate peace efforts.
These points have been rationally explored in a highly
valuable statesmanlike
report published by the Seven
Springs Center under the title The Ptrth to Pcrrcc,
Artrk-Isrirrli
POLYP, Omh~r 1981 .

167. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): Madam President, first
of all I should like warmly to felicitate you on the
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of March. We are confident that with YOUI
experience and diplomatic skill you will be able to
steer the proceedings of the Council with distinction.
It also gives me great pleasure to refer to the cordiitl
and happy relations which exist between Pakistan and
the United States of America.

160. Israel should accept squarely and unhesitantly
the challenges of peace as set forth in the options
formulated in the framework of peace in the Middle
East and as designed in the autonomy talks, because
this is, in our opinion, the most practical and realistic
basis for the establishment
of a just, peaceful, comprehensive settlement.

168. 1 should also like to take this opportunity to
express our gratitude to Sir Anthony Parsons for having
provided guidance to the Council’s work during the
month of February. His departure from New York
will deprive us of his wise counsel in the United Nations
and we shall deeply miss it.

161. We call upon Israel to rescind forthwith its
latest measures, to reinstitute the Municipal Council
of Al-Bireh and Mayor Ibrahim AI-Tawil, who was
freely and legally elected to his office, and also to lift
all oppressive regulations
enacted by the Israeli
administration.

169. The fact that the Council has been obliged to
address itself time and again to the situation in the
occupied Arab and Palestinian territories of the West
Bank, Gaza and the Syrian Golan Heights and the
Holy City of Jerusalem is clear evidence of the explosive nature of the problem, which poses a grave peril
to international
peace and security. The continuing
resistance of the Palestinian people to the Israeli
occupation
of their homeland also highlights
the
primary imperative of the Middle East conflict--that
peace cannot be attained in the region without the full
restitution
of the inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination and the establishment
of their sovereign
State in Palestine.

162. We also urge and call upon Israel to start the
implementation
of the confidence-building
measures
called for by Egypt time and again since October 1978
in order to convince and persuade the Palestinians of
the viability, possibility and promising prospects of the
peace process.
163. Before I conclude, I should like to reaffirm a
remark made in my statement before the General
Assembly last February:
“We have accepted peace with honour and
dignity, and we call upon others to join the march
of peace inspired by free will. At the same time,
however, we categorically
reject any peace that
would be imposed on us or on others from positions
of strength and the usurpation and denial of the
inalienable legitimate rights of all parties, foremost
among which are the rights of the Palestinian people
to self-determination
and the establishment of a free
and independent State.‘16

170. Israel has long defied overwhelming world opinion, particularly
the decisions of the United Nations
on the Middle East conflict, and has embarked on a
relentless policy of annexation and consolidation
of its
control of the Holy City of Jerusalem, Gaza, the West
Bank and the Syrian Golan Heights, occupied since
1967. This policy has been condemned by the United
Nations in unequivocal terms.
171. The Council, in several resolutions--namely,
resolution 465 (1980), which addressed itself to the ;
occupied Palestinian
and other Arab territories,
including the Holy City of Jerusalem; resolutions 476 !
( 1980) and 478 (1980), relating to the status of the Holy
City: and the latest resolution, 497 ( I98 I), on the Syrian
Golan Heights-censured
all measures taken by Israel
to alter the character and status of the occupied territories and declared them to be without any legal
validity. Those measures, which represent Israel’s
ambition for aggrandizement,
are in flagrant contravention of the Charter of the United Nations, the fourth

164. We are aware of the difficulties and pain that
accompany the birth of peace, but we are also aware
of the potentialities
of peace, They far outweigh those
difficulties and hardships. Delivery of peace in the
Middle East, while requiring courage, statemanship,
commitment
to international
law and legality, cannot
be achieved before the liberation of the Palestinian
people and deliverance of the Palestinian future.
165. I should like to conclude by striking a hopeful
note, despite this ominous situation, and quoting one
of the wisest witticisms of Winston Churchill:
“An
18

Geneva Convention
of 1949.’ the Supplementary
Hague Convention of 1969 and Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 ( l973), which emphasize the inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by force and which
remain the foundation
of international
efforts to
attain peace in the Middle East. By its persistent
defiance of those imperatives of international law and
civilized conduct among States, Israel is undermining
the emergence of an international order based on the
principles of the Charter and the universal aspirations
to peace which are symbolized by the creation of the
United Nations and on whose survival our hopes for
the future rest.

inhabitants of those territories. Pakistan has joined the
overwhelming majority of Member States in urging the
Council to take strong measures against Israel in order
to compel it to agree to a just and peaceful political
settlement of the Middle East conflict consistent with
the resolutions of the United Nations. Such a settlement cannot be arrived at without ensuring the total
withdrawal of Israel from all the Palestinian and Arab
territories occupied since 1967. including the Holy
City of Jerusalem, and respect for the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people. including the
establishment of their sovereign State in Palestine. It
is our firm conviction that such a settlement cannot
be achieved without the equal participation in the peace
process of the PLO, which is the sole representative
of the Palestinian people.

172. The gravity of Israeli actions is not fully encompassed by their illegality as determined by international law and United Nations resolutions. The Israeli
policies of brutal repression against the Palestinian
people appear to be aimed at thec,liquidation of the
Palestinian nation, its identity and its magnificent and
venerable culture, which spans scores of centuries.

177. Recent events in the occupied territories have
demonstrated that paralysis on the part of the Council, preventing it from acting expeditiously and firmly,
will contribute to the aggravation of the situation. A
particularly
heavy responsibility
therefore lies with
the permanent members of the Security Council to
enable the Council to carry out its primary responsibility to bring peace to the afflicted region. Nothing
could be more dangerous than a situation in which the
authority of the Council is impaired and it is prevented
from complying
with the dictates of peace and redressing the injustice being perpetrated against the
Palestinian people.

173. The recent events in the occupied West Bank
have once against stirred up anxiety and indignation
throughout
the world, The Israeli decision to disband
the Al-Bireh elected Municipal
Council and to replace it by direct Israeli rule, and its coercive methods
against unarmed civilians protesting against that illegal
decision,
are yet further manifestations
of Israel’s
scheme to bring the occupied West Bank under its
permanent
annexation and control. But it is also
evident that the Israeli annexationist policy has met
the determined
opposition of the Palestinian people.
The Israeli oppression of the Palestinians in the occupied territories, the expropriation of their land and
property, the denial of their fundamental rights-and
even the indiscriminate
bombardment
of the Palestinian refugee population in Lebanon-have
failed to
vanquish Palestinian aspirations to the restoration of
their national rights. The Israeli repression has only
served to intensify their indomitable resistance.

178. The Council must demand from Israel-the
occupying Power-that
it rescind forthwith its decision to dissolve the Al-Bireh elected Municipal Council. Israel must immediately
reinstate the duly elected
Municipal
Council of Al-Bireh.
The Council must
demand of Israel that it put an end to its brutal violence
against the unarmed civilian population of the occupied
Arab and Palestinian territories.
179. While taking this opportunity
to declare once
again the complete solidarity of the people of Pakistan
with the Palestinian cause, I would, on behalf of the
Pakistan delegation, urge the Council to make a concerted effort to fulfil its historic obligation towards the
Palestinian people by bringing to a close the tragic
chapter of their sufferings and travail.

174. On this occasion, we should like to salute the
martyrs of the Palestinian struggle, the heroism of the
Palestinian youth who are once again demonstrating in
the streets of Al-Bireh, Nablus and Halhoul that they
cannot be subjugated by violence and the courage of
their elected leaders in occupied Palestine, who have
stood firmly in defence of the rights of their people.

180. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, to whom the Council has extended an
invitation
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

175. Judging from the upsurge for liberty and freedom in our time, the cause of the Palestinian people
will eventually triumph. However, we cannot overlook the fact that Israeli expansionist policies have
already taken a heavy toll in sacrifices of blood and
tears. Tension is mounting.
Should the tragedy of
the Palestinian people persist longer in the future, it
will inevitably escalate into a world-wide conflict.

181. Mr. MAKSOUD:
Madam President, I should
like to extend to you the congratulations
of the League
of Arab States on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of March. Throughout
your tenure at the United Nations you have represented and articulated
some of the noblest ideals
characterizing
the body politic of the United States,
ideals and values we cherish throughout the world

176. Deeply conscious of the grim consequences of
Israel’s dangerous course of annexing the occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories and its repression of the
19

187. This resolution, although it is not official policy
of the United States Government, is still an indication
of what some of the mechanical supporters of Israel
in one branch of the United States Government
are
willing to do in order to foreclose any possibility of
the United Nations itself performing
its functions
and duties. This attempt at interrupting
America’s
capacity for objective judgement, this attempt at preempting United States policy through considerations
of local politics, is one of the unfortunate things that
we in the Arab nation have to put up with.

and throughout
the Arab nation, namely, the centrality in society of the human person and the need
for human rights to be not only articulated, but institutionalized and guaranteed.
182. Your academic background is well known and
well established; it brings to the United Nations the
intellect in action, giving the lie to the perceived
dichotomy between the academic and the diplomat or
politician.

183. I should like to take this opportunity
also to
congratulate the British representative on his tenure
last month. He is a well-known Arabist and the Council enioyed his wisdom and his guidance in many of
its deliberations.
We will all miss him. .

188. In regard to the presentation we heard from
the Israeli representative about Syria and Jordan vying
to present the complaint about Israel’s activities and
oppression in the West Bank, I should like to put the
record straight. It is to their great credit that Arab
States vie with each other to submit this complaint
on behalf of the Palestinian people under occupation,
For the PLO is recognized, but the Palestinians are
denied their right to statehood. All Arab States consider themselves
Palestinian,
for the Arab people
recognize in Palestine a part of their sacred homeland
and in the Palestinian people an integral part of their
national constituency, but one whose rights have been
denied. Thus each one of us is acting on behalf of the
Palestinian people, because as long as they are temporarily denied a State every Arab, State will vie to
protect and articulate their rights.

184. The dissolution
of the Al-Bireh
Municipal
Council and the removal of the mayor constitute an
escalation of the annexationist policies of the Israeli
occupation authorities.
That escalation is aimed at
setting in motion a mechanism by which all other
options before the Palestinians are foreclosed. The
intention of Israel at this particular juncture is especially to put the United States in particular in a position
where if it does not collude with Israel in its policies
it will collide with Israel. In fact, what Israel intends
to do in the next few days and weeks is to make totally
impossible the development
by the United States of
more flexible policies in regard to the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

189. Let me say for the record that the complaint
submitted to the Council by the representative
of
Jordan was submitted in his capacity as the Chairman
of the Group of Arab States members of the League of
Arab States. Therefore,
there was no question of
vying. This was a collective, unanimous decision on
the part of the Arab nation, whose diplomatic vehicle
in the United Nations is the Arab Group.

185. We have learned today, to our great regret
-as a matter of fact, to our great astonishment-that
one of your predecessors, Madam President, Senator
Moynihan has introduced at this particular moment in
the Foreign Relations Committee of the United States
Senate a resolution which states that any attempt on
the part of the General Assembly or the Security Council to penalize Israel for its aggression will be a proper’
excuse for the United States to withhold any of its
financial contributions
to the United Nations. That
resolution, which was unfortunately
adopted by the
Foreign Relations Committee,
comes on precisely
the same day that Israel acts in complete contempt of
the United Nations, in complete defiance of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, in utter rejection of all norms
of international
law, in defiance of all agreements.
At precisely this moment, when the international community, including many sectors of American opinion,
unequivocally
condemns Israel’s behaviour and its
escalating annexationist
policies in the West Bank,
politics seeks to interrupt American policy and preempt America’s objective judgement.

190. Secondly, oft repeated is the notion that the PLO
is a terrorist organization.
Let me! on behalf of the
League of Arab States, spell out what we conceive to
be the PLO. I think that the record should be put
straight again-although
this has been affirmed repeatedly-in
order that there be no misunderstanding
or misrepresentation.
The PLO is, by resolutions of
the League of Arab States, the Non-Aligned
Conference and the United Nations, the sole legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people. But that is
only one attribute of the PLO.
191. The PLO is something else: it is the framework
of Palestinian “peoplehood”.
There are no Palestiniafi
Arabs in so-called Judea and Samaria; there are no
Palestinians in refugee camps who are separate from
their own people: there are no Palestinians in Diaspora
without a focus of representation. Because finally the
Palestinian people have discovered and asserted not
only their identity but also their rights, and they have
assigned the PLO not only the function of leading
their liberation struggle-that
is one of the functions:
and not only the function of representing the Palestinian people in the international community-that
is

186. This resolution is reprehensible
because it is
perceived by Israel as a sort of license to act at will,
to strike at will and to be able to have the protective
shield of a very important Power whose global responsibilities
for peace and international
security are
underlined by the Charter of the United Nations and
by the perception by the United States itself of its
global functions and role.
20

another of their functions, No, the PLO is also the
framework of Palestinian “peoplehood”
and, because
of that, it carries the germ of the achievement of
Palestinian statehood.
192. That is what Israeli occupation and racism are
seeking to pre-empt by actions of State-sponsored
terrorism,
by the attempt to picture the PLO as a
phase of the Palestinians and a faction of the Palestinians: as well as by alleging that the sponsored,
minute quislings which are under the “village leagues”
are an alternative leadership that acquiesces in Israeli
occupation,
that serves its conquering objectives and
that feeds on Israel’s creeping annexation of the West
Bank and the occupied territories.
193. For the Palestinian people the PLO is not only
its legitimate representative, its leader in its liberation
struggle, the framework of the Palestinian people and
the carrier of the seeds of its statehood: it is also a
state of mind. Any attempt to circumvent and dislocate
it only reinforces the facets of national cohesion and
national determination.
And the PLO is not unique in
these manifold functions.
194. In recent days and weeks we have seen that
the mayor of Al-Bireh is only one of the mayors. There
are the mayors of Nablus and Ramallah. There are
other mayors, who are outside their towns and villages
because they have been expelled and condemned by
Israel; they are mayors who were duly elected and
functioning,
without any coercion.

sea attacks, Israel’s attempt to inflict on southern
Lebanon in perpetuity
its strategic hegemony and
military
occupation,
Israel’s annexationist policies,
and the resistance of the Syrian Arab people in the
Golan Heights, despite all odds-all this bears witness
to the resilience of the Arab people and their utter and
total insistence on maintaining
their independence
or securing it when it is denied.
197. Israel’s
annexationist
policies
have been
escalated to an intolerable level and warrant the convening of the Council, because this level of escalated
annexation threatens the peace of the region, and
perhaps of the world as well. These annexationist
policies treat the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories as they were treated in the early beginnings
of the Zionist conquest of Palestine-not
as adversaries, not as human beings, but as human obstacles
to the unfolding conquering pattern of the Zionist colonization of Palestine. They must be removed-by
persuasion, by village leagues, by quislings, by purchase, by military
occupation,
by annexation, by
making it totally impossible for them to survive because
they are denied water, education, social facilities and
human equality.

19.5. The demonstrations by the hundreds and thousands of students in Bir Zeit University, Bethlehem
University
and other universities
in the occupied
territories
are passive, peace-loving acts against the
whole might of the Israeli military authority. They are
seeking to trigger the conscience of mankind, to focus
attention
on their plight, because they consider the
PLO not only as their representative: they know that
the PLO has also become coterminous with their
identity and personality, their present and their future.
It is in this context that when an attempt is made to
denfgrate the PLO, any attempt to describe it as
terrorist,
it is an insult not only to the Palestinians
and the Arab people. Many similarly situated peoples
and liberation
movements throughout history have
been termed terrorists by the colonialists and racists.
Gandhi
and Nehru of India, Kenyatta of Kenya,
Makarios of Cyprus and other leaders, including those
in Zimbabwe, have been called-up
to a few years 01
months ago-terrorists
by the occupiers, the conquerors and the annexationists. Liberation movements
too have been called terrorist. Well, I must say that
Mr. Arafat and the PLO are in good historical company.

198. Israel treats the Palestinians as human obstacles
that have to be removed in order to accommodate the
future Israeli empire already designated, not as occupied territories, but as “Judea” and “Samaria” in
preparation for the infliction on Palestine of outright
Israeli conquest and annexation.
Has Israel eve1
called the occupied territories “occupied territories”?
Has it ever treated them as occupied territories? The
Israelis do not consider the occupied territories occupied. They consider the occupied territories to be
territories that should be “liberated”.
From whom?
And upon what philosophy is this based? It is based
on a philosophy of Zionism that considers that there
is a permanent
polarity between the Jew and the
other, a polarity that cannot be reconciled: that every
non-Jew has to be suspect, has to be treated critically
and is ultimately
an alien. So in the Israeli-Zionist
philosophy
the native population,
the Palestinians,
are not only human obstacles: they have to be treated
as aliens in their own homeland and country. It is this
philosophy
of alienation
that has engendered the
ghetto mentality-that
everybody must be treated
with suspicion-and
that has engendered the concept
that their actual military terrorism inside the occupied
territories, in Lebanon and in the Golan Heights is a
terrorism that not only is self-generating but has to be
protected; that anybody, anybody in the world, who
questions Israel’s
policies, who questions its behaviour, who does not comply with and acquiesce in
Israel’s perpetual addiction to aggression, expansion
and annexation, must be regarded as anti-Semitic.

196. The hysteria with which Israel perceives the
wave of the future inherent in the Palestine liberation
movement,
the terror that Israel inflicts on the Palestinian refugee camps in southern Lebanon by air and

199. And the Israelis come to the Council and say
about the representative
of Jordan that he called himself a Palestinian from Jerusalem and therefore is a
“diplomatic
mercenary”.
What would happen to the

that the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949’ applies
to all the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem. This is
an affirmation that Israel is an occupying Power, and
Israel is thus answerable to the international community, particularly to the Council, for any and all actions
constituting a violation of the provisions of the fourth
Geneva Convention
and other international
instruments and the norms of civilized society. Israel is
obligated to respect this Convention.

various representatives and diplomatic institutions of
Israel if the criterion of where one was born were to
determine the right of representation?
For Israel to
come and distort the Arab national situation in order
to deflect this body from focusing on the complaint
against Israel’s aggression and annexation is indicative
of the inherent contempt that Israel has for the United
Nations and its machinery.
It seeks to render the
United Nations impotent, its resolutions empty rhetoric and the effectiveness and credibility
of these
debates peripheral and marginal. It claims that it seeks
to bring about autonomy.
But autonomy,
Madam
President, as you well know and as everybody else
knows, is pre-emptive
of independence and sovereignty. Autonomy is an administrative
formula, not a
political formulation.
Autonomy, if it is a prelude to
independence, if it is a precursor of independence, can
be considered to be a feasible option. In many countries of Asia and Africa autonomy was perceived as a
stage in development
towards independence;
the
occupying or colonial Power conceded rrk initio that
independence was a legitimate outcome. But in this
case, autonomy as perceived, advertised and marketed
by Israel in the occupied territories is pre-emptive of
independence and is a total negation of national selfdetermination.

204. The mayors of the Palestinian
territories
-among whom are the mayors of Al-Bireh, Ramallah,
Halhoul and Hebron-were
elected, but when their
terms of office expired, the Palestinian people were
denied the right to go to the polls either to renew theil
mandates or to elect other individuals to these posts.
One wonders: Can we dare the occupying Power to
allow new elections to be held? In that case they would
not need to provide all those obstrusively and heavily
armed guards of the so-called village leaguers.
205. We are not dealing here with criminal acts of
mass murders, like the Deir Yassin massacre or the
deliberate and planned sinking by the Zionist movement of the Putria, which was carrying Jewish survivors from the Nazi concentration camps and gas
chambers. The Council is now faced with the flow of
blood and the imminent threat of a ma.jor military confrontation in the area.

ZOO. I do not want to dwell on the crocodile tears
that have been shed concerning the anguish and agony
of the Arab States in their search for a sense of direction in the twentieth century. In many instances that
search has caused us a great deal of bloodshed. But
all our inter-Arab relations, all our inter-Arab disputes are within the framework of an Arab nation in
trying to assert its rights and develop itself. It is the
Israel which occupied part of our nation, which conquers part of our nation and is in occupation of Arab
territories, that must realize that it cannot play havoc
with the chances of comprehensive
and genuine
peace by perpetually
denying the Palestinians theit
right to self-determination,

206. A new concept of law, both national and international-and
I do not claim to be a jurist-a
new
jurisprudence,
has just been announced here. One
wonders whether spies, quislings, agents and traitors
can be absolved of their crimes by invoking “their
desire to live in peace with the other party”--the
relationship between that party and their own people
and their national aspirations, rights and interests
notwithstanding.
I am sure that some jurists and
legislators will work very hard to provide an answer.

201. We have come to the Security Council. The
representative of Jordan, in his capacity as the Chairman of the Group of Arab States for this month, has
presented our complaint because we believe, despite
evidence to the contrary, in the ultimate efficacy of the
United Nations machinery.
We are committed
to
exhaust all diplomatic and peaceful options through the
mechanism of the United Nations. But if the intolerable
and escalating annexationist
policies of Israel, its
addiction
to aggression
and annexation,
remain
uninterrupted
by the intervention
of the United Nations, then the havoc that we are all seeking to avoid
will be conjured up and enforced.

i
i

\
/

202. The PRESIDENT:
Two participants
in this
debate have asked to exercise their rights of reply.
I call first on the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization.

207. As I mentioned earlier, the civilian administration referred to is a misnomer, a deception or an 1
attempt to insult our intelligence and that of the worId
community.
Professor-General
Milson has already c
described to us what this so-called civilian adminis- 1
tration really is. He tells us very clearly that this is 1
not administration
by civilians but one dealing with the /
affairs of civilians. And there he draws a line between 1
the needs of the population-whether
it be for a !
sewer system, public water or streets-and the policy :
aims of the Government. Thus this administration
is i
based on the denial of political and other rights of these f
people and, as Mr. Milson says, the aim of that admin- 1
istration is the full implementation
of the Camp David
accords. It is the substance of the Camp David accords
that is the cause; it is not the labyrinth of various :
interpretations
of the substance itself.
i’

203. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization): The Council has on numerous occasions decided

208. I noticed that the media were being quoted, 1
I only wish again to suggest a reading of the entire i

i

22

-

b

editorial in The C’hrisriun ScirJm,r Monitor of 23 March,
under the heading “West Bank Warning”. If editorial
writers, people across the Atlantic, entertain such
thoughts as revealed in this editorial and draw such
conclusions and deductions, we can readily understand
how the people under the bayonets and boots of the
troops feel-and,
believe me, they feel it in their own
skin when they see their own children being killed.
At the end of this editorial a question is put to the
Administration
in Washington.
We should only like
to add our voice and ask the United States Administration: Where do we go from here?

issue before us has not even been touched upon by him.
and this evasion is a tactical move that we have by now
learned by heart.
2 15. Criminals
under investigation
always evade
the issue to distract attention from their crimes,
216. If we read the fourth Geneva Convention
carefully, concerning punitive measures, by its standards any country on the globe can detain Mr. Begin
and try him for war crimes.
217. On 8 March, which is Revolution Day in Syria.
the President of the Syrian Arab Republic marched in
the streets of Damascus on the way to the Parliament.
He was received by one million Syrians. He WAS
carried on the shoulders of our workers, farmers,
intellectuals,
even pseudo-intellectuals.
His speech in
Parliament
wilt remain a monumental defence of his
country against imperialism
and Zionism and their
permanent attempt to subvert Syria.

209.
It really hurts me to the bottom of my heart
when I hear someone representing a racist regime
speak about Jews and Arabs living together in peace.
I belong to a generation which has known Palestine.
I was born in Jerusalem. I know the country as one
where there was no difference, no discrimination
between
Arab and Jew. It was only when it became
clear to the Palestinian Arabs that the Zionist newcorners were to take over their homeland and their
beloved country that the clashes started. We had lived
in peace and in oneness; it is not only a question of
understanding:
we are just one. I wonder how many
among the members of the delegation seated at the
other end of this table were born in peaceful and
beautiful Palestine or have their roots there.

218. Syria wishes through you, Madam President,
to correct the representative
of Israel. He said that
workers’ trade unions had been dissolved. That has
never happened. The power of Syria ties in the ranks
of a large segment of workers, whether labourers in the
agricultural
fields or workers in factories. Those are
the people of Syria.

2 10. In 1974 Chairman Arafat addressed the General
Assembly.’
He called for a State-he described it as
a “dream”,
but it was really an aim and not merely
a dream-in
which we should all live inpeace, without
any discrimination,
on Palestinian territory between
the Jordan River and the Mediterranean.
There is
plenty of room to accommodate all of us. Believe me,
that woutd be peace-and
a viable peace.

219. His defence of the terrorist activities of the
Muslim
Brotherhood
shows the extent of the cooperation of Israel and the United States with that
group. Israel and the United States of America are
arming and supporting and co-operating with those
armed groups, which have nothing to do with Islam
-those heretics, whose objective it is to bleed Syria
and to weaken its credibility in withstanding United
States and Israeli aggression against the Arab homeland and in liberating our territory from the Zionist
occupation supported by the United States.

The Council is faced with a challenge: to enable
the Palestinians to return to their homes and freely
exercise their inalienable rights in their own homeland, Palestine. This is the challenge, and it is high time
that the Council met that challenge and found a solution,
21 I.

220. Syria is the bastion of Arab nationalism, the
catalyst of progressive forces. Its image cannot be
tarnished-neither
through the pronouncements of
the Israeli representative
here nor through sabotage
by the reactionary
forces armed and protected by
United States imperialism
and Israel, whose objective
it is to destroy Syria from the inside. The people and
Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic are, as they
have been for the last 30 years, dedicated to harnessing
all their force with the help of their friends-and
we
have so many friends-to
liberate Palestine and the
occupied Arab territories.

212.
Meanwhile,
the Council is dealing with an
immediate
issue; it is dealing with the most recent
Israeli acts of State terrorism; it is dealing with the
question of innocent persons being killed. The Council has the duty and the power to deal with this issue.
2 13. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic has asked to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

22 I. The PRESIDENT:
Israel,

214. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
The representative
of Israel has taken the floor to
misrepresent
and to mislead the Council. He spoke
about everything in the area except the situation in
the occupied Arab territories, which is, as you, Madam
President, and all members know, deteriorating. The

I call on the representative of

222. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I had no intention of replying to the sermon delivered by Mr. Maksoud. One
does not usually respond to sermons. But towards the
end of that sermon he made certain allegations which
call for a response.
23

223. I do not want to polemicize with him as to the
characterization of the terrorist PLO. If that is his perception of the PLO, he is certainly entitled to it. But
I for one prefer the self-presentation of the PLO in its
own documents, its so-called Covenant, and the
statements of its leadership, and above all through its
terroristic behaviour. All these speak more about the
true nature of the PLO than Mr. Maksoud’s sermon.
224. I do not want to polemicize with him with regard
to the alleged unity within the Arab world. We were,
though. told towards the end of the statement that
there are many disputes and rivalries within the Arab
world but that they are inter-Arab rivalries and others
should not intervene. Well, if they were inter-Arab
rivalries and disputes and dissensions and suspicions,
that would have no implications for the rest of the
world and for the rest of the Middle East, and I think
that we would all heed his advice. But unfortunately
it is precisely these inter-Arab rivalries and dissensions and suspicions and disputes that are the rootcause of the instability of the Middle East and that
these days constitute one of the major threats to international stability and international peace and security.
So we should not be told to leave it to Mr. Maksoud
to sort out those differences. After all, what is at stake
is not only the well-being of the people of the Middle
EM but also the peace of the world.

wishful thinking and it is probably part of the wishfkll
of his President, who I’eg:i&q the fwmet
Palestine Mandate, including the State of Isr*ael. ns pal’t
of southern Syria. So I think it WAS i~ useful stutenlent
and I leave it at that.
thinking

229. The PRESIDENT:
Mr. Clovis Maksotld
wishes
to make a further statement. I understand that he htls.
strictly speaking, no right to do SO. However, with the
consent of the Council, I shall invite him tu address
the Council. As there is no objection, I invite Mr. Mibksoud to take a place at the Council table anti to make
his statement.
230. Mr, MAKSOUD:
I do not want to take more
of the precious time of the Council, but I think that it
is necessary to clarify certain positions SO that the
distortion of truth and reality does not become habitu:d
and uninterrupted.
231. The League of Arab States has amongst
its
members all the independent Arab States, as well ils
the PLO, a full member. This is not only il regional
organization of various Arab Governments,
but :IISO
a national organization. Our nation, the Arab nation.
has experienced a variety of colonial Powers
and
different levels of colonial control ranging from the
Ottoman in the past to the British and the French at it
moment prior to the decolonization
period. Therefore.
the Arab States achieved their independence
at different stages. We had national liberation movements
in every Arab State. We did not have the over-n11
mechanism of a national liberation movement
because
of the multiplicity
of the colonial Powers and the
different levels of colonial control. So we achieved
our independence at different stages. Because of this
we realize that the sovereignty and independence
of
each Arab State is precious, important
and vital,
historically
and contemporaneously.
But
besides
being independent sovereign Arab States, we are one
nation; we are one nation of many States. And because of this dynamics of inter-Arab relations,
determined by historical factors, the unity of our spiritual
experience, the unity of our culture and language,
the
unity of our aspiration, the unity of our destiny-because of all this, the interrelationships
among
the
Arab States assume a dimension and a dynamics
that
put the Arabs in a togetherness that is at times intimate and at times acute. Sometimes we differ with
many States outside the Arab nation. Our differences
are sometimes resolvable and sometimes not resolvable. We have misunderstandings
with many States
throughout the world. We have good relations
also.
But because of the intimate nature of our- relationships, because of the organic nature of Arab nationalism, we have a feeling of interdependence that makes
our sovereignty Protective of interference, but not uf
interaction. This is the dynamism of Arab nationalism,
Included in that nationalism are the PaIestiniun
people,
because the Palestinians still are almost the only Ar&
People that has not achieved sovereignty and an independent State in its homeland-that
is llnfinished
business and Palestinian rights are on our conscience.

225. And then we were told by Mr. Maksoud that we
have a ghetto mentality. There are limits even to
arrogance.
226. This Organization is the product of the great
wartime coalition that fought nazism and fascism. The
prime targets of nazism and fascism in those days were
persons to be found in the ghettos of Europe and those
who rebelled against Nazi tyranny in Europe. At that
time the spiritual and intellectual mentor of Mr. Maksoud, Hajj Amin al-Husseini, the notorious Mufti of
Jerusalem, co-operated with the Nazis in the extermination of the Jews of Europe in the ghettos. He was
wanted as a war criminal in Nuremburg after the war,
So Mr. Maksoud would do well not to address himself
to the question of ghettos and the ghetto mentality.
What he has displayed here is the mentality of those
who oppressed the ghetto dwellers during the Second
World War.
227. I do not think that the reply that we heard from
the representative of Syria calls for any detailed
response. I think it was a very useful statement. It
clarified once again for all of us here the state of mind
of the Syrian representative.
228. He spoke of Revolution Day, 8 March-Revolu,tion Day in Syria. What he has failed to tell us is which
of the many revolutions Syria has undergone over the
past 35 years that day is intended to mark? He also
made a very interesting Freudian slip, which he corrected at once. He spoke of his President going on
8 March last to Jerusalem. This may be part of his
24

232. Now, as far as the ghetto mentality that I have
ascribed to Israel is concerned, I want to stand by it,
Because what WC have are two concepts of nationalism
in conflict. Our nationalism,
Arab nationalism,
is a
function of liberation;
it seeks equality in the community of nations: it underlines what unites the Arab
with the other, Zionist nationalism,
Israeli nationalism, is a conquering nationalism, a settler nationalism;
it seeks to assert and underline what distinguishes the
Jew from the other, not what unites the Jew with the
other: it assumes that anti-Semitism
is inherent in
human nature, Of course there has been persecution
and Jews have been targeted in the past. We, the
Arab nation, have always felt that the Jews are part of
our people, that Judaism is part of our spiritual heritage. Many Arabs are of Jewish persuasion and faith.
We have never condoned any attempt to tear out a
particular religious, or at times ethnic, group in order
to institutionalize
its alienation, its otherness and the
inevitability of its perpetual distinction from the other.
We believe in human integration, but not to the extent
of total absorption and denial of identity. We believe
that in the function of equality Arab nationalism
partakes of the third world decolonization
process.
We have expanded the area of internationalism
by
the achievement of our national independence, while
Israeli nationalism
is predicated on institutionalizing
alienation-and
it is that alienation that constitutes the
ghetto.

234. The PRESIDENT:
Israel,

I call on the representative of

235. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. Maksoud has referred
to US as a religious group, thus explicitly denying the
national identity of the Jewish people. He has also
stated that Jews are a part of “our” people-that
is
to say, of the Arab people. I think he has highlighted
the source of the Arab-Israel conflict, namely, the
refusal of that brand of nationalism which he speaks
for to admit the existence of any other nationalism in
our part of the world. This kind of exclusivist approach-racist
approach-is aimed not only at Israelis
and Jews. He applies it equally to Kurds, to Druse and
to other non-Arab nationalities in the Middle East.
That is the kind of nationalism-the
brand of nationalism-which
Mr. Maksoud speaks for. This is the
internationalist
approach. And others who maintain
that they have the same rights to national existence
as the Arabs are relegated to the level of people suffering from a ghetto mentality.

NOTES
1 United Nations, Tr~fy Series. vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
2 General Assemblv resolution 217 A (III).
’ See General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX).

233, That is why it is crucial that at this moment,
when we are discussing the fate of the Palestinians
under occupation, we go into the root of the problem
-and that is the fact that Zionist nationalism has no
accountability.
It considers the world answerable to it
but it is accountable to nobody. It is that alienation
in the ideological structure that spills over and becomes
total contempt for the international community.

4 C#cirr/
Rcwrds
of fhe Getwrul
,sion, .S~/pplemet~t
No. 35 (A/36/35).
5 Ibid.,
Ninth Etnerg~twy
Special

4th meeting, paras. 20 and 25.
h Ibid., para. 32.

25

Assembly,
Sc.ssicttf,

Thirty-sisfh
Plc~~~rry

Ses-

M~Witt,sv,

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UMTED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
auprts
des ventes.
New York ou Get&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICATIONS

NATIONS

sont en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas panes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

DES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

UNIES

et les agences
a : Nations

dcpositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccibn de Ventas.

I
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

8%60989-April

1989-2,050

/
