United Nations

S/PV.6260

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6260th meeting
Friday, 15 January 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Yesui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Takasu
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations
assistance in support of its peace process (S/2010/17)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-21022 (E)

*1021022*

S/PV.6260

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2006/920)
Report of the Secretary-General on the request
of Nepal for United Nations assistance in
support of its peace process (S/2010/17)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Nepal, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Mission in Nepal.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Ms. Landgren to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/17, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for
United Nations assistance in support of its peace
process. I should also like to draw the attention of
members of the Council to document S/2010/25, which

2

contains a letter dated 14 January 2010 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
At this meeting the Council will hear a briefing
by Ms. Karin Landgren, to whom I now give the floor.
Ms. Landgren: I would like to say at the outset
on behalf of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) that our hearts are with the people of Haiti
and with our colleagues in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and their families in this
time of sorrow and uncertainty.
It is three years since the Security Council
authorized the deployment of UNMIN, at the request of
the then Seven-Party Alliance and the then Communist
Party of Nepal (Maoist) (CPN-M). The Mission’s
election-related tasks were completed, with some
delays, in April 2008. UNMIN’s continued support of
the peace process, in particular through the monitoring
of the management of arms and armies and the
chairmanship of the Joint Monitoring Coordination
Committee, has yet to be concluded.
The report of the Secretary-General now with the
Council (S/2010/17) reflects a turbulent period, with
contentious actions and statements by the parties. It
warns of the grave danger that the prolonged period of
polarization and growing confrontation poses to the
peace process. As I reported on 6 November (see
S/PV.6214), the fragility of the peace process, and the
concerns that it could be derailed, remain real. In the
past weeks, however, the leaders of the principal
parties have demonstrated a renewed urgency in
focusing on core peace-related matters. The 28 May
deadline for the promulgation of Nepal’s new
constitution and the need to create the conditions that
will allow UNMIN’s role to be brought to an orderly
end have generated intense discussion and reflection
within and among the parties. Although the hour is late,
the recent actions by the Government and the parties, if
followed through with vigour, have the potential to
usher in constructive actions for the next stage of
Nepal’s democratic transition.
Since the middle of December, activity has
revived on several fronts. The Unified Communist
Party of Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M) stopped obstructing
the work of the Legislature-Parliament; the longdiscussed high-level political mechanism was set up;
the first discharge of the disqualified Maoist army
personnel took place under the newly agreed action

10-21022

S/PV.6260

plan; and the Special Committee is now discussing a
timeline for integration and rehabilitation of the Maoist
army personnel. These developments may strengthen a
consensual basis for moving forward.
On 23 December, the UCPN-M lifted its blockade
of the Legislature-Parliament, apparently without the
preconditions that had been under discussion since
August, saying that they took this step in the interest of
the peace process and to prevent relations with other
parties from deteriorating further. I have repeatedly
called on the Maoist leadership to allow the
Legislature-Parliament to function and to respect and
rely on democratic and institutional channels.
Last week, on 8 January, the leaders of the three
major parties announced the establishment of a highlevel political mechanism dedicated to resolving
outstanding peace-process issues, notably the
integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army
personnel, as well as constitutional issues. The initial
members are the Chair, Mr. Girija Prasad Koirala,
President of the Nepali Congress Party and former
Prime Minister; Mr. Jhala Nath Khanal, Chairman of
the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist
Leninist); and Mr. Pushpa Kamal Dahal “Prachanda”,
Chairman of the UCPN-M, with Prime Minister
Madhav Kumar Nepal as an invited member. UNMIN
has long underlined the need for an effective
framework within which the peace process can be
taken forward.
In a third positive and long-awaited development,
the discharge of the 4,008 personnel disqualified in 2007
as minors and late recruits began last week. As the
Council will recall, nearly 3,000 of this group are persons
disqualified as having been below the age of 18 at the
time of the signing of the ceasefire in May 2006. After an
arduous process of discussions, an agreement was secured
on 16 December on an action plan for the discharge of the
minors, signed by the Government, the UCPN-M and the
United Nations country team, and witnessed by the
Minister for Peace and Reconstruction, Mr. Rakam
Chemjong; Chairman Prachanda; the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy; and myself.
Agreement on the discharge of the disqualified
was a significant step and came after a protracted
period of inaction on resolving the issue of personnel
in the cantonments. Many of the disqualified appear
already to have left the cantonments. The first

10-21022

discharge took place in main cantonment site 2,
Sindhuli, on 7 January. Two hundred and one of the
originally registered 372 persons disqualified at this
site received new civilian identity cards, and were
offered a duffel bag with civilian clothing, a 10,000rupee transition allowance from the United Nations and
12,000 rupees from the UCPN-M, as well as bus
transport to six main destinations.
At the first discharge ceremony, Maoist army
commander Nanda Kishore Pun “Pasang” encouraged
those who were about to depart to go on to new
achievements. The process was smooth and the
atmosphere jubilant. The scheduled end date is
8 February, and a United Nations team, referred to as
the Monitoring Mechanism, will follow up for six
months those who were verified as minors and
discharged. UNICEF will lead the Monitoring
Mechanism, with the participation of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. Operational
guidelines for monitoring are being developed.
The Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction will
make available educational and vocational support to
the discharged personnel on an individual basis, with
the support of the United Nations, which has worked
diligently on the components of these support
packages. I would like to pay tribute to the exemplary
cooperation between the Mission and the United
Nations country team. I would also like to
acknowledge the valuable visit paid by Special
Representative Coomaraswamy and her staff at a
critical moment in the discussions leading to the
signing of the action plan.
Finally, the Special Committee established to
address the supervision, integration and rehabilitation
of Maoist army personnel has resumed meeting and is
considering a timetable within which the future of the
more than 19,000 former combatants is to be resolved.
The Special Committee has experienced significant
delays under successive Governments. We encourage
the parties to come to rapid agreement on the details of
the modalities of integration into the security forces,
and on rehabilitation. This is a critical element in the
peace process, not only from the perspective of
completing UNMIN’s arms monitoring work, but, more
important, for the future stability of Nepal. The
integration and rehabilitation exercise pertains to the
lives of close to 20,000 men and women who have
military and combat experience fighting for a political
cause. The proper integration of an agreed number into

3

S/PV.6260

the security forces and the re-absorption of others into
society — with productive and meaningful lives ahead
of them — require careful planning and
implementation and an enabling political environment.
UNMIN and the United Nations system as a whole
remain available to extend appropriate support in that
regard.
UNMIN has engaged in active efforts to
encourage the Government and the parties to take the
steps that would allow UNMIN to complete its tasks
and withdraw in a well-ordered manner. A timeline
with benchmarks agreed upon by the major peace
process actors is absolutely essential for that.
The Government wishes to see the integration
and rehabilitation of the Maoist army before the new
Constitution is promulgated. The interim constitution
does not address the sequencing of those two events
directly, nor does it link them. But the drafters assumed
that integration and rehabilitation could take place
within six months, while the constitution-drafting was
expected to require two years and be completed by
28 May 2010.
The question of whether or not the term of the
current Constituent Assembly can be extended should
more time be needed for constitution-drafting has been
widely debated. Views differ on this and on the legal
situation that would prevail should there be neither an
extension nor a constitution by 28 May. It is important
to ensure that steps be taken in a timely fashion so as
not to create a constitutional vacuum.
The uncertainty surrounding the post-28 May
situation is one more reason for the parties to move
ahead speedily with the integration and rehabilitation
of the Maoist army personnel, with the conclusion of
the constitution-drafting process and with the fresh
elections that are to follow. As encouraging as recent
developments have been, it is imperative to follow
through and resolve the outstanding main tasks in the
peace process. Until that happens, the peace process
will remain at risk.
There are various challenges facing the high-level
political mechanism, including opposition within some
of the political parties, while the proposed action plan
for integration and rehabilitation appears still to require
significant negotiation.
There have been other signs of continued
volatility in Nepal, including the fatal violent clashes

4

in the far-western district of Kailali on 6 December
and, more recently, among youth groups affiliated with
political parties in several areas of the country, as well
as the serious clash in Kathmandu on 20 December. In
Bara district, members of the Terai Mukti Morcha
reportedly shot and killed three members of the
UCPN-M on 6 January, with two others seriously
injured.
Fresh recruitment into the Nepal Army — in
UNMIN’s view, in violation of past agreements —
continues to be mooted. While the Government
recently announced its intention to review the structure
of the security sector, it remains unclear how the rightsizing and democratization of the Army will be
approached.
The Maoists, having returned land in many parts
of the country that they had seized during the conflict,
undertook a new and concerted land grab in the
southern Tarai belt, as well as crop seizures, mostly in
mid- and far-western districts. While the Maoists’
declaration of autonomous provinces last month was
largely peaceful, it was regarded as provocative in the
light of the Constituent Assembly’s responsibility for
determining the new federal structure of Nepal. Several
ethnically based organizations, some of them militant,
are prepared to agitate for their respective agendas,
including the establishment of ethnic-based states.
In the prevailing climate of political pressure and
impunity for crimes and human rights violations, it has
become extremely difficult for civil society and the
media to speak forthrightly about excesses. The past
year was bookended by savage attacks on two female
journalists — Uma Singh, who was killed in Janakpur
on 11 January 2009, and Tika Bista, who survived her
attack in Rolpa on 8 December.
The serious clashes and provocations of late 2009
led many to draw UNMIN’s attention to what they
called breaches of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). Those allegations underscore the
absence of a credible and independent national
monitoring mechanism to determine whether or not the
CPA is being implemented as foreseen. As the Council
is aware, UNMIN’s monitoring tasks concern breaches
of the Agreement on the Monitoring of the
Management of Arms and Armies, and not the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement as a whole.
There have also been repeated allegations of
breaches of the Agreement on the Monitoring of the

10-21022

S/PV.6260

Management of Arms and Armies. Those are rules that
the parties themselves agreed to place on the Nepal
Army and the Maoist army. For the record, the parties
have made three agreements over weaponry outside the
weapon storage containers: the Agreement on the
Monitoring of the Management of Arms and Armies
itself, which provides for the storage of most Maoist
army weapons and of an equal number of Nepal Army
weapons, and the use of 30 weapons for perimeter
security at each main cantonment site and 15 at each
satellite site; the agreement on the security of the
Maoist leadership, which was signed in late June 2007
and which allowed 42 weapons of varying calibre to be
carried by designated security personnel; and, finally,
an informal understanding, amply referenced in the
records of the Joint Monitoring Coordination
Committee, that permits a weapon to be carried by
Maoist divisional commanders, deputy divisional
commanders and brigade commanders who command
troops. The agreements on arms and armies have been
respected by the parties to a significant degree. They
are, however, increasingly under strain, which is all the
more reason to move expeditiously towards completing
the political steps foreseen for the peace process.
The parties have recently sought greater common
ground, giving rise to cautious optimism that progress
can be made in the peace process. There are positions
on the political left and right alike, however, that argue
against the merits of peaceful resolution and adherence
to the original agreements. Some speak of a fresh
confrontation as being inevitable. Fears have not fully
receded that the Maoists have reneged on their
acceptance of the democratic principles laid down in
the peace agreements, and that the Government lacks
sincerity in implementing critical reforms. Some actors
maintain uncompromising positions. Threats, taunts
and provocations continue to leach into the public
discourse. The parties are quick to assert that fault for
the failure of the peace process lies with the other side.
The parties should be encouraged to make
maximum use of the new space for constructive
dialogue, which has been an area of strength overall in
Nepal’s peace process. The Government has requested
the extension of UNMIN’s mandate for three months
and three weeks. That is linked to an ambitious
timetable for the integration and rehabilitation of the
cantoned Maoist army personnel, paving the way for
UNMIN to depart with its task completed. We welcome
that development. Should the Council decide to extend

10-21022

UNMIN’s mandate as requested, we truly hope that the
renewed commitment will bring tangible results and
that the conditions will now be created for UNMIN to
complete its work within the envisaged timeframe.
UNMIN has remained continuously engaged with
the major political actors to contribute to confidence in
the peace process and to fulfil our specific monitoring
tasks. The present efforts towards pursuing a peaceful
and constructive way forward should be maintained
and the principal political actors encouraged to
continue the unity, leadership and focus of recent
weeks.
On behalf of UNMIN, I would like to convey a
warm welcome to Ambassador Gyan Chandra Acharya,
who in his previous role as Nepal’s Foreign Secretary
worked closely with my predecessor, Ian Martin, and
with me. Along with my colleagues in the Department
of Political Affairs, I look forward to continuing the
warm relationship and good communication that we
have enjoyed.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Landgren for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January. I
also take this opportunity to express my sincere
appreciation to you for providing me with this
opportunity to speak before the Council for the first
time since taking up my assignment here.
Through a formal note dated 9 January 2010, I
have conveyed to the Secretary-General the decision of
the Government of Nepal to request the extension of
the duration of the current mandate and the
continuation of the related works of the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) until 15 May 2010. In
seeking the extension of UNMIN to that date, the
Government of Nepal has given due consideration to
the current transitional situation of the country and has
recognized the important role played by UNMIN in
providing support and facilitation within its mandate to
our nationally driven peace process.
We have taken note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on UNMIN (S/2010/17), which highlights
UNMIN’s assessment of the situation in Nepal over the
past six months. I would like to express my thanks to

5

S/PV.6260

Ms. Karin Landgren, Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Nepal and head of UNMIN — as she said,
we work together in Nepal — for her statement on
recent developments in Nepal.
In the context of the consistent evolution of the
situation, I would like to inform the Council on the
latest situation in the country and provide our
perspective on the overall course of the peace process.
The Council is aware that we are going through a
transition from a 10 year-long conflict to sustainable
peace and stability with a nationally driven peace
process. This has received wide support and
cooperation from the international community. Since
June 2006, we have come a long way and, as I fully
understand, with many ups and downs, which is only
natural for a complex peace process. We are also aware
that we still have some way to go. Yet, along the way
we have made tremendous progress in terms of our
political transformation. We are equally committed to
institutionalizing it and bringing about social and
economic transformation
together with State
restructuring. Our agenda has therefore remained a
forward-looking, inclusive and democratic Nepal,
which would ensure peace and prosperity for itself and
also stability and progress for the region as a whole.
In our efforts towards attaining these goals,
international good will, support and cooperation have
played an important role. We thank the United Nations
for its support and consistent encouragement and
UNMIN for its contribution in the mandated areas of
the peace process.
We consider that writing a Constitution on time is
essential to accelerating the peace progress during this
transition period, which would help us conclude the
peace process in Nepal. I am happy to inform the
Council that all the parties have committed themselves,
repeatedly and very recently, to writing the
Constitution on time, by May 2010. A large majority of
the thematic committees of the Constituent Assembly
have already deliberated on the issues under their
purview and submitted input to the respective bodies of
the Constituent Assembly. The new Constitution is
expected to usher in a new Nepal, which would be
more inclusive, federal and democratic. This would
ensure sustainable peace, together with the rule of law,
human rights and basic principles and norms of
democratic governance.

6

Similarly, with a view to narrowing down the
political differences among the major political parties
on key national issues and steering the country towards
a logical conclusion of the peace process, a high-level
political consultative mechanism has also been
established recently under the leadership of the former
Prime Minister, Mr. Girija Prasad Koirala.
We have now come to a stage wherein we have to
deal with important and fundamental issues, including
the future of the combatants. All the political parties
are committed to resolving this issue as soon as
possible and, as a result, the Special Committee and the
Technical Committee have been working hard on the
issue of the integration and rehabilitation of the Maoist
combatants. These Committees will be guided by the
principles as stipulated in the interim constitution, the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the Agreement on
the Monitoring of the Management of Arms and
Armies and the agreement of the political parties of
25 June 2008. The process of integration and
rehabilitation is expected to be completed before the
promulgation of the new Constitution.
In an important recent development, the release
of the disqualified minors living in the cantonments
has begun in earnest on the basis of the action plan
signed on 16 December 2009. We expect the release to
be completed by the middle of the next month.
Similarly, a mine action committee has been working
assiduously with a view to completely clearing mines
as per its schedule as early as possible. That will have a
salutary impact on protecting the lives and limbs of all,
including children and women.
Likewise, the Government has taken a number of
important initiatives. A draft bill on the establishment
of the commission of inquiry on disappearances has
already been submitted to Parliament following its
approval by the Cabinet. Efforts are under way to
finalize a bill for the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation commission. I would like to stress that
substantial consultations with all the stakeholders were
held in the preparation of these bills with a view to
making them consistent with the international
standards and national aspirations.
Nepal’s commitment to human rights is
unflinching. We are party to more than 16 major
international human rights instruments, including the
Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, Aiming at the Abolition

10-21022

S/PV.6260

of the Death Penalty. We are fully aware that the
protection and promotion of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms strengthen the sustainability of
peace and progress. The Government is determined to
ensure, through the effective enforcement of law and
major institutional reforms, that there is no impunity in
the country.
The Government has been supporting the tasks of
the National Human Rights Commission, a
constitutional body empowered to investigate and
recommend suggestions on cases of human rights
violations. The independent judiciary has been an
important institution in protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms. In addition, a vibrant civil
society and the media have all played an important role
in promoting awareness and protecting human rights,
despite the fact that there have been some occasional
cases of violations of human rights.
In conclusion, let me stress once again that we
are emerging from a decade-long armed conflict. The
transition has not always been easy or smooth, and has
not followed a straight line. However, if we take a longterm view, we can see that Nepal has made significant
progress over the years. A compartmentalized view of the

10-21022

peace process may not capture the essence of our
genuine determination to bring the peace process to its
logical conclusion. More than anybody else, the people
of Nepal are eagerly looking forward to a posttransition era. Therefore, and looking at the successive
developments in the country since the inception of the
peace process in June 2006, we have reason to be
optimistic about its overall direction.
In realizing our goal of a peaceful, stable,
democratic and prosperous new Nepal, we need more
than ever before an enhanced level of support,
understanding
and
encouragement
from
the
international community. Against this backdrop, we
look forward to the extension of the mandate of
UNMIN until 15 May 2010 in order for it to complete
its mandated tasks within the stipulated time.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

7
