A /68/PV.25

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

25th plenary meeting

Thursday, 3 October 2013, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
High-level Dialogue on International Migration
and Development
Agenda item 21
Globalization and interdependence
(e) International migration and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/190)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/68/162)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.5)
The President: I warmly welcome all present
to this High-level Dialogue, whose overall theme is
“Identifying concrete measures to strengthen coherence
and cooperation at all levels, with a view to enhancing
the benefits of international migration for migrants and
countries alike and its important links to development,
while reducing its negative implications”. This meeting
is held in accordance with resolutions 63/225, of
19 December 2008, and 67/219, of 21 December 2012.
I am deeply honoured to be here today at the
beginning of this important two-day High-level
Dialogue on International Migration and Development
to discuss a topic that affects virtually every country
in the world. The recent tragedy, last Thursday, off
the coast of Sicily serves as a sad reminder of why our
discussions on migration, particularly the protection
and well-being of migrants, are both critical and urgent.
I would like to begin my remarks today with a
reference to my own country, the small island developing

State of Antigua and Barbuda, where migration is both
a bane and a blessing. We are a country of origin, so
migration deprives us of the skilled workers we need
for our development — teachers, nurses, technicians
and so forth. But the flip side of that coin is that some
of our citizens who live and work overseas invest,
engage in trade and create businesses back home. In
2012, we received $22 million in migrant remittances.
At the same time, the people leaving our shores also
make important contributions to their countries of
destination, providing much-needed skills there and so
enhancing growth. But we are also a destination country,
welcoming thousands of immigrants from many of our
sister islands in the Caribbean. They contribute to our
national development and work to build better lives for
themselves and their families.
Over the next two days, the Assembly will focus on
such individuals and many others from all over the world
who leave their homes in search of better opportunities.
Intuitively, we know that such journeys to new lands
offer the potential for great rewards — most, if not
all, of us have also ventured from our own homelands.
But how can we ensure that migration benefits the
individuals as well as the societies and countries
involved, while minimizing the downsides?
As some here may recall, the General Assembly, at
its sixty-seventh session, decided to hold this High-level
Dialogue with the overall theme of “Identifying concrete
measures to strengthen coherence and cooperation
at all levels, with a view to enhancing the benefits of
international migration for migrants and countries alike
and its important links to development, while reducing

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-49787 (E)

*1349787*

A/68/PV.25

its negative implications”. That decision marked a
turning point in a journey that began seven years ago, in
2006, with the first High-level Dialogue on the subject.
We agreed that migration, which for so long had been
deemed too sensitive an issue, deserved — indeed,
required — our collective attention and efforts. We also
agreed that migration was not a zero-sum proposition,
but that all could benefit, provided that migration was
properly managed. And such management, I hasten to
add, is a joint responsibility of countries of origin and
countries of destination.
Seven years later, our progress has been
significant. First, at the United Nations, we continue
to make progress, agreeing on many aspects related
to international migration and development and the
protection of migrants, while raising international
awareness about the importance of the issue. A number
of resolutions have been adopted in the Second and
Third Committees of the General Assembly, and
migration-related work is ongoing in the Economic
and Social Council. Secondly, the Global Forum on
Migration and Development, established after the 2006
High-level Dialogue, is serving us well as a venue
for informal discussion, exchanging good practices
and inter-State cooperation. Thirdly, civil society is
working ever more closely with Member States in our
quest to find practical solutions to concrete challenges.
At the informal hearings held on 15 July in preparation
for this Dialogue, civil society presented us with an
action-oriented agenda for the next five years. Fourthly,
the United Nations system is coordinating its work
on migration better, through the Global Migration
Group, and there is now enhanced collaboration with
the International Organization for Migration. Fifthly,
inspired by those new developments and in response
to the realities on the ground, many Member States are
experimenting with innovative migration policies.
On 25 June, my predecessor, Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
organized a panel discussion on international migration
and development that clearly outlined the progress we
have made so far. Panellists reminded us of the potential
of migration as a force for development and the many
hurdles migrants still face, and they acknowledged
the progress made since 2006. Learning from our
experiences in the past seven years, we should now take
the next step. In line with our overall theme, the focus
of our meeting should first and foremost be on practical
measures and responses. That means setting realistic
targets, committing to implementation and monitoring

2/46

03/10/2013

progress. In short, we must hold ourselves accountable
in following up on our Dialogue; otherwise, our
dialogue will remain just talk.
Since the first High-level Dialogue in 2006,
the face of migration has changed. Overall global
migration patterns have shifted. In parts of Europe and
North America, migration rates have slowed, while new
destinations have emerged in Africa, Asia and Latin
America. In some areas, intraregional mobility is on the
rise. Agreements such as the Caribbean Single Market
and Economy are removing obstacles to the free flow
of skills, labour and capital. The Southern Common
Market has introduced measures to promote the free
movement of its citizens. In addition to open mobility for
citizens, the European Union has developed portability
standards for health care and pensions. Globally, the
international community has experienced a series of
crises related to food and fuel prices and economic and
financial markets that have impacted countries around
the world. Some countries have bounced back with
impressive growth rates, while others have been slow
to recover. The impact on migrants has varied; some
migrants were forced to return home when their jobs
abroad disappeared, while new waves of migrants were
created.
The backlash from the crisis has led to the
resurfacing of racism, discrimination and intolerance.
During economic downturns, migrants become easy
scapegoats. We must take a strong stand against that.
We need to redouble our efforts to ensure that the
contributions of migrants are apparent not only to us,
but also to the public at large. We have an important
responsibility to get the message right.
Protecting the rights of migrants must be the
cornerstone of all migration policies. We have special
responsibilities towards those migrants who are
most vulnerable, especially undocumented migrants,
women, children, youth and migrants stranded in
humanitarian crises. “[R]ecognition of ... the equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family
is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the
world”. Those words from the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights also apply in particular to the more than
230 million international migrants.
This Dialogue about migration and development
comes at a critical time for the United Nations, as
we embark on what could be the Organization’s
most far-reaching venture to date, that is, defining a

13-49787

03/10/2013

global development agenda that picks up where the
Millennium Development Goals left off. The past seven
years have confirmed that well-managed migration
reduces poverty, adds to human capital and contributes
to global development. In 2012, migrants sent more
than $400 billion in remittance flows, as compared to
$126 billion in official development assistance. They
also contribute to the transfer of knowledge, skills and
technology. As the Assembly debates the parameters of
the new development paradigm, we must ensure that
migration receives its rightful place in the post-2015
development agenda.
This Dialogue provides an important opportunity
to make vital contributions to that endeavour. Over
the course of the next two days, Member States will
bring national experiences to the table, sharing their
perspectives and good practices. They will agree
on many things, and they will no doubt disagree on
others. I trust that their deliberations will be informed
by an acknowledgement of the joint responsibilities of
both countries of origin and countries of destination
to manage migration in an equitable manner. Our
commitment is consistent with the principle of human
dignity and celebrates the transformative power of
human ingenuity, initiative and perseverance; our
shared belief in the rule of law and the need for people
to abide by it; our knowledge that societies that shut
themselves off face stagnation and decline, whereas
those that embrace diversity and opportunity reap the
benefits; and, above all, our determination to improve
the lives of the millions of men, women and children
who are affected by migration on a daily basis.
Change is never simple. It requires patience,
perserverance and a firm belief in the ability of all
people to live together peacefully. We will need to
listen to each other, work together, forge consensus and
break new ground. I am confident that we will rise to
the occasion. We now have before us the text of the draft
declaration, which I understand has already received
our support. I wish to thank the delegation of Mexico
for its valuable contribution to making that document
a reality.
Let me conclude by wishing everyone a fruitful
discussion.
I now call on His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Before I begin, let me
just note that we need to look no further than this

A/68/PV.25

morning’s headlines to see the great importance of this
Dialogue. Dozens of African migrants are reported to
have perished in the Mediterranean Sea after the ship
on which they were travelling sank. I offer my deep
condolences, and I hope that we all take this as another
spur to action.
Seven years ago, we came together in this same
venue and agreed that we could find common ground
on international migration. We agreed that migration,
which for so long had been deemed too sensitive to
discuss, deserved and required our concerted attention.
Seven years later, there is no doubt that we have come a
long way. Today we are united in a joint declaration on
the importance of migration to development, and on the
protection of the rights of all migrants. That progress
has been made possible by the climate of trust that
we established at the Global Forum on Migration and
Development.
The face of migration is changing. Today migrants
are coming from, and going to, more places than ever
before. Almost half of migrants are women. One of
every 10 migrants is under the age of 15, and four of
every 10 migrants are living in developing countries.
Given those complex realities, we need to work
together, with courage and vision, while recognizing
that our actions will have an impact on millions of
women, men and children. In my report (A/68/190) to
the General Assembly, I put forward an ambitious eightpoint agenda to make migration work for all: migrants,
societies of origin and societies of destination alike. Let
me briefly outline my vision.
First, we must do more to protect the human rights
of all migrants. Too often, migrants live in fear of being
victimized as the “other”; of having little recourse to
justice; or of having their wages or passports withheld
by an unscrupulous employer. We cannot remain silent.
We need to eliminate all forms of discrimination against
migrants, including those related to working conditions
and wages. We need to create more channels for safe
and orderly migration, and to seek alternatives to the
administrative detention of migrants.
I call on all Member States to ratify and effectively
implement the relevant international legal instruments,
including the International Labour Organization
Convention on Decent Work for Domestic Workers and
the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families. I also urge Member States to engage with the
relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms.

13-497873/46

A/68/PV.25

Second, we need to lower the costs of immigration
and migration. Global remittances, including to highincome countries, are expected to reach $550 billion
this year and to surpass $700 billion by 2016. Yet every
year, billions of those funds are withheld through
unnecessarily high transaction fees. Moreover,
countless migrants pay their life savings, and those of
their families, to unethical recruiters and end up in debt
bondage. Imagine what we could achieve if those funds
were put to work for development, to send a child to
school, pay for a medical visit or start a small business.
Third, we must end the exploitation to which
migrants are vulnerable, including human trafficking.
Those crimes often perpetuate vicious cycles of abuse,
violence and poverty, to which women and children are
particularly vulnerable. We have a sound international
legal framework to guide us in combating such crimes.
Let us implement those instruments together.
Fourth, we need to address the plight of stranded
migrants. Migrants are often caught in situations of
conflict or natural disaster. My Special Representative
on Migration, Mr. Peter Sutherland, who has
championed this issue, has made a number of concrete
recommendations for protecting migrants affected by
such crises. I am pleased to note that the United States
and the Philippines have offered to lead an initiative to
create a framework that would articulate clear roles and
responsibilities for all involved.
Fifth, we need to improve public perceptions of
migrants. Migrants contribute greatly to host societies.
As entrepreneurs, they create jobs. As scientists, they
are engines of innovation. They are doctors, nurses and
domestic workers and are often the unheralded heart
of many service industries. Yet far too often they are
viewed negatively. Too many politicians seek electoral
advantage by demonizing migrants. While we should
not ignore the challenges that arise from migration,
especially in the context of high unemployment, we
should dispel dangerous myths. But information is
not enough. It takes leadership to reinforce positive
messages about the benefits of migration.
Sixth, we need to integrate migration into the
development agenda. With discussions under way on
the post-2015 development agenda and a new set of
goals for sustainable development, the time is ripe to
present a compelling case about why migration matters
for development. My report entitled “A life of dignity
for all” (A/68/202) includes the positive contribution

4/46

03/10/2013

of migrants as one of the transformative actions of
the post-2015 development agenda. One litmus test
of the new agenda’s inclusivity will be the degree to
which migrants and diasporas are seen as development
partners, and not left behind.
Seventh, we need to strengthen the migration
evidence base. We are fortunate to live in an era of
information, yet reliable data on migration and its
impact on development are often very hard to come by.
Migration policies should be guided by facts, rather
than hunches and hearsay.
Eighth, we need to enhance migration partnerships
and cooperation. The forward-thinking proposals of
civil society now play an integral part in shaping our
actions. We have also made progress in improving the
coherence and coordination of the Global Migration
Group, which brings together 15 United Nations entities
and the International Organization for Migration.
I encourage all parties to continue strengthening
their collaboration. To that end, I have asked my
Special Representative on Migration to meet regularly
with the leadership of the Global Forum on Migration
and Development and the Global Migration Group to
identify shared priorities.
Migration is an expression of the human aspiration
for dignity, safety and a better future. It is part of the
social fabric, part of our very make-up as a human
family. It would be naive to overlook the costs, including
the human costs. Yet even sceptics have to recognize
that migration has become a fundamental part of our
globalized world. It is our collective responsibility to
make migration work for the benefit of migrants and
countries alike. We owe that to the millions of migrants
who, through their courage, vitality and dreams, help
make our societies more prosperous, resilient and
diverse. Let us intensify our work and be sure to follow
up.
Let me express my great appreciation to all the
bodies and organizations that are devoting attention
to this issue. Special thanks as well go to my Special
Representative, whose advocacy and leadership have
advanced the debate and improved our collective
handling of this issue.
Let us all make sure that the 2013 High-level
Dialogue on International Migration and Development
becomes a watershed moment when we show the world
that we can make a difference for the common good and
our common future.
13-49787

03/10/2013

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/68/L.5, entitled “Declaration of the
High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/68/L.5 was adopted (resolution
68/4).
The President: I should now like to consult
members in relation to giving the floor to the following
speakers: the President of the Economic and Social
Council, His Excellency Mr. Néstor Osorio; His
Excellency Mr. Tobias Billström, Chair of the Global
Forum on Migration and Development; Mr. Ian Goldin,
professor at Oxford University, as an eminent person in
the field of international migration and development;
and Mr. Gibril Faahl, Chair of the African Foundation
for Development, United Kingdom, as a migrant
representative.
In my letter dated 2 October 2013, I proposed that
those speakers deliver statements at the beginning of
this morning’s plenary meeting. If I hear no objection, I
shall take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to invite those speakers to make a statement at this
meeting.
It was so decided.
The President: I now give the floor to the President
of the Economic and Social Council, His Excellency
Mr. Néstor Osorio.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia), President of the Economic
and Social Council (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour
and pleasure to address the second High-level Dialogue
on International Migration and Development.
As my predecessors have already pointed out,
migration is a powerful tool for development, and that
is the focus of the Economic and Social Council with
regard to that phenomenon. International migration
should be seen as a driver of global development, given
its important contribution towards the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals and its impact
as a key factor for sustainable development. It
should therefore be duly considered in the post-2015
development agenda.
There is a clear need to better articulate and
strengthen the links between migration and development

A/68/PV.25

and to promote a human rights-based approach in order
to achieve the fullest potential that migration can give
to development. Migration has the power to transform
the lives of individuals and their families, as well as to
shape societies in the countries of origin, transit and
destination.
When governed by rights-based policies,
international migration can be an empowering
experience that affords development benefits for
migrants, their families and their societies in countries
of origin and destination. Migration can contribute
to human and community development through the
accumulation of human capital, greater access by
migrant households to social services and the increased
participation of women in productive employment,
inter alia.
As the President of the General Assembly indicated
a few minutes ago, every year billions of dollars are
sent in remittances. In 2012, migrant families in
developing countries received more than $400 billion
in remittances. Remittances have proved to be a stable
source of private financial resources that can improve
the lives and well-being of tens of millions of families
worldwide.
The impact of the formation of transnational
communities is also increasing. Groups in the diaspora
contribute to strengthening economic and social
ties among countries through their labour, skills,
knowledge, ideas, values and cultures. They facilitate
trade and technology transfer and channel foreign
direct investment.
The first High-level Dialogue on International
Migration and Development recognized migration as
an intrinsic part of global development. As a result,
the Global Forum on Migration and Development was
established as a common platform to share information
and best practices and to promote national, bilateral
and regional cooperation. We have come a long way
since the first High-level Dialogue, in 2006. The fact
that Member States have been able to agree on a joint
declaration as the outcome document of this second
Dialogue (resolution 68/4) proves the significant
progress made and the commitment that exists with
regard to it.
It is time to act more systematically and responsibly
in countries of origin, transit and destination so as to
put in place an action-oriented agenda that creates a
safer and more transparent system of international

13-497875/46

A/68/PV.25

mobility, one that protects the human rights of all
migrants, enhances the positive contribution of
migrants and migration to development, fosters
cohesion in multilateral environments and improves
the public perception of migrants and presents them as
vital members of our societies.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/68/190) has
proposed a set of concrete actions. I wish to highlight
some of them: first, protect and promote the human
rights of all migrants; secondly, reduce the costs
related to migration; thirdly, combat the exploitation
of migrants, including the trafficking in persons;
fourthly, improve the public perception of migrants;
fifthly, give due consideration to migration in the post2015 development agenda; and, sixthly, strengthen and
promote dialogue and cooperation and partnerships on
migration issues.
The overall objective of this event is to identify
concrete measures to enhance the benefits of
international migration and better address the particular
issues it presents in terms of development. The United
Nations should play a fundamental role in the followup to the High-level Dialogue through a coherent,
comprehensive and coordinated approach. Given that
the Economic and Social Council is undergoing an
important review of its functions and mandates, we
should also consider how it can play a significant role
with regard to the complex interrelationship between
migration and development. The Global Migration
Group, made up of 15 United Nations entities and
the International Organization for Migration, should
continue to play a key role and to assess the progress in
the field of migration and development.
We are all aware that migration can provide a
threefold benefit. Destination countries can benefit
because migrants fill skills gaps and make up for labour
and market shortages. Countries of origin can benefit
through financial and cultural transfers. Migrants
themselves can benefit both economically and socially.
Yet migration also has costs. Measures should
be taken to reduce the cost of remittance transfers.
Important steps in that regard could include improving
the regulatory framework for financial services and
increasing transfer services through public-private
partnerships.
I believe that we all need to work on an effective
global agenda while promoting and strengthening
existing institutions and frameworks and improving the

6/46

03/10/2013

governance of migration on the basis of human rights at
the international, regional and local levels. Cooperation
with all those concerned is needed to facilitate the
effective contribution of migration to development.
The President: I thank the President of the
Economic and Social Council for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Tobias
Billström, Chair of the Global Forum for Migration and
Development.
Mr. Billström (Global Forum on Migration and
Development): At the outset, I would like to say that
I was deeply struck by the news of the tragic deaths of
more than 90 migrants, including children and women,
off the coast of the island of Lampedusa, Italy. That event
cannot in a more alarming way illustrate the urgency for
all of us at this High-level Dialogue to commit to action
for a holistic approach to the multifaceted challenges
arising from migration and development.
When we gathered for the High-level Dialogue
on International Migration and Development in 2006,
there was an overwhelming interest in the continuation
of global dialogue on international migration and
development. In response, the Secretary-General
proposed the establishment of the Global Forum on
Migration and Development as a venue for discussing
such issues in a systematic and comprehensive way.
Belgium offered to host the first meeting the following
year. Since then, the Philippines chaired the Forum in
2008, Greece in 2009, Mexico in 2010, Switzerland
in 2011 and Mauritius in 2012. Sweden is the current
Chair of the Forum.
The Global Forum is the most important and
tangible deliverable in the field of migration and
development to emerge from the last High-level
Dialogue. More than 160 Governments have taken part
in these annual meetings, with the goal of maximizing
the development benefits for migration and minimizing
its negative impact, especially on migrants. The Global
Forum has built trust and helped shape the global debate
on migration and development.
The Forum has proved to be a successful and
innovative process for holistic, frank and constructive
dialogue. It offers a space for informal and voluntary
dialogue among Governments on current and
emerging migration and development issues. It is also
a multi-stakeholder platform that brings Governments
together with relevant stakeholders, including agencies

13-49787

03/10/2013

of the Global Migration Group and other international
organizations, civil society and the private sector.
The Forum has been successful as it deals with
substance relating to migration and development. It
is open to all States Members of the United Nations,
although it is a body that operates outside of the
United Nations system. Government teams have been
established around each year’s round-table themes,
where Governments and other stakeholders share
experiences and highlight examples of policies and
practices, and thus learn from each other and establish
partnerships.
Over the years, States and relevant stakeholders
have engaged in constructive dialogue around thematic
issues, such as strategies for minimizing costs and
maximizing human development, labour migration
and mobility, diasporas, remittances, strategies for
addressing irregular migration and enabling regular
migration, the rights of migrants, policy coherence and
mainstreaming, data and research, and the governance
of migration and coordination of dialogue, as well as
ways of involving civil society and the private sector.
As for concrete outcomes of the Global Forum,
we have records of good practice on bilateral labour
arrangements, benchmarks, monitoring and licensing
systems for recruiters and other intermediaries, the
sharing of legal frameworks that enable mobility and
skills circulation, the sharing of practices to facilitate
productive investments and spending on health and
education through remittances, among other things.
When dealing with rights, the discussions in the
Global Forum have focused not only on international
conventions, but also on the shared responsibility to
protect the rights of migrants and to engage with the
measures that are in place so as to enable migrants to
access social and economic rights. In that regard, the
Forum has addressed issues relating to the portability
of pensions, national examples of cost-effective
health-care models and brain waste, as well as broader
integration-reintegration development links. The
approach focuses on the human and social capital of
migrants and its contribution to development, in both
source and receiving countries. From one year to the
next, the Global Forum has successfully discussed
selected themes in greater depth, while identifying new
ones such as South-South migration, links between
environmental change and migration as well as the role
of migration in the post-2015 development agenda.

A/68/PV.25

The substantive work conducted within the Global
Forum between the High-level Dialogue of 2006 and now
bears witness to the success of the Forum in engaging
with the evolving challenges and opportunities shaped
by migration dynamics. That is also underscored in the
recently concluded assessment of the first six years of
the Global Forum, in which some 80 per cent of the
respondents expressed satisfaction with the Forum
process and an overwhelming majority of Governments
considered that the process brought added value
compared to other related forums. Indeed, the everincreasing number of Governments that engage with
the process testifies to that success.
That is a very positive development. By sharing
experiences and lessons learned, the Global Forum
paves way for improvements in policy, programmes
and practice. Ultimately, that will bring benefits for
the countries of origin and destination and for migrants
themselves.
In conclusion, the Global Forum has become a
major deliverable since the last High-level Dialogue.
Its success in enabling dialogue, building trust and
sharing experiences has been documented, and its
working methods, building on informal and voluntary
exchanges, have been critical for that success. As a
global community, we should take further steps to
strengthen such a positive achievement and ensure its
sustainability. The success of the Global Forum cannot
be taken for granted. It requires strong and consistent
engagement by Governments and other stakeholders in
the Forum process.
We therefore encourage Governments to maintain
their ownership of the Forum, to support it, to engage
actively through a broad range of ministries in the
thematic discussions of Government teams throughout
the year and to continue strengthening the development
focus of the Forum. As the current Chair, we are
working in close partnership with the outgoing Chair,
Mauritius, and the incoming Chair, Turkey, to move
the process forward. The Secretary-General’s Special
Representative on Migration, Mr. Peter Sutherland, has
been an important link to the United Nations system,
and his commitment has been crucial for the success of
the Global Forum.
I conclude my statement by inviting the Assembly
to read the Thematic Recollection submitted to this
meeting, for an overview of the issues discussed in the
Global Forum over the years.

13-497877/46

A/68/PV.25

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ian
Goldin, Professor at Oxford University and eminent
person in the field of international migration and
development.
Mr. Goldin: It is a singular honour and a privilege
for me to be here today, and I thank you, Mr. President,
for the invitation. The devotion of two days to this most
important topic is a ray of hope for all of those who are
concerned with migration and development.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the Secretary-General on his report on international
migration and development before us today (A/68/190).
It highlights some of the evidence and provides an
eminently sensible and concrete set of actions that, if
taken forward, will advance the lives of many millions
of people around the world. The progress made by the
Global Forum for Migration and Development and in
other initiatives, such as the recent Dhaka declaration,
are additional rays of light in what is otherwise an
extremely cloudy environment for migration and
development. In country after country, major agenda
items on migration are stalled and in some, even reversed.
As in so many areas, decisions that are politically tough
get bogged down in the gridlock of short-termism.
Overcoming that in a world of hyperconnectivity and
the empowerment of citizens and the pressures of
daily politics and business is a major task for leaders,
requiring them to translate the theories we know into
actions and make the right decisions in a very tough
political environment.
We hope that the gathering weight of evidence
that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
presented last week will unblock the logjam in climate
negotiations. When it comes to trade, we have seen
theoretical evidence and one conceptual framework
after another that prove the importance of the trade
reform stalled in Doha. We cannot allow that to happen
in migration as well. The gathering weight of evidence
on migration and development will, I hope, give strength
to all of those who believe that they can overcome the
constant stream of negative anecdotes and alarmist
rhetoric that so paralyses progress every day.
All evidence points to the fact that small changes
made in migration regimes lead to much more
significant economy-wide, nationwide gains for
both the sending and the receiving countries and, of
course, fundamentally transform the lives of migrants
themselves and their families. There is no other area

8/46

03/10/2013

of economic reform where small incremental changes
can so radically improve the lives of so many for so
long, because such reform affects not only current
generations; it has a lasting effect, as all of us here
today know: we are all migrants. We would not be here,
the United States would not be what it is, nor would
any other society or civilization we know, without
migration. Yet in our daily activities, we forget that.
The founding fathers of economics, John Stuart
Mill, Adam Smith and many others, saw the migration
of peoples as absolutely central to economic growth
and progress. They knew the central place of migration,
and so it is a puzzle that their modern disciples believe
in freedoms in many of the spheres the founding fathers
talked about, but not in this one. Despite the fact that we
have shown that globalization has improved the lives of
more people more rapidly than any other process in the
history of humankind, when it comes to migration we
have the exceptionalism of denial — the exceptionalism
that means that, despite hyperconnectivity and the
flows of all other goods and services, matter and
finance, there are now fewer migrants as a share of
the population of the world than there were before the
globalization process began, and relatively much lower
levels than before the First World War, even though,
of course, the absolute numbers are much higher, as
population growth has increased.
In my book Exceptional People, I take a forensic
look at the evidence. John Galbraith called migration
the oldest action against poverty that humankind has
known and that is repeated in the evidence. The World
Bank has shown in its modelling that changes as small
as 3 per cent in migration flows would increase world
welfare by more than $350 billion. Those numbers are
much larger than commensurate changes in other areas
of economic activity.
Having reviewed all of the evidence, I have no doubt
of the net economic benefits for sending countries,
receiving countries and migrants themselves. Yet none
of that evidence adequately accounts for the dynamic
factors. And it is the dynamic factors that in the long
term will make the difference to all of our futures.
They will make the difference to the dynamism of each
and every one of our societies. We know that from
new evidence coming out of places such as Silicon
Valley, where more than half the start-ups are thanks to
migrants, as are half of the patents in the United States.
As we will see with the latest flourish of Nobel Prizes,
exceptionally gifted people who travel do exceptional

13-49787

03/10/2013

things. But this is not only about exceptionally gifted
people; it is about the unskilled too. Steve Jobs would
not have started Apple if his parents had not migrated,
and so it is in the dynamic effects over the long term.
The problem is not in the evidence; it is in the
politics. The problem is the short-termism and the focus
on local costs and perceptions. The perceptions are not
reflected in the evidence, whether it is that migrants
bring down wages, or lead to reduced incomes, or are
a burden on the tax system, social security systems,
hospital systems or other. We know from the evidence
that the perceptions are not correct.
Yet we also know that we are not winning the
political arguments. It is because, as in trade, the shortterm and local costs tend to be very direct and very
visible and are fanned by rhetoric. And yet the benefits
are national, global and longer-term.
We need leadership. We need evidence that is
able to traverse from the short to the long term. We
need bottom-up actions at the community and national
levels, and top-down actions at the United Nations and
Global Forum levels.
We must accept the real concerns regarding social
cohesion, social security, undocumented workers and
other concerns. Part of that is about accepting that
we cannot place the burden of dealing with migration
on local communities. We see that in the tragedies of
Lampedusa today and in so many other places. Because
the benefits are national and longer-term, it has to, in
the end, be a national responsibility.
Individual communities cannot carry the burdens of
great influxes of people, of schooling, of education and
other matters. The benefits are long-term and national.
Migration issues have to be seen as something that
national Governments take forward. We can all take
small, incremental steps together. Through those steps
and through bottom-up and top-down actions, I believe
we will be able to make a fundamental difference.
The Secretary-General’s eight-point agenda
highlights many of the items that need to be addressed,
namely, the major issues of rights, such as the question
of pension portability and the simple ability of migrants
to carry funds and remittances, which has been talked
about by previous speakers. The data and research need
a much broader perception. Data on migration remain
an orphan of the system. The responsibility is on all
of us for what we are able to do in terms of taking the
agenda forward.

A/68/PV.25

For development, for developing countries and
also for the most advanced countries, there is no more
important debate in the world than this one. The task
is to transform what we know into concrete actions in
small steps, which will take the agenda forward. It is
the right theme at the right place and at the right time. I
wish the Assembly well as it seeks to do the right thing.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Gibril
Faal, Chair of the African Foundation for Development
in the United Kingdom and migrant representative.
Mr. Faal (African Foundation for Development):
Six years after the 2006 High-level Dialogue, in these
times of post-2015 reflection, we gather here again
to discuss migration and development and to seek
transformative new approaches.
As I look out over the Hall, I see migrants
everywhere: itinerant diplomats, first-generation
immigrants and the many descendants of migrants who
constitute diasporas in various parts of the world. The
place is full of them.
Given the fundamental and age-old nexus between
migration and development, it is quite odd that we
have not made as much progress in the field as would
have been natural. As nation States, we operate within
demarcated borders, jealous and protective of the
proud sovereignty they represent. Yet ours is a world
of acres of land and herds of people. It appears that we
sanctify the acres of land and the privileges thereof at
the expense of the herds of people and their humanity.
We defame the scheming migrant who encroaches
on our land and realm, not seeing the aspiring individual
who yearns for a decent and good life for herself and
her family. A change of attitude towards migrants
and diasporas is imperative if a new partnership is to
be established. Partnerships with diasporas need to
be based on a solid foundation where suspicion and
mistrust are allayed and tokenism surpassed.
In these times when we are contemplating
sustainable development goals for our world, one with
Gaia-like global connectedness, we need new diaspora
enlightenment. We need to be comfortable with respect
to the transnational characteristics that define migrants
and diasporas. We need to reaffirm the eternal virtues
of transnationalism.
Some may call us naive. Some many even think
that we are sandal-wearing, bleeding-heart liberals.
But we will have responded to the empirical needs of

13-497879/46

A/68/PV.25

the contemporary fluid and amorphous twenty-firstcentury realities.
As a distinct outcome of the High-level Dialogue,
civil society proposes to collaborate with States during
the next five years for measurable progress on eight
points. We have the eight points in three languages and
multiple colours for members’ delectation.
The action plan is our memorandum of engagement,
our writ of partnership, our deed of action. We
acknowledge and express gratitude to the Assembly
for accommodating civil society and diaspora voices in
the proceedings. We hope that such cooperation will
become deeper and even more cordial in future.
Now we come before the Assembly and ask for its
endorsement of the five-year eight-point action plan.
As Peter Drucker, the Austrian-American management
thinker, would have said: leaders do the right things and
managers do things right. We call on the Assembly, as
leaders, to endorse the outcome (resolution 68/4) of the
High-level Dialogue. It will be a result — real and apt,
true and fair. “I have spent many days stringing and
unstringing my instrument, while the song I came to
sing remains unsung.” That is the poetic caution given
to us by Rabindranath Tagore, the Bengali writer.
In looking forward, I am reminded of the audacious
advice of one of my colleagues at the African
Foundation for Development, a non-governmental
organization involved in funding development through
diaspora actors: “Let States, migrants and diasporas,
together, aspire for full employment.” That vision is big
and noble enough to unite all of those who yearn to see
decent jobs for all. In it, people will have the dignity to
live off of the honest sweat of their brow; youth will be
less receptive to destructive movements and nihilistic
ideologies; and migration itself will become a genuine
choice, rather than dictated by necessity or desperation.
Perhaps the generation to come will not know of the
grotesque horrors and human misery of dysfunctional
migration.
I see migrants with constrained resources and
pressured circumstances extract their families from
poverty within a generation. I see Governments,
multilateral
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations with massive resources and State
privileges admit the self-evident failures of combating
chronic poverty. I am a simple man. I made a deduction:
perhaps those migrants know how to achieve
development.

10/46

03/10/2013

It is indeed true that for many of those in diaspora
making a contribution to the development of the
country of origin and heritage is not seen as work,
or the fulfilment of a political mandate, or even
the heroic response to a twinge of conscience. For
them, development is a way of life — the very stuff
of life — the support of families, communities and
countries. There are 200 million migrants. Millions of
second-generation people in diasporas support 1 billion
people in the developing world. Here we are a veritable
partner for development.
I urge the members of the Assembly, when they go
back home, just as I urge the Secretary-General, when he
reports on this Dialogue, to tell the world that migrants
and diasporas are ready, able and willing; that States
avow a new inclusive attitude towards transnational
migrant diaspora; that we endorse a framework action
plan for partnership. May they tell the world, so that
all development stakeholders hear the news, that in
this very place in 2013, we endorsed the heralding of
a new partnership among migrant disaporas and State
institutions. May they tell the world, so that cynics
and sceptics, realists and optimist alike, will come to
witness the triumphant hopes and indomitability of the
migrant spirit.
The President: In accordance with paragraph
13 of resolution 67/219, I now call on Ms. Catherine
Tactaquin, Executive Director of the National Network
for Immigrant and Refugee Rights, United States.
Ms. Tactaquin (National Network for Immigrant
and Refugee Rights): I am pleased to address the
Assembly this morning as a representative of global
civil society. Our many diverse organizations and
community members concerned with the health, safety,
welfare and happiness of some 232 million in migration
around the world today welcome the opportunity to
share our proposal for a five-year action plan.
The proposal was formalized in November 2012,
has been supported by hundreds of civil society
organizations worldwide and was shared through
the United Nations and with various States as our
contribution to this High-level Dialogue. Since the
beginning of this year, some 600 civil society leaders
and organizations have met in 21 regional and national
events and convened again here in New York in July at
the time of the informal interactive hearing organized
by the Office of the President of the General Assembly
to discuss this proposal and more. This has been an

13-49787

03/10/2013

unprecedented level of participation of civil-society,
certainly since the last High-level Dialogue, in 2006.
Even during this week, some 500 global civil society
partners have continued to confer across the street
in the parallel people’s global action on migration,
development and human rights.
As we noted in the conclusion of July’s interactive
hearing, we are mindful that we now stand at an
important moment, one which we hope will be a
crossroads between simply talking and taking deliberate
action. While we recognize and very much support
strategic thinking and planning to address the complex
factors motivating migration, we are eager to identify
durable solutions, the strongest rights protections and
standards, opportunities for migrant and diaspora
contributions and real partnership. We come here to
help make a difference.
We urge States to support our five-year eightpoint action plan in considering the outcome document
(resolution 68/4). Our hope is that the High-level
Dialogue will launch an action agenda that will be
both reasonable and ambitious. Our proposal focuses
on eight points — that which also fall within the topic
areas of the four round tables.
Briefly, we wholeheartedly support the integration
of migration into the post-2015 development agenda
with a view to addressing the contributions that
migrants make to development in countries of origin
and destination, as well as better planning, policyplanning and coherence that can make migration more
genuinely a choice and not a necessity, with greater
gain than drain. In that context, we support the right
to migrate and the right to remain at home with decent
work and human security.
We encourage models and frameworks to facilitate
the engagement of diaspora and migrant associations
as entrepreneurs, social investors, policy advocates and
partners in setting and achieving priorities for the full
range of human development in countries of origin,
heritage and destination.
We believe there must be reliable, multi-actor
mechanisms to provide assistance and protection to
migrants stranded in distress, beginning with those
trapped in situations of war, conflict or disaster, whether
from natural or man-made causes, and certainly with
the same logic and urgency with respect to the migrant
victims of violence or trauma in transit. The deaths
off the coast of Lampedusa, as well as those of the

A/68/PV.25

hundreds of thousands and more of other migrants who
have lost their lives in similar circumstances, reinforce
that urgency.
Throughout our proposal, we seek models and
frameworks that address the rights and needs of
migrant women in their specificity. Mechanisms
must also consider the best interests of children in the
context of migration, including their rights. We would
like to see benchmarks for promoting the exchange of
good practices and the enactment and implementation
of national legislation to comply with the full range of
provisions in international conventions that pertain to
migrants, even outside the labour sphere, with particular
concern for their rights in the context of enforcement
policies — rights to basic social protections and due
process.
Our proposal envisions a redefinition of the
interaction of international mechanisms of migrant
rights protection in the context of the United Nations
normative framework and institutionalizing the
participation of civil society in future governance
mechanisms.
Finally, but certainly far from the least of our
concerns, we urge the identification or establishment
of effective standards and mechanisms to regulate the
migrant labour recruitment industry, and we strongly
support mechanisms to guarantee a full and broad
range of labour rights for migrant workers. This is in
the context of decent work and ensuring the dignity of
all migrant workers.
Migrant workers’ rights cannot be protected
through informal networks with no monitoring
systems, no genuine participation by civil society and
no reference to the normative framework agreed upon
at the international level.
Those are our recommendations for State action
and, in some areas, action in partnership with civil
society. Our emphasis is on strategic planning, rights
and action, and we hope that States will agree that we
can collaborate on several areas of convergence.
Despite a life often touched by uncertainty,
exploitation or trauma, our migrant families, friends,
fathers, mothers and even children still hold to hopes
and dreams for a better life and a brighter future, not
just for themselves but for their communities, their new
countries and their countries of origin. We members of
civil society share those hopes and dreams and stand

13-4978711/46

A/68/PV.25

ready to support a five-year plan as advocates and
partners: eight points, five years, collaboration and
action.
The President: In accordance with resolution
67/219, this High-level Dialogue consists of four plenary
meetings and four interactive multi-stakeholder round
tables. Round tables one and two will take place today
at 10 a.m. and at 3 p.m., respectively. Round tables three
and four will take place tomorrow, also at 10 a.m. and at
3 p.m., respectively. The round tables will be held in the
Trusteeship Council Chamber. Conference Room 2 will
serve as an overflow room for the plenary meetings,
and Conference Room 1 will serve as an overflow room
for all the round tables.
Round table one, entitled “Assessing the effects of
international migration on sustainable development and
identifying relevant priorities in view of the preparation
of the post-2015 development framework”, will be
co-chaired by Her Excellency Ms. Rita Claverie de
Sciolli, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala,
and His Excellency Mr. Heikki Holmás, Minister for
International Development of Norway.
Round table two will focus on “Measures to ensure
respect for and protection of the human rights of all
migrants, with particular reference to women and
children, as well to prevent and combat smuggling
of migrants and trafficking in persons and to ensure
regular, orderly and safe migration”. It will be
co-chaired by His Excellency Mr. José Antonio Meade
Kuribreña, Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico, and
Her Excellency Ms. Anne Richard, Assistant Secretary
of State for Population, Refugees and Migration of the
United States.
Round table three is entitled “Strengthening
partnerships and cooperation on international migration,
mechanisms to effectively integrate migration into
development policies and promoting coherence at
all levels”. It will be co-chaired by His Excellency
Mr. Patrick Abba Moro, Minister of Interior of Nigeria,
and Ms. Simonetta Sommaruga, Head of the Federal
Department of Justice and Police of Switzerland.
The fourth round table will take place tomorrow
afternoon from 3 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. and will focus
on “International and regional labour mobility and
its impact on development”. It will be co-chaired by
Mr. Shahidul Haque, Permanent Secretary in the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh, and

12/46

03/10/2013

Mr. Konstantin Romodanovsky, Minister, Federal
Migration Service of the Russian Federation.
Members are reminded that tomorrow at 5.30 p.m.,
at the concluding plenary meeting of the High-level
Dialogue, the co-Chairs of the round tables will present
summaries of their discussions.
Additionally, I would like to draw attention to other
organizational matters pertaining to the conduct of
meetings. We turn first to the length of statements. In
order to accommodate everyone inscribed on the lists, I
urge speakers to limit their statements to four minutes,
on the understanding that that does not preclude the
distribution of more extensive texts. I appeal to speakers
to cooperate in that request in view of the limited time
frame, and I also appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a normal speed so that interpretation may
be provided properly. To assist speakers in managing
their time, a light system has been installed at the
speakers’ rostrum and will function as follows: a green
light will be activated at the start of the speaker’s
statement; an orange light will be activated 30 seconds
before the end of the four minutes; and a red light,
which means danger, will be activated when the fourminute limit has been reached.
On that positive note, we will now begin the debate.
Mr. Cokanasiga (Fiji): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, Member States agreed to include
population and migration factors in their development
strategies. They also resolved to promote the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all migrants and to
avoid practices that might increase the vulnerability of
international migrants.
Migrants and migration are relevant to all countries
of origin, transit and destination. These are global
issues with economic and structural imperatives. The
economic causes of migration, concentrations of wealth
and dual labour markets benefit powerful interests and
reinforce power structures that often blame, penalize
and criminalize migrant workers who are caught in that
web. The organizational and political challenge is to
overcome those biased approaches and work towards
facilitating orderly and safe mobility, while recognizing
that greater mobility is inevitable in the twenty-first
century.

13-49787

03/10/2013

A/68/PV.25

Migrants are responsible persons who are trying to
earn a living and provide for their families. Migrants
should be aware of their rights and be protected by
States, as States exercise their sovereign right to
determine who enters, leaves or remains in their
territory. The root causes of migration need to be
openly discussed and addressed so that migration
becomes a matter of choice rather than a desperate
necessity. International economic imbalances, poverty
and environmental degradation, the absence of peace
and security, human rights violations and weak judicial
and democratic institutions are but some of the factors
affecting migrants and international migration.

and plans and the post-2015 development agenda. It
should offer an understanding of the opportunities and
obstacles and ways to explore solutions.

Dialogue among all actors and agencies and the
link between migration and development need to be
clearly presented and openly discussed at the public
and policy-making levels, including with the media
and civil society. Such discussions should lead us
to the construction of lasting solutions based on an
understanding of the shared problems and common
goals, as well as coordinated policies and frameworks.
The positive impact of migration on development
hinges on orderly migration governance that, inter alia,
protects human rights and migrants’ well-being. More
focus should be placed on the human development
potential of migration, including the potential of
improving the lives of migrants and their families,
as well as migration’s contribution to the economic
and social growth and the development of countries.
In that regard, more should be done to address the
negative public perceptions of migrants and to combat
xenophobia and discrimination directed against them.

Migration is one of the critical issues that were not
properly factored into the framework of the Millennium
Development Goals. That has to change, and the time is
now. The puzzle must be addressed boldly, as has been
said. No society can pretend that it has not benefited
from migration. The truth must be the basis for action.

In the context of migration, countries of origin
and destination should recognize their role and
responsibility in providing access to social services,
health care, education and cultural identities. That
broad scope of assistance in migration and development
dynamics should be developed to provide lasting,
just and effective national, regional and international
measures.
The theme “Identifying concrete measures to
strengthen coherence and cooperation at all levels,
with a view to enhancing the benefits of international
migration for migrants and countries alike and its
important link to development, while reducing its
negative implications” opens the door to defining the
role of migration in development. It also promotes policy
coherence and institutional development, including the
factors in migration, into national development policies

I shall stop there. In the interests of time, I invite
delegations to read my statement, which has been
distributed in the Hall.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): The latest tragedy near
the southern Italian island of Lampedusa once again
underlines how critical this High-level Dialogue is
and how much international action against human
trafficking is overdue. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the vision he has laid out.

In addressing the complex interrelationship
between migration and development, we should be firm
and bold in both our individual and collective actions.
First, we need to recognize the constructive role that
migrants play in the development process of origin and
destination countries. On balance, migration is a boon
rather than a bane to the development of all, a fact on
which there should be consensus. It therefore follows
that it should be a matter of self-interest for all to make
sure that the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all migrants, regardless of their migration status, are
respected at all times.
It has now been recognized that women account
for half of all international migrants at the global level.
Most of them are subjected to abuse, with little help
coming their way. In formulating global migration
policies, therefore, priority should be given to ensuring
that the aspect of gender is given the serious attention
it deserves.
With regard to Africa, many of our migrants live
in different parts of the world in search of better living
conditions. Their contributions to the development
processes of their respective countries and to the
continent in general has now become significant. In
many of those countries, the share of remittances in the
gross domestic product has begun to rise. On the other
hand, in many instances, there are reasons for concern
about the loss of skilled personnel and qualified
professionals. It should not be too difficult, given

13-4978713/46

A/68/PV.25

goodwill, to find a formula whereby, without infringing
on individual rights, the interests of countries of both
origin and destination could be accommodated, thus
enabling migrants to play a role in the development
process of their respective countries. We would like
to take this opportunity to thank the International
Organization for Migration for its efforts in that
regard, as well as the Global Forum on Migration and
Development and other member agencies of the Global
Migration Group.
Now that we have embarked on a process of
designing the next generation of global development
goals, we ought to make sure that the significance of
migration for development is accorded due recognition.
In other words, migration should be integrated, as the
Secretary-General so rightly emphasized, into the new
global development framework. It is therefore proper
that the declaration we have just adopted (resolution
68/4) calls for such collective responsibility.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the member States
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (CELAC).
We welcome the holding of this second High-level
Dialogue on Migration and Development, in accordance
with resolution 67/219. We are confident that the
outcome of the meeting will provide guidelines for the
work of the United Nations on the issue of international
migration and its relation to development. CELAC
agrees with the importance of integrating the issue of
international migration into the development agenda.
In an increasingly globalized and interconnected
world, human migrations, in their diverse characteristics
and implications, should be appropriately and
systematically addressed by every State and by the
international community in general, making use of
the valuable contributions of the relevant entities and
actors at every level. It is therefore essential that all
States, regardless of their status as countries of origin,
transit or destination, work together to find solutions
to the challenges that international migrations pose
today. We firmly believe that the most appropriate
framework for a comprehensive approach to migration
and development is that provided by the United Nations,
especially the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, since they are best suited for all States,
in full equality, to synergistically and symmetrically
express their perspectives and interests.

14/46

03/10/2013

CELAC is of the view that we should discuss
the nexus of migration, development and human
rights. Furthermore, we believe that facilitating the
regularization of migration is fundamental to the
human development of migrants, their families and
countries of destination, considered together, and
should be a central element in the deliberations. In that
context, CELAC defends migration as a human right
and the recognition of migrants as persons with rights.
In that sense, we believe that migrants should be at the
centre of States’ policies on migration.
We should realize that it has been difficult to hold a
formal, ongoing discussion of international migrations
at the multilateral level, owing to the differing focuses
of current policies. Therefore, this is a forum where
States, regardless of their situation as a countries of
origin, transit or destination, can participate on an
equal footing. That is why we defend and affirm the
significance of this meeting.
CELAC acknowledges the significant work and
technical cooperation provided by the International
Organization for Migration, the principal promoter of
existing regional forums for discussing the topic of
migration. We also acknowledge the efforts of States
in the Global Forum on Migration and Development
and their support for dialogues on the subject in every
region. However, those efforts have not been enough.
The way they function should be reviewed, particularly
with regard to the contributions of the regions with
developing countries to the Global Forum.
International migration policies require a
comprehensive approach. Human mobility across
national borders affects many areas and policy scenarios.
Among other factors, we should take into consideration
the human rights of migrants and their families, States’
security needs and efforts to combat treatment of
and trafficking in migrants and to facilitate growth
and development, as well as the impact of migration
on highly sensitive areas of social concern such as
health and attention to the most vulnerable groups.
It is also important to address the structural causes
of international migration and to align international
economic policies with current development models.
The members of CELAC recognize the importance
of helping migrants maintain links to their countries
of origin, including their cultures, languages and
traditions. It is also important to highlight the
contributions they make through tourism, investment

13-49787

03/10/2013

and family remittances, among other activities.
However, those cannot be seen as a substitute for foreign
direct investment, official development assistance, debt
relief or other public development policies, since they
represent private financial resources. Member States
should therefore work together to arrive at a formula
that does not affect migrants or States negatively.
The contributions of migrants to host countries’
social and economic development still do not receive the
recognition they deserve. We reiterate our concern about
the continual worsening of working and employment
conditions for migrant workers and their families, as
well as their lack of access to fundamental rights, which
has been aggravated by the current economic, financial
and environmental crisis. It is important to recognize
and address the complex circumstances that migrants
confront on the road to their destination countries, as
well as their increasing vulnerability to violations of
their human rights. We therefore believe it necessary
to ensure that migration is well ordered, secured and
informed.
We reaffirm the importance of effectively
protecting and promoting the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of migrants, especially women
and children, regardless of their migratory status. That
must be done in a comprehensive and balanced manner,
while recognizing the roles and responsibilities of
origin, transit and destination countries and avoiding
approaches that may increase their vulnerability.
It is time to undertake concrete actions to protect
migrant workers, primarily women, so as to ensure their
protection against the various forms of exploitation
and violence they face, and to secure effective means
of ensuring respect for their dignity, fair working
conditions and productive and decent jobs, and
achieving their full integration into the labour force. We
urge all States to ensure that human rights, especially
of vulnerable groups, are promoted, protected and fully
publicized.
While we recognize that Governments have the
right to establish and implement policies to regulate
migration flows into and within their territories, CELAC
regrets the adoption of regulations or provisions, at
whatever level of the Government, that criminalize the
act of migration and criminalize people who migrate
with irregular migratory status. We reiterate the call to
all Member States to end the detention of migrants who
have not committed any crime and to unconditionally

A/68/PV.25

respect their dignity, human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
I am sorry to have spoken more than a minute too
long. The rest of the CELAC statement is available in
the Hall.
I conclude by reiterating that CELAC stands
ready to work together with other Member States and
effectively participate in and contribute to appropriate
initiatives on migration, in particular international
migration. We will continue to do so in a serious and
constructive manner.
Mr. Mosharraf Hossain (Bangladesh): We are
delighted to note a wider recognition of migration
and human mobility as a key driver and enabler
of development at the national and global levels.
We commend the Secretary-General for including
migration as an area for action in his report entitled “A
life of dignity for all” (A/68/202).
Let me briefly share some of Bangaldesh’s
perspective, realities on the ground and expectations.
My detailed statement is being circulated.
Well over 8.5 million of our people live and work
abroad. The majority of them are migrant workers,
especially in the Middle East and Asia. Bangladesh
has emerged as a key player in the global migration
process. Over the past three decades, we have been
experimenting with various modalities for governing
migration for migrants’ well-being. To bring in
greater transparency and accountability, to bring
down the cost of migration and to reduce abuse of
migrants, Bangladesh has adopted Government-toGovernment arrangements. We are experimenting with
a Government-to-Government labour mobility model
for recruiting Bangladeshi workers bound for Malaysia.
It has drastically brought down the cost of migration
and reduced abusive practices.
Let me pose a few questions that need to be
addressed. The world of 2030 and beyond will be
fundamentally different, and what migrants can do to
secure a stable, safe, healthier and productive society
in the world beyond 2015 is a crucial question. Gaps
in collaboration and partnership are equally critical.
Partnerships between Government and non-government,
Government and business, origin and destination
countries — these must be innovative and forwardlooking. Let me flag a few issues for consideration at
the High-level Dialogue.

13-4978715/46

A/68/PV.25

Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
First, migration in its totality and in all development
dimensions has to be integrated into national
development discourses and planning processes. In
Bangladesh, we have already developed Vision 2021,
the long-term perspective for Bangladesh to emerge as
a middle-income country.
Secondly, migration is all about an individual’s
freedom and choice. In some cases, it is a question
of personal survival. The securitization of migration,
therefore, can no longer be optional for development or
human security.
Thirdly, in an uncertain and often conflict-ridden
world, the protection of migrant workers caught in crises
must also be addressed. That is an area we still address
through ad hoc arrangements, as, for instance, in the
recent experience in Libya. In that regard, we value the
contribution made by the International Organization
for Migration (IOM).
Fourthly, the private sector and civil society remain
principal stakeholders in migration governance and
in ensuring safe and dignified migration. Optimal
results and beneficial outcomes from migration can be
achieved only if the State, the private sector and civil
society act in concert.
Fifthly, in all migration-governance initiatives,
migrants’ well-being should remain our utmost priority.
I shall now address a few aspects that Colombo
Process members would like to emphasize for reflection
at the High-level Dialogue.
First, factual evidence has established that
migration has a positive effect on many areas of
development. Today’s globalized world benefits not
only from trade, capital and technology but also from
information and ideas. Many destination countries have
greatly benefited from the talent of migrants, including
in diverse areas of economic importance to destination
countries. We need to ensure that migration is included
in national and sectoral development policies, as well as
in poverty-reduction strategies and national adaptation
action plans.
Secondly, partnership is key in migration and
development and, eventually, for equitable and
sustainable development. To harness that potential,
policy coherence at the local, national, regional

16/46

03/10/2013

and global levels needs to be strengthened through
cooperation and by establishing global partnerships
in the post-2015 framework. Partnerships at the global
or regional levels need to address aspects such as
the recognition of skills, the matching of skills and
jobs, and facilitating training and skills development.
Regional consultative processes, such as the Abu Dhabi
Dialogue, can further deepen cooperation in this area.
Thirdly, we must ensure the protection of migrants
in a holistic manner. Actions in origin countries need to
be matched in destination States in terms of legislation,
enforcement measures, information-sharing and
awareness measures. Greater openness is needed to
allow people to move across national boundaries.
Fourthly, a key objective of the High-level Dialogue
is to identify ways to enhance the benefits of migration
for both origin and destination countries as well as for
migrants. The fundamental human rights of migrants
must be upheld to realize the full benefits of migration.
Indeed, all aspects of labour migration that impact
the dignity, rights, welfare and well-being of migrant
workers need to be addressed. All stakeholders must
be involved in ensuring safe and regular migration.
Bilateral and regional consultations must also be
sustained.
Finally, we value and deeply appreciate the continued
support and contributions of IOM. We also believe that
IOM’s past experience and expertise have the potential
to contribute to global migration management. It would
be important to focus on a paradigm that would set the
scope for the essential mandate of IOM, facilitating its
work within the framework of relations with the United
Nations.
Since 2006, the High-level Dialogue on Migration
and Development has emerged as a useful forum for
Governments to discuss opportunities and challenges
in migration. We would like to emphasize the need for
concrete outcomes towards establishing an effective
monetary mechanism from the Dialogue. That must
be our contribution to the betterment of the lives of
migrants, allowing them a safe, orderly and dignified
migration. We look forward to the developments over
the next two days with expectations.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to convey my appreciation to the President
of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session for
organizing the High-level Dialogue on Migration and

13-49787

03/10/2013

A/68/PV.25

Development. I also sincerely welcome the eminent
persons who have contributed to the dialogue.

working conditions, to give them access to education
and health services and to recognize their status.

I speak on behalf of the least developed countries
(LDCs).

According to the Migrant Workers Convention,
employers must pay all the recruitment fees for foreign
workers, including the unskilled. We should form
a large coalition to set and apply initially acceptable
standards to receive migrants and to give them decent
living conditions. That would have a positive effect on
the well-being of those individuals.

In the past few years, the phenomenon of migration
has increased in scope, grown more complex and had
greater impact. Factors contributing to the changing
scope of the problem are demographic transition,
economic growth, the economic and financial crisis,
climate change and the deterioration of the environment.
We are aware of the role played by factors such as
endemic poverty, unemployment, underemployment,
the lack of socioeconomic prospects, discrimination,
marginalization and even social exclusion.
Migrants generate significant benefits for the host
country and for the country of origin. A recent study
by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development found that migrant workers contributed
more in terms of taxes and contributions to social
security programmes than they received in terms of
individual social services payments. The migration
of highly skilled workers, also called the brain drain,
causes enormous losses in human capital for least
developed countries. That loss could considerably
affect the provision of essential services, tax revenues
and the growth rate of certain countries. Migration
can also generate pressure for an increase in salaries,
causing inflation in the countries of origin.
Migration is a factor whose importance we cannot
underestimate for LDCs in the context of globalization.
The world has made significant progress in integrating
peoples under the momentum of globalization, which
forces the dismantlement of barriers. Opening borders
has been limited to freeing markets for goods and
capital. The integration of the workforce continues
to pose colossal challenges related to the negative
discrimination that affects those workers.
There is a double standard that must be corrected
by making renewed efforts to harmonize the system
of the flow of goods and persons. Providing services
has great potential. We call upon the international
community to take effective measures to liberalize
markets for the free flow of service providers under
Mode 4 of the General Agreement on Trade in Services.
That could also contribute to reducing fraud and human
trafficking. Efforts should be made to eliminate the
exploitation and discrimination experienced by migrant
workers, to treat them fairly, to give them decent

While large foreign firms established in the LDCs
benefit from very generous systems for transferring
their profits to their countries of origin, migrant LDC
workers must pay exorbitant fees for the transfer of their
funds. Transaction costs are extremely high, especially
from Africa and the Pacific, sometimes 12 per cent of
the amount being transferred. According to forecasts,
flows of funds from migrants will be approximately
$414 billion dollars in 2013 and $514 billion in 2016.
That provides an idea of the volume of monies spent
on transaction costs. We must facilitate transfers of
migrants’ funds, because that would have considerable
consequences for the countries of origin. It is up to the
Governments and private service providers to work
towards that end. Countries of destination should make
provisions for the transfer of funds to the migrants’
country of origin without restrictions. The objective is
to reduce the average from 10 per cent to 5 per cent
within five years; that objective has to be reaffirmed.
The question of the use of funds transferred by
migrants merits particular attention as well. It is
important to ensure that funds are used for productive
activities and for development. Countries of destination
should create frameworks for economic activities
conducive to that. Countries of origin should do
likewise. That way, diasporas will be able to provide
information and to work in the countries of destination
to promote integration into the banking system of those
sending and those receiving monies, thereby increasing
their capacity to save and to make investments.
On the margins of the fourth United Nations
Conference on Least Developed Countries, which was
held in Istanbul from 9 to 13 May, least developed
countries signed a memorandum of understanding
on the implementation of a pilot programme in the
framework of the establishment of a body to monitor
the funds transferred by migrants from LDCs. That
pilot programme is intended to collect, analyse and
disseminate data on the transfer of migrants’ funds in

13-4978717/46

A/68/PV.25

four pilot countries. The studies have been carried out
and allow us to define the outlines of that monitoring
body. It is important that the initiative continues to
benefit from assistance required by its development
partners in order to take shape. I would like to take this
opportunity to express the appreciation of the LDCs
group to the Government of Turkey, which provided a
generous grant for launching the monitoring body.
Diaspora networks also serve as channels for
transmitting knowledge, information and know-how
in two directions between the countries of destination
and those of origin. Researchers, scientific experts
and technological experts living abroad made large
contributions to the economic miracles realized by a
number of countries in the second half of the twentieth
century. That phenomenon has transformed the brain
drain generated by migration into a brain gain. Given
the large number of qualified people from LDCs
living abroad, it is important to set up frameworks
for agreement with countries of destination to enable
diasporas to further contribute to the development of
LDCs, including through business and investments.
That could involve the issuance of bonds and the
development of competency-transfer programmes.
In that context, particular attention must be paid to
mobilizing the competencies and the savings of the
diaspora so as to finance productive investments. We
thank the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development for devoting its most recent LDC session
to that issue.
Migration should be considered from a humanistic
and humanitarian standpoint, with a view to improving
the precarious living conditions of millions of migrants.
Global partnerships are best positioned to promote joint
measures towards that objective. The issue should be
integrated into the post-2015 development agenda
and the sustainable development goals, with a view to
promoting the evolution of a world without borders in
which all of humankind will be able to fully benefit from
mobility and face the ongoing challenges. Goals and
targets should be set to reduce the costs of migration,
including recruitment, visas and passports, residence
permits, health insurance, children’s education,
remittances and integrating the production capacities of
LDCs to promote development. Genuine coordination
at the international, regional and subregional levels is
therefore necessary.
Mr. Romodanovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): According to United Nations data, the Russian

18/46

03/10/2013

Federation is the second most popular destination for
migrants, owing largely to some of the consequences of
the fall of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. On
a temporary or ongoing basis, about 11 million foreign
nationals and stateless persons are in Russia. Russia’s
general course of action is determined by its migration
policy. Its main priority is the protection of the rights
and freedoms of both Russians and foreign nationals
who reside in Russia.
Our migration legislation is continuously
undergoing improvement. We have developed and
continue to modernize immigration mechanisms to
attract qualified specialists, for whom a broad array of
preferences and privileges, including tax benefits, have
been introduced. There are specific legal documents for
less-qualified migrants, and there is a particular focus on
developing programmes to assist migrants in adapting
and integrating. We fully honour our humanitarian
obligations on international protection and eliminating
statelessness. The institute for readmission is also
up and running. As a result of those and many other
measures, the number of legally working foreign
nationals has doubled over the past three years, with
a resulting significant decline in illegal immigration.
We have found a way to replace the administrative
detention of illegal migrants. The Secretary-General
spoke about that. New information technologies have
led to full knowledge of the names of all foreign
nationals who have exceeded the authorized duration
of their stay. My country continues to work to promote
greater accountability through the management of
illegal migration flows. In that context, the burden
of responsibility falls first and foremost on unethical
employers.
I can say with certainty that illegal migrants
represent the most vulnerable and defenceless members
of society in States of destination. Many illegal migrants
become victims of crime. In spite of the steps already
taken, including humanitarian measures, there remains
an enormous amount of work to be done to minimize
the problem of illegal migration. I believe that dealing
with the problem should be of interest to both States of
destination and States of origin.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that no single
State is in a position to respond alone to today’s
immigration challenges. An ongoing dialogue focused
on regional specificities is necessary. Such cooperation
continues to develop among the member States of the

13-49787

03/10/2013

Commonwealth of Independent States. Since 2007, the
Russian Federation has been carrying out active work
together with our colleagues as part of the council of
heads of migration services of member States of the
Commonwealth. That platform has visibly demonstrated
its success as an effective cooperation mechanism.
In fact, the Russian Federation, with its partners, is
forming a labour confederation; individual components
have already been successfully implemented as part of
the customs union and continuing Eurasian integration.
The joint statement on behalf of the States parties of
Commonwealth, circulated at the Dialogue by its Chair
from the Republic of Belarus, presents a detailed view
of Commonwealth accomplishments — I recommend it
to the Assembly.
Russia is continuing its active participation in
the work of the Global Forum on Migration and
Development. We are strengthening cooperation with
various United Nations agencies and international
organizations. We are convinced that the dialogue
should always be people-centred. Unconditional
respect for people’s rights and freedoms is enshrined
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and is
a core principle of Russia’s policy. We welcome the
future work of the Global Forum and the dialogue as an
important platform for cooperation on migration issues
and thank the organizers for their efforts.
Ms. Iivula-Ithana (Namibia): At the outset, let me
join others in thanking the President for organizing the
High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development. The rise in global mobility, the growing
complexity of migratory patterns and the impact of
such movements on development have all contributed
to international migration becoming a priority of the
international community.
The theme of this high-level event, “Identifying
concrete measures to strengthen coherence and
cooperation at all levels, with a view to enhancing the
benefits of international migration for migrants and
countries alike and its important links to development,
while reducing its negative implications”, provides an
opportunity for us to reflect on measures to review
current policy options and to seek ways to enhance our
resolve in addressing the plight of migrants. Namibia
attaches great importance to this Dialogue, since it
provides an opportunity to collectively take stock of
our achievements since the most recent High-level
Dialogue, in 2006. However, challenges still remain, and
we should recommit ourselves to addressing them. The

A/68/PV.25

event also provides an opportunity for all stakeholders
to work towards a new global agenda and identify
measures to help promote the role of migrants as agents
of development and make migration an integral part of
the global development agenda beyond 2015.
One important outcome of the 2012 United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development was that we,
as Member States, agreed to mainstream migration
in our development strategies. We also emphasized
the protection of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of migrants to protect them from potential
violence and abuse.
Namibia has made significant strides in updating
the laws that govern migration, particularly with regard
to the protection of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all migrants. We are engaged in a process
of revamping our migration policies with a special
emphasis on key migration management areas, such as
migration and development, facilitation and regulation.
We have also created an interministerial coordination
committee on migration management, consisting of
key State and non-State actors, which is responsible
for policy development. Those measures are aimed
at providing us with a platform to address challenges
related to migration and development. Our effort in that
regard is driven by the realization that the link between
migration and development has the potential to turn
economies around. Sending, transit and receiving
States have all recognized that fact, hence the debate
on the subject has become very critical.
International migration is a global phenomenon
that is growing in scope, complexity and impact. Today,
virtually all countries in the world are simultaneously
countries of destination, origin and transit for
international migrants. Traditional migration patterns
are complemented by new migratory flows, fuelled by
changing economic, demographic, political and social
conditions. Because of the contribution it makes to
development, migration has also become a pressing
policy priority for every State.
Namibia reiterates that, to ensure equity, security
and human dignity, Member States should pursue labour
migration policies that include measures to prevent
abusive practices and promote decent employment for
migrants. Such policies, legislation and programmes
should not overlook the fact that women and children
migrants often find themselves in irregular situations
and in unregulated sectors of the economy, or the
victims of traffickers or smugglers, and thus subject to

13-4978719/46

A/68/PV.25

many forms of violence and abuse. We need to put in
place measures to combat such evils while at the same
time facilitating the flow of lawful migrants.
The countries of origin from which those workers
come and those in which they work must share the
responsibility of lessening the burden on them by
protecting and promoting their rights. That can be
done by enhancing the supervision and regulation
of international labour migration and engaging in
international cooperation in the interest of promoting
migrants’ rights and preventing abusive conditions.
Development gains from migration for the countries
involved and the protection of the rights of migrant
workers are inseparable. Such development gains are
significant not only for the origin countries, but also
for the destination countries where migrant workers
provide their labour.
International migration will remain an important
component of the United Nations development agenda.
Now, as we ponder the post-2015 development agenda
and the formulation of sustainable development goals,
we should ensure that international migration is fully
mainstreamed into them. Moreover, while recognizing
that migrants play an important role in development,
we must encourage our nationals to use lawful channels
of migration so that the risks of exploitation and
trafficking are minimized.
Mr. Bouguerra (Algeria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to begin by associating my delegation
with the statement made by the representative of Fiji on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
This discussion of the issue of migration and its
links to development gives us an additional opportunity
to deepen the dialogue that began in 2006 and
consider new developments. The issue is of particular
importance in view of the consultations on the post2015 development agenda. The World Migration Report
2009-2011 shows that migration is not exclusively a
North-South phenomenon, but one that also flows
South-South, and, with the new migration dynamic,
one that will, in addition, affect the countries of the
North.
It is universally acknowledged that migrant workers
contribute to the economic growth of the countries
where they are employed, given the labour shortages in
those countries. Similarly, migrants’ remittances help
raise the living standards of their families, and therefore
contribute to the fight against poverty. However, the

20/46

03/10/2013

migration of highly skilled workers — or the “brain
drain” — has a negative impact on the development
of many countries of the South. Selective migration
policies accentuate that phenomenon. Moreover, African
countries face other forms of migration constraints on
account of conflicts and natural disasters, in particular
drought and desertification.
As a country of origin, transit and destination,
Algeria, which hosted Africa’s regional meeting on
migration and development in 2006, reaffirms its
commitment to work in good faith on the transnational
issue of migration. The free movement of individuals
should be among our priorities, since that is how the
universal yet unique nature of the respective histories,
cultures and civilizations that have enriched humankind
has been affirmed.
The growing interdependence of our globalized
world cannot accommodate the gulf that, in our region,
separates the northern shores of the Mediterranean and
their fortresses of prosperity from the southern shores
and their poverty. Credible alternatives are needed to
put an end to selective migration policies, especially
those advocating absolute security, the limits of which
are now obvious. In that regard, the urgently needed and
appropriate response to the flows of illegal migrants,
many of whom Algeria welcomes on its soil, is to work
together to create the conditions for shared prosperity.
Algeria calls for the protection of the rights of
migrant communities abroad as an integral part of
human rights, and for migrants’ protection from
discrimination and acts of racism and xenophobia.
Efforts must also be made to quell Islamophobia and
the extremism that uses Islam as a tool and distorts its
universal values and its tolerance.
The multidisciplinary nature of migration, together
with the contrasting interests of countries of origin,
transit and destination, should lead us to develop global
strategies to manage migration. Those can be greatly
enhanced by the implementation of international
instruments, in particular the International Convention
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families and the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its Protocols.
Organized and coordinated migration is within
reach. Working together, we can join our efforts at the
regional and international levels to achieve our common
goal within the framework of a long-term strategy

13-49787

03/10/2013

articulated around the 2015 Millennium Development
Goals.
Mr. Mondlane (Mozambique): Allow me to join
previous speakers in expressing our sincere appreciation
to the President of the General Assembly for the diligent
way he is leading the work of this second High-level
Dialogue on International Migration and Development,
an event of great importance in our efforts to develop
mechanisms for managing migration on a global scale.
As a country with a long migration history,
and as a source of, transit country for and recipient
country of migrants, Mozambique is committed to
strengthening cooperation at all levels to ensure a
balanced management of migration flows, taking into
consideration the existing policies and legal frameworks.
Mozambique, as a source of migrant workers, has its
citizens working in various countries, where they are
a contributing factor to growth and development and a
significant source of revenue for their own families and
their country of origin.
The first High-level Dialogue recognized that
migration was a social phenomenon intrinsic to human
nature and motivated by various dynamics of a cultural,
political, economic and environmental nature.
Mozambique is part of a regional economic
community, the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), the development history of which
has been influenced by the movement of people through
various member States and motivated by, among
other things, social, security and economic reasons.
Therefore, the geographic contiguity of SADC member
States, their historical, sociocultural and linguistic
ties and their interdependence and complementarities
highlight the fact that migration is an inevitable dynamic
in the process of enhancing our regional economic
integration. In that regard, our approach to migration
issues is aimed at consolidating and enhancing the
pillars of regional integration processes enshrined in
the SADC Treaty through increased harmonization of
policies and strategies for the better management of
migration as a factor contributing to the development
of our countries.
Guided by those principles, we have put in place
political and legal frameworks on labour migration
based on, among other things, the SADC Treaty, the
Protocol on Labour and the Protocol on the Facilitation
of Movement of Persons. Those regional frameworks
take into consideration the African Common Position

A/68/PV.25

on Migration and Development, which creates the
necessary enabling environment for integrating and
implementing migration issues in national, regional
and continental development agendas.
The Global Forum on Migration and Development,
established as a follow-up mechanism to the first
United Nations High-level Dialogue on Migration and
Development, has been considered a valuable platform
for streamlining the debate on policies and strategies
related to the management of labour migration and a
way to further align States’ positions. In that regard,
one of the most important aspects to be highlighted
is the acknowledgement that, notwithstanding its role
in and contribution to development, international
migration poses complex challenges resulting from the
dynamics of an increasingly globalized world.
The challenges that have been at the centre of our
concerns are related to the need for better protection
mechanisms for the rights of migrant workers and their
families, including remittance transfers, health care
and safety at work. In the same vein, the management
of migration raises concerns related to the need to
ensure the necessary balance between development
and national, subregional, regional and global security,
considering the fact that the destabilizing activities of
organized criminal groups, including terrorists, are
increasingly undermining national borders and our
security architecture.
In conclusion, we reiterate the call for the
international community to continue to exert its best
efforts to strengthen bilateral, regional and multilateral
cooperation in order to promote legal, safe and orderly
migration.
Mr. Mitchell (Bahamas): I wish, first of all, to
express our deep sorrow, in the Commonwealth of
the Bahamas, regarding the death of those migrants
whom we read about in the news just this morning. It
reinforces the importance of this High-level Dialogue
that we are holding today.
Last Saturday, the Prime Minister of the Bahamas
spoke in the general debate (see A/68/PV.19) and put
migration on the agenda. It is an issue that is front
and centre for the Bahamas. It has the potential, if not
carefully managed, to destabilize all that we are seeking
to create: the best little country in the world. We sit in
the middle of a number of countries that are sources of
illegal migration to us, notwithstanding the best efforts
of all of the Governments concerned: Haiti to the south

13-4978721/46

A/68/PV.25

03/10/2013

of us and Cuba to the west of us. The country to which
migrants go is the United States.

issues. Our future, our survival and our identity depend
on it.

The Bahamas therefore often finds itself in a vortex
that is not of its own making but the consequences of
which we often have to live with and withstand, and we
are often the object of forces and policies that affect us
but that we are powerless to control.

The Bahamas would also like to propose a final
outcome from this High-level Dialogue, namely, the
establishment of a permanent forum on migration and
development. And in conclusion, the Dialogue should
guarantee that the Bahamas will become not a casualty
of migration but rather a beneficiary of documented,
sustainable development.

This High-level Dialogue is welcome as yet another
opportunity to ensure that our friends around the world
are aware of the serious consequences that we face from
illegal migration. The Dialogue is therefore important
to us first and foremost as a means of stopping
undocumented illegal migration to the Bahamas. We
have good relations with all Governments around us.
Governments are, however, sometimes undermined
by forces beyond their control — criminal elements,
ideologies and policies that run counter to common
sense, and the dictates of bad economies. What we
know, however, is that if we have the will to stop illegal
migration, we can. We can do so by ensuring that there
is cooperation against trafficking and smuggling; that
we reject ideology and adopt common sense; and that
we work together to solve the economic problems of our
countries and region.
The Bahamas endorses the views contained
in a statement that was delivered on behalf of the
Caribbean Community region here at the United
Nations regarding important issues that must inform
any efforts to elaborate the post-2015 agenda, including
the development of sustainable development goals,
targets and indicators: first, addressing the root causes
of migration, so that migration is by choice and not by
necessity; secondly, combating the trafficking and/or
smuggling of migrants; thirdly, protecting migrants
against human rights abuses, racism, ethnocentrism
and xenophobia; fourthly, improving data, especially
disaggregated data, on international migration,
including forced migration; fifthly, facilitating the
flow and use of remittances to support development;
and, finally, strengthening dialogue and cooperation
between countries of origin, transit and destination.
The preparatory work on the topic makes it
clear that no sustainable solutions can be achieved
unless the aforementioned imperatives are adopted.
We are committed to working with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
International Organization for Migration, the region
and the world at large to help resolve such migration

22/46

Mr. Batshu (Botswana): At the outset, I would like
to join other delegations in welcoming the convening
of this High-level Dialogue. As a small developing
country faced with many competing needs, priorities
and development challenges, Botswana attaches great
importance to the issues of migration.
Migration is a complex phenomenon common
to all countries and regions, whether they are places
of origin, transit or final destination. At the heart of
the problem we find human beings, who migrate for
various reasons. Since the adoption, in 1990, of the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families
and of the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development in 1994,
the issue of migration remains one of the key challenges
facing the world today, with economic, cultural and
social implications. We recognize that significant
progress has been made since the adoption of the
Conference Programme of Action. But although much
has been achieved, Botswana believes that more needs
to be done to provide a comprehensive solution and
response to the challenges of international migration
and development. We believe that this High-level
Dialogue is a timely and useful forum for expanding
the debate and consultations on the vital issue in
question. The Dialogue also comes at an opportune
time, as the international community moves beyond the
Millennium Development Goals and towards a post2015 development agenda.
Botswana has a rich migration history. Before
independence, our people crossed international borders,
especially to neighbouring countries, mainly in search
of employment. The income earned by migrant workers
was used chiefly to support their immediate and
extended families at home at a time when the country
was classified as among the poorest in the world. In
the post-independence period, Botswana has witnessed
both the continuation of outbound migratory movement

13-49787

03/10/2013

and a significant rise in the number of migrants coming
into the country. Over the years, however, we have
seen changes in demographic trends and dynamics.
Today Botswana has become a net receiver of migrants
attracted by positive economic indicators in successive
decades.
Botswana continues to benefit from regulated
migration, both outbound and inbound. Many of the
migrant workers coming into the country provide
highly specialized services in areas of economic and
social development, such as education, health and
engineering. Conversely, the country continues to deal
with the challenge of the emigration of highly skilled
workers — the “brain drain” — as well as with irregular
migration, which negatively affects the provision of
basic services. While we recognize that international
migration can be a positive force for development in
countries of origin, transit and destination, we are
also mindful of the challenges that many countries,
especially in the developing world, continue to face in
managing international migration. Botswana believes
that a balanced approach is needed in seeking ways
and means to maximize the benefits of migration and
minimize its negative impact. To that end, we remain
open and committed to learning from other countries’
best practices and experiences. I would also like to
stress that international migration should be addressed
not merely from an economic point of view but through
a more holistic approach that fully integrates humanrights and gender-equality perspectives.
As human mobility continues to increase, we share
the view that no country can manage international
migration alone. Botswana therefore recognizes
the importance of international cooperation and
partnerships on migration matters. In that regard, we
continue to work closely with partners such as the
International Organization for Migration in various
areas, which include training immigration and lawenforcement officers on border management and
procedures.
Lastly, in view of the ongoing discussions on the
post-2015 development agenda, we note the emphasis
placed on the role of migration and its contribution to
social, cultural, political and economic development,
as well as the importance of integrating population
dynamics into a future development framework. In that
regard, we believe that the outcome of this High-level
Dialogue will make an important contribution to the
discussions on the post-2015 development agenda.

A/68/PV.25

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Botswana’s
commitment
to
supporting
the
international
community’s efforts to ensure that international
migration issues continue to receive priority attention
at the global level.
Mr. Abba Moro (Nigeria): On behalf of the
delegation of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this important meeting. The timing of this
meeting is apt, given the ongoing global discourse on
the post-2015 development agenda and the potential that
migration presents for the achievement of sustainable
development goals.
Nigeria associates itself with the statement delivered
by the Minister for Defence, National Security and
Immigration of Fiji on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China.
Nigeria believes that a discussion on the nexus
between international migration and development
would assist the global community in addressing the
multifaceted challenges faced by migrants at the points
of origin, transit and destination. There is no doubt
that migration is a key factor in the development of
countries of origin, transit and destination. That has
been amplified by the report of the United Nations
High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the post-2015
development agenda, which clearly placed poverty
eradication and development within the context of
human rights.
Nigeria emphasizes the need for coherence in
migration governance through a comprehensive
framework in order to ensure a coordinated and holistic
approach to the challenges encountered. In that regard,
Nigeria has developed a national policy on migration,
which is awaiting endorsement by the Federal Executive
Council. Furthermore, the National Assembly is
considering a bill to establish a diaspora commission.
Similarly, Nigeria stresses the need for national
authorities to develop migration-data management
strategies, because it is on the basis of evidence and
statistics that migration programmes can be planned to
be more responsive to emerging trends and contextual
issues. In that regard, Nigeria has concluded a strategy
for a common template for migration-data management
that has been validated by stakeholders, including State
and non-State actors. Nigeria therefore emphasizes the
need to establish further intergovernmental platforms
for frequent dialogue on migration as strategies for

13-4978723/46

A/68/PV.25

raising global awareness about the benefits of an
effectively managed migration system and its potential
for development.
Our Government has developed a process of
continuous engagement among Government institutions
and civil society organizations in a periodic national
migration discourse that is aimed at creating the
conditions required for safe, predictable and regular
migration.
Migration has been an integral part of human
history and progress. It has also proved to be a vehicle
for social reconfiguration within the context of human
capital development. Migration provides social benefits
for migrant households in areas such as health care,
education and technological advancement. Promoting
safe and regular migration, therefore, should be an
important focus of this Dialogue by creating more
flexible channels for resource exchange.
In 2012, Nigeria was ranked the fifth-largest
recipient of remittances through the banking sector.
The amount would be higher if informal remittances
were taken into account. That figure amounted to
$20.5 billion in 2012, second to exports as a source
of foreign-exchange inflow and representing 8.1 per
cent of our gross domestic product. The challenge
for Nigeria is to design and establish mechanisms to
encourage remitters to channel some of those resources
into investments that would benefit some of the critical
areas of unmet development needs. Nigeria therefore
calls for a global partnership in that regard.
One vital concern that deserves the immediate
attention of the global community is the impact of
climate change and terrorism on migration. In Nigeria
and the greater Sahel region, cases of floods and
drought in recent times have resulted in increased
numbers of internally displaced persons and huge
economic losses. We are therefore of the view that any
discussion on migration must take into account the
importance of reducing greenhouse emissions and other
parts of the carbon footprint, while acknowledging that
severe changes in the climate will increase internal and
external migration, thereby posing substantial threats
to the security of States.
There have been numerous cases of deportation
of migrants worldwide without consideration for their
human rights. The Government of Nigeria stresses
that migrants, irrespective of their migratory status,
should be treated humanely and their dignity should

24/46

03/10/2013

be respected. We condemn acts, manifestations
and expressions of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance against migrants
and the stereotypes applied to them, including on
the basis of religion or belief. In that regard, Nigeria
recommends that, while migrant smuggling and human
trafficking must be addressed in a comprehensive
way, impunity must also be reduced by the enactment
of national legislation and the strengthening of lawenforcement efforts at the subregional, regional and
international levels.
In our national efforts to provide sufficient
information to prospective migrants and encourage
safe and regular migration, the Government is giving
priority to the establishment of a migrant resource
centre. Nigeria is also providing support to the
“passport to safe migration” project being implemented
in collaboration with the Economic Community of
West African States Commission and the support of the
Spanish Government. Migration is being given priority
attention by the Government in view of the high
incidence of deportation of Nigerians. Consequently,
measures are being adopted to institutionalize the
assisted voluntary return and reintegration programme
so as to better provide settlement services to returned
migrants, humanitarian entrants and refugees. We are
also working to improve access to services, address
special settlement needs and develop the skills and
confidence of returned migrants.
Finally, Nigeria wishes to state that migration is
a natural phenomenon that, if managed properly, has
abundant potential for the exponential development
of countries of origin, transit and destination. Nigeria
affirms that migration is a veritable tool for the
eradication of poverty. We therefore support the call for
its inclusion in the post-2015 development agenda.
Mr. Sonko (Gambia): The Republic of the Gambia
sees migration as a phenomenon that affects developed
as well as developing countries. Its implications,
negative and positive, transcend the borders of any
one nation, as every country in the world is either a
country of origin, of transit or of destination. The
Gambia is therefore cognizant of the integral role that
intraregional migration plays towards reaching its
development goals. The Gambia hosts many nationals
from countries in its subregion and beyond. Those
migrants have spurred development in many spheres,
serving as a catalyst.

13-49787

03/10/2013

If we delve further into this phenomenon, we can
conclude that migration is rewarding to people coming
from countries where the general economic situation is
worse than that in the receiving country. In the case of
the Gambia, both unskilled and highly skilled migrants
aged between 20 and 30 years make up a workforce that
serves an attractive basis for further investment.
The Gambia furthermore recognizes that migration
is not devoid of challenges. There is, in the first place,
the reality of irregular migration, which often involves
our young men and women endangering their lives in
dilapidated boats on the high seas and during long treks
across the desert. In many cases, such daring ventures
are fatal.
Meanwhile, all the migration restrictions in
advanced industrialized economies have provided
further impetus for this new trend. While we all strive
to promote free trade and the free movement of people,
most developed countries continue to place restrictions
on the movement of people.
The Gambia shares the concern of developing
countries that essential skills for the development of
our region and the continent have been lost, further
weakening the already inadequate capacity to meet
our development challenges. Many parts, if not all, of
the continent are affected by a shortage of qualified
human resources, resulting in part from the large-scale
departure of our professionals and university graduates.
Thousands of African professionals, including
medical doctors, nurses, accountants, engineers and
managers, leave our shores each year. While those
movements may have some limited beneficial effects in
developing countries, this “brain drain” is a handicap
for sustainable development. We acknowledge that
migration is an agent of development, but we cannot
ignore the downside of migration and the problem
of the brain drain. The migration of skilled workers,
together with the scarcity of qualified health personnel,
engineers and so forth, highlights one of the biggest
obstacles to our achieving the Millennium Development
Goals in the health, education and agricultural sectors.
We are concerned about the failure of many rich
countries to develop their own human resources and their
preference to instead recruit staff at the international
level. That trend affects developing countries, which
invest a great deal to train their nationals, only to
lose them to rich countries. The migration of such
skilled people therefore creates a paradox of reverse

A/68/PV.25

development. Furthermore, the resultant brain drain
heightens the dependence of developing economies by
compelling us to resort to spending huge resources on
foreign expertise in many areas.
The Gambia acknowledges that the key to a
prosperous country is in the hands of the young
generation. The young constitute a major component
of the country’s human capital. If they are effectively
utilized through gainful employment, they will be
the dynamic drivers of poverty-reduction efforts
through long-term economic growth that creates more
employment.
The Gambia collaborates with other countries,
civil society organizations and development partners,
especially the International Organization for
Migration and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, in addressing illegal
migration. Furthermore, migration and development
have been mainstreamed in our national development
agenda. The Gambia has a coherent poverty-reduction
strategy anchored in the programme for accelerated
growth and employment 2012-2015, which is the
country’s development blueprint.
Another policy initiative of the Government is
the priority employment programme, whose overall
objective is to create an enabling environment for
employment creation in order to develop a skilled,
versatile, dynamic and efficient workforce. The goal
is to provide opportunities for wage-earning and
self —-employment in both the formal and the informal
sectors of the economy. In 2011, a number of young
people graduated from the programme’s pilot phase
training on mobile phone repairs. The green industry
project, launched by His Excellency President Al Hadji
Yahya A.J.J. Jammeh, seeks to create employment for
Gambian youths who risk their lives on the Atlantic
Ocean or trek across the desert in search of greener
pastures in developed countries. The national youth
service scheme, started in 1996, is also designed to
provide the young with employment skills. It emphasizes
self-reliance and is aimed at discouraging illegal
migration. To date, the scheme has trained thousand
of Gambians in almost 22 occupational fields, such as
car mechanics, carpentry, tailoring and so forth. The
national enterprise development initiative is tasked with
empowering young Gambians through the provision of
training in entrepreneurship, giving loans to operate
businesses in the informal sector and business advice
in order to ensure investment sustainability.

13-4978725/46

A/68/PV.25

The Gambia recognizes that remittances are one
of the developmental effects of migration. Although
such effects are felt most acutely at the individual and
household levels, they are also felt at the community and
national levels. Hence, while remittances are privately
earned transfers, they play a significant financial role
in developing nations. The Government of the Gambia
acknowledges the significant contribution Gambians
in the diaspora are making towards the development of
our nation.
In conclusion, it can be seen that the Gambia
recognizes the huge advantages that migration can
confer by spurring development, yet there are immense
challenges that the phenomenon poses to development.
Therefore, with a view to harnessing the potential
benefits of migration and development, the Gambia has
initiated development projects that are proving useful
in curbing illegal migration, on the one hand, and in
improving the skills of our youth and increasing options
for the development of our country and its people, on
the other.
Mr. Billström (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union
and its member States.
Much progress has been made since the first Highlevel Dialogue, in 2006. We have been moving towards
a common understanding of the positive development
impacts of migration. It is clear that migrants and
diasporas can become crucial actors for development.
Not only do they send remittances to families and
communities, they connect countries by investments
and trade. Their skills and ideas enrich economies
and societies. Development is about expanding the
choices of the poor and vulnerable. Today, we can claim
with certainty that the millions of people who move,
contribute to that process. In fact, they are intrinsically
part of it. Mobility brings prosperity.
The potential for even greater contributions is
nevertheless immense. Better-tuned Government
policies and cooperation can make that difference.
Therefore, I believe that we should focus on making
further progress in a few key areas at this Dialogue.
First, as one of the main outcomes, I hope to
hear strong commitments on the role of migration
in the post-2015 agenda in line with the proposal
by the Secretary-General. The new development
agenda needs to recognize migration as an enabler
of the relevant development goals, and we need to

26/46

03/10/2013

develop global partnerships to that end. That will help
national planning commissions, bilateral development
cooperation agencies and multilateral development
agencies to incorporate migration in their development
analysis, plans and monitoring efforts.
Secondly, Governments, employers and civil
society should make stronger and more systematic
efforts to empower migrants. Migrants will bring
about more development if their fundamental rights
are respected, and when they are protected against
exploitation, discrimination and abuse. We need to
enable and facilitate access to rights and ensure the
effective implementation of existing human rights
frameworks.
Thirdly, Governments should assist migrants so
that they can bring value to foreign labour markets
at the actual level of their skills and qualifications. If
we want to bring about greater, positive development
outcomes, Governments should work more closely
on the validation and recognition of skills. We need
to make commitments to reduce the transfer costs of
moving and the costs and risks of recruitment. Working
with employers, we also should improve the match
between the demand and the supply of labour, so that
migrants respond to relevant national labour market
needs.
Fourthly, when we invite migrants to our labour
markets, we need to make sure that they have the means
to integrate. We should better inform the general public
about migrants’ positive contributions. If we want settled
immigrants and members of diaspora communities
to bring more back to their countries of origin, we as
Governments need to facilitate their involvement and
provide adequate tools and frameworks.
Fifthly, for the sake of the migrants’ and their
families’ well-being and the enhanced portability
of skills, we also need to facilitate the portability of
earned pension rights.
Those are five areas where tangible progress is
needed and possible. Those Governments that put
in place enabling legal frameworks and embrace
partnerships are likely to facilitate mobility and
positive development outcomes in all those areas. Wellmanaged migration can thereby bring mutual benefits.
Measures are certainly important at the national
level, and I will provide just one example. In Sweden,
a reform has opened up the Swedish labour market to

13-49787

03/10/2013

people from outside the European Union. It has been
praised by the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) as one of the most liberal to
be initiated by an OECD member. We are also preparing
proposals on enhancing circular migration for mutual
development gains.
National action can feed into regional and global
cooperation. Sweden has taken an active part and
provided leadership in the Global Forum on Migration
and Development. As the current Chair of the Forum,
we build on the experiences of and the progress made
during the time of our six predecessors. In fact, setting
up the Global Forum after the first High-level Dialogue
was that Dialogue’s most tangible result. I fully
support the Secretary-General’s statement that this
forum has become indispensable. Today, it is the only
global platform for the frank, open and trust-building
exchange of experiences and good practices.
In that context, I would like to acknowledge the
significant contributions of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sutherland. I take this
opportunity to call on the Secretary-General, through
his Special Representative, to continue his work on
identifying priorities for international cooperation on
migration, to stimulate the global debate and to initiate
broader analysis and proposals regarding migration in
the post-2015 development agenda. Sweden is ready to
contribute actively to such initiatives. I would also like
to call on the co-Chairs of the Open Working Group on
Sustainable Development to bring the issue of migration
into the Group’s discussions.
All relevant United Nations agencies and the
International Organization for Migration, as the
lead migration agency, should have migration and
development firmly on their agendas. Strengthened
coherence and cooperation within the Global Migration
Group should be encouraged not only in New York and
Geneva, but also in the field.
In conclusion, we as Governments can take
significant steps forward, together with all stakeholders,
to further improve the potential contribution of migrants
to development. It is up to all of us. Let us move ahead
in partnership.
Mr. Khair (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
we extend our most heartfelt condolences and sympathy
to the families of the migrants who perished in the
Mediterranean Sea today off the shores of Italy. This
painful tragedy should compel us to attach even greater

A/68/PV.25

interest to this issue within the framework of our
discussion on international migration and development
here today.
I should like, on behalf of my country, to associate
myself with the statements made on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China and of the African Union.
The delegation of the Sudan appreciates the
opportunity presented by this High-level Dialogue on
the issue of international migration and its integration
into and incorporation as an objective as part of the
post-2015 development agenda. We are aware of the
close relationship between migration and development,
as well as the positive and negative impacts of migration
on States of origin and of destination. This meeting
affords us the opportunity to discuss that issue, too, in
its many dimensions.
In this respect, the issue of migrants’ human
rights in destination countries should enjoy the same
level of attention as efforts and sacrifices to achieve
development in those countries, in conformity with the
principles of international agreements in the field of
human rights.
Another issue of importance for this and other
meetings that will lead to the outcome document is
that of compensation for States that have seen their
workers, their best brains, flee abroad. They should be
compensated in line with the resources that they have
invested in the education of those workers, including
professional training. It should take the form of
assistance to cover the local shortfall and guarantee
that successive generations of qualified professional
workers are available for countries of origin and
destination alike.
The Sudan has adopted a law to prevent the
illicit trafficking of human beings on the basis of
international efforts to regulate safe migration, in
particular international migration. The Sudan complies
with the International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families, which prohibits the use of migrants for
immoral work and the harming and abuse of migrants.
Our history, both recent and distant, shows that
we have always welcomed migrants. We have done
so despite our very difficult economic circumstances
resulting from the unjust unilateral sanctions imposed
against the Sudan and from the fact that our debt was
not written off in conformity with the comprehensive
agreement reached in that regard.

13-4978727/46

A/68/PV.25

The Government of the Sudan attempts to help
Sudanese citizens working abroad. We have set up
agencies to help them and to study the issue of migration
and its impact. We have also established a national
council to assist migrants. All these bodies work under
the direct leadership of the Council of Ministers of the
Sudan.
The Sudan is both a sending and receiving country
of workers and migrants, as well as a country of transit
on various levels. We therefore have a great deal of
experience in the field of migration issues. We attach
high priority to this meeting and have high expectations
of it. International migration in all its forms and the
impact thereof at the national and international levels
should be taken into consideration.
The Sudan stands ready to continue its cooperation
with all the relevant actors in drawing up development
goals for the post-2015 period.
Mr. De Barros Veiga Tavares (Angola) (spoke in
Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation):
On behalf of the executive branch of the Republic of
Angola, let me express my joy at and gratitude for the
invitation to participate in this great event. The topic
under discussion is of pivotal importance, as migration
is a hot topic and a political priority for the majority of
the States Members of the United Nations.
As is well known, migration dates back to
prehistoric times and is motivated mainly by the search
for better living conditions. In the globalized world in
which we operate today, there is a growing migratory
movement caused principally by political, economic
and social factors, and in many cases by armed
conflicts. For several years, the Republic of Angola was
marked by a wave of emigration due to the fratricidal
war that devastated the country and the unfavourable
economic climate that was prevalent then, which led
many Angolans to abandon their country in search of a
better life in various parts of the globe.
With the achievement of peace in 2002, Angola
now enjoys political and social stability, which has
allowed considerable economic growth. That has
resulted in the return of Angolans from the diaspora
and a massive influx of immigrants from various parts
of the world, particularly from Asia, South America,
Europe, the Middle East and Africa. It is our belief
that the influx of immigrants to Angola is useful for
the country’s development, especially in this phase of
national reconstruction.

28/46

03/10/2013

The Angolan Government recognizes that
international migration is part of the globalization
process and is an important factor for the development of
both countries of origin and destination. However, illegal
immigration in Angola is a matter of concern for the
State, especially because of its economic, demographic,
social, cultural and security consequences, which make
it a permanent concern for the Angolan State.
Therefore, in order to strengthen the status of
immigrants, the Republic of Angola is currently
reforming its immigration policy, a legal instrument
of vital importance. The reformed policy will define,
among other things, mechanisms to be observed by
immigrants in order for them to settle legally in Angola
and to find suitable conditions for their integration into
society and their participation in the country’s national
reconstruction process now under way. That will allow
them to earn an income, which will enable them to
improve their living conditions in this increasingly
globalized world.
Angola has been adopting political, diplomatic,
judicial, legislative and administrative measures to
promote and ensure a healthy and smooth immigration
system geared towards economic and social development
and the protection of the human rights of immigrants,
especially among the most vulnerable, including women,
children and the elderly. Among the various measures
being taken, we would like to highlight the construction
of temporary housing centres for illegal immigrants,
the opening of border checkpoints and crossing points,
the issuance of identification documents to border
residents — a laissez-passer, for example — and the
strengthening of bilateral cooperation with States and
international and regional organizations.
However, the fight against illegal immigration and
the promotion of regular migration is the responsibility
of Member States, in partnership with international
organizations and civil society. There is a need to
elaborate and adopt at the highest level an international
strategy for managing migration flows. We believe it
is essential to establish cooperative relations between
countries of origin and/or transit by entering into
bilateral and multilateral agreements on migration. In
that regard, the Republic of Angola has signed bilateral
and multilateral cooperation agreements on migration
issues with several countries, focusing on neighbouring
countries within the context of the Southern African
Development Community and the Economic Community
of Central African States. Moreover, Angola has

13-49787

03/10/2013

been actively involved in regional and international
conferences on the management of migration promoted
by the African Union, the International Organization
for Migration, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the African, Caribbean
and Pacific Observatory of Migration.
In conclusion, we would like to appeal to the United
Nations to support, through its specialized agencies,
Member States and regional organizations in their
policies aimed at efficient management of migration
flows. Similarly, we think it is appropriate to identify
strategies in this forum to allow Member States to
strengthen the exchange of experiences and other
provisions, so that migrants are not seen as a factor
harmful to the socioeconomic policies and cultural
rights of host countries.
Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): First of all,
I would like to express our appreciation for the
organization of today’s High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development.
We associate ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Fiji on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
It is common knowledge that, since the first
High-level Dialogue on International Migration
and Development, some progress has been made in
strengthening cooperation in this area. However, as
yet the most effective mechanisms for the protection of
the rights of all migrants have not been fully engaged,
and awareness of the complex and multifaceted
nature of the migration process is lagging. We hope
that the second High-level Dialogue on International
Migration and Development will provide a broad and
efficient platform for a constructive discussion and an
assessment of the impact of international migration on
sustainable development, and that it will also identify
priorities for the post-2015 development agenda. We
believe we should focus our efforts on searching for
ways to enhance cooperation and partnership on issues
of international migration and the protection of the
rights of migrant workers.
Recognizing the importance of migration issues,
the Government of Tajikistan has been implementing
measures on the legislative regulation of the migration
process. Since 2000, various consistent and targeted
institutional measures aimed at regulating labour
migration have been implemented and the structures
for bodies that manage migration have been developed.

A/68/PV.25

In 2001, the concept of labour migration abroad from
the Republic of Tajikistan was adopted, according to
which labour migration is considered an integral part
of the national employment policy. In 2010, in order to
develop and implement an effective labour migration
policy, the Republic of Tajikistan developed a national
strategy for labour migration abroad for the period 2010
to 2015.
Currently, Tajikistan is implementing a programme
on professional training for labour migrants. Today, their
number has increased from 18 to 71, and their network
covers the entire country. Within this framework,
migrants receive training in 48 of the professions and
trades most in demand.
I would like to dwell on the issue of the social
protection of migrants. A report by Tajikistan on the
implementation of the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and
Members of Their Families was considered by the
Committee on Migrant Workers at its sixteenth session,
held in Geneva on 17 and 18 April 2012. The report
covered work done in the field of the social protection
of the families of migrants. As for the social protection
of migrants from Tajikistan in destination countries,
almost all bilateral agreements between Tajikistan and
the destination countries have provisions concerning
ensuring their rights and their social protection.
I wish to take this opportunity to speak briefly
about a negative aspect of international migration:
human trafficking. As one of the worst forms of human
rights violations and freedoms, human trafficking has
become the most urgent global problem. We believe
that more attention should be paid to strategies aimed
at protecting and rehabilitating the victims of human
trafficking. The formation of regional and international
mechanisms of cooperation to combat human
trafficking is an important component in this struggle.
Tajikistan is gradually implementing a comprehensive
programme on combating human trafficking for 20112013.
In conclusion, I would like to note that my
delegation supports the Declaration adopted by
the General Assembly at this High-level Dialogue
(resolution 68/4). Meanwhile, I wish to underscore that
implementing that declaration successfully depends,
in many respects, on the practical, agreed-upon and
coordinated measures and steps to be undertaken by
both origin and destination countries.

13-4978729/46

A/68/PV.25

Ms.
Dimapilis-Baldoz
(Philippines):
The
Philippines, as a major country of origin for labour, has
pioneered a system of managing temporary contract
migration that has been recognized as a model by the
international community. It is founded on a strong
legal and social framework and is known for its
comprehensive State policy of protection of the rights
of migrants, regardless of their status, which covers all
phases of the migration cycle. It serves as one of the
pillars of the Philippine economic, social and foreign
policy.
Notwithstanding this long-tested model, the
management of the migration of more than 10 million
overseas Filipinos, who live and work in more than
200 countries and annually contribute $22 billion in
remittances, continues to present many development
challenges. President Benigno S. Aquino III has
articulated a development goal of sustainable inclusive
growth and decent work for all, where remittances are
leveraged to spur investment and growth and migration
for work is envisioned as a genuine option, and not a
necessity.
In this High-level Dialogue, the Philippines
supports a migration and development agenda on decent
work for migrants and their families that is anchored
in the shared principles of transparency, responsibility,
accountability and mutuality of benefits. We support the
reconvening of the Dialogue every five years to assess
its progress and to take stock, considering the results
of dialogue processes such as the Global Forum on
Migration and Development, the Abu Dhabi Dialogue
and the Colombo Process, among others.
The Philippines supports a post-2015 migration
and development agenda that can be pursued through
national, bipartite and multilateral arrangements, with
the following objectives. There should be respect for
the universally recognized rights of migrants and their
families, and legal, ethical and orderly migration should
be promoted. The gender dimension and migration’s
impact on women and children, particularly those in
domestic work, must be addressed. Effective access
to fast and fair complaint mechanisms and judicial
remedies is needed. There should be mutual recognition
of skills and professions, and recruitment agencies
must be regulated and monitored. Migrants should
have access to social security and health care, and
social security and pension rights should be portable.
“Return home” programmes are needed for effective
reintegration. Faster, safer and cheaper remittance

30/46

03/10/2013

transfers are important. Assistance to returning
distressed migrants and trafficked persons is required,
as is international action against trafficking and human
smuggling. The United Nations must lead multilateral
action for the fast and safe return of migrants caught in
crisis situations.
With the support of Member States, this post-2015
agenda can be measured through a jointly agreed set
of global migration and development indicators to
establish benchmarks for good practices and decent
work for migrants and their families. With the support
and commitment of all Member States to the post2015 agenda and its global migration and development
indicators for good practices, as well as those from
social partners and civil society organizations, it will
certainly help strengthen the foundation for global
peace, security and prosperity for all.
Mr. El Jaziri (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express, on behalf of Tunisia, our
deep solidarity and sadness over what happened this
morning near Lampedusa, Italy. This type of accident
happens on a daily, monthly and yearly basis, and
thousands of people go missing between Africa and
Europe. Fewer than 300 people were martyred during
the revolution in Tunisia that demanded freedom and
sought to build a new State, but hundreds and hundreds
of Tunisians have gone missing in the waters between
Europe and Africa. We know nothing of their fate. This
issue is a global responsibility for Africa, Europe and
the countries of the rest of the world.
Migration is an important vector for social,
economic and cultural cohesion among nations.
Therefore, support for the contribution of migrants
to development in the countries of origin, destination
and transit and their ability to play a fruitful role in
achieving cultural outreach cannot be separated from
policies that would enhance respect for their rights
and aspirations. Moreover, sound management of
international migration flows and the creation of
relationships through the development of the States
of origin, destination and transit require continued
dialogue and cooperation at the international level on
all issues in order to overcome the challenges posed by
migration that require joint solutions.
The
increase
in
migration
flows
over
time — owing to people’s desire to improve their
living
conditions,
accelerating
technological
advances and social, economic and environmental

13-49787

03/10/2013

transformations — sometimes brings about crises and
challenges that a single country cannot overcome alone.
That requires us to work together to find appropriate
and rapid solutions to those challenges and crises by
listening to others, holding dialogues and cooperating,
while preserving the dignity of migrants and their basic
rights regardless of their legal status.
This approach, which is based on dialogue,
cooperation and the centrality of human rights, has
enabled Tunisia to confront and overcome one of the
most extreme migration crises it has ever experienced:
the flow of 1.2 million refugees of different nationalities
coming from Libya after the fall of the former regime
there during the spring of 201l. Had it not been for
the spontaneous solidarity that the Tunisian society
and Tunisian people expressed, and without the
effective participation of international humanitarian
organizations, the Libyan crisis would have had
repercussions with a significant impact on Tunisia.
The Tunisian authorities dealt with the crisis in an
exemplary way, as has been demonstrated by various
international entities. We distributed those refugees to
various refugee camps that were concentrated in the
south of Tunis for their own benefit, and the camps
were finally closed in June 2013.
It is worth noting here that the changes we have
witnessed in our region over the past few years have had
important repercussions on migration flows and routes.
My country and the entire region are still trying to deal
with the various repercussions and challenges of those
developments, especially at the economic and social
levels. In addition to the challenges related to managing
the crises brought about by regional developments,
and the need to strengthen the link between migration
and development, my country is trying to firmly deal
with the issue of illegal migration, as well as trying to
combat human trafficking and provide assistance to the
victims of such dangerous practices.
Migrants play an important role in supporting
development in their countries of origin in various
fields. Our expatriate community, for example,
contributes 5 per cent of our gross domestic product.
Moreover, their savings constitute 30 per cent of total
national savings. Given the importance of the role of
Tunisian migrants, we have worked on including the
issue of migration in development plans and on giving
Tunisian communities abroad a strategic position that is
in line with national priorities.

A/68/PV.25

In that framework, after the elections of 23 October
2011, Tunisia established a State department for
migration and for Tunisians abroad, tasked with
drawing up a national policy for migration issues
and following up on developing capacities and skills
and coordinating the various mechanisms. We have
also launched a national strategy assigning roles in
dealing with this to all the relevant parties, including
Government organizations, academics and civil society.
Furthermore, we are working on creating a national
observatory for migration.
In that regard, I would like to call on friendly
countries and international organizations to support
our efforts in establishing institutional frameworks for
migration that relate positively to the relevant political
and administrative issues and to national development.
I should note here that migration sometimes has
negative repercussions on development in the form of
the brain drain. In in my country, for instance, it has
exceeded acceptable levels and cannot continue at such
a rate without having serious adverse effects on our
development.
Finally, as I said earlier, we cannot talk about
migration today without mentioning the tragedy of
the thousands of migrants who have gone missing at
sea, a number that includes hundreds of Tunisians. I
believe the time has come for the United Nations to
give that issue the attention it deserves, because it has
devastating humanitarian and social repercussions.
While we are discussing the many challenges and
opportunities involved in international migration and
its repercussions on development, we would like to
reiterate the important role that the United Nations can
play in dealing with issues of international migration
in the post-2015 development agenda. Those challenges
and dangers have to be dealt with, and we must provide
more opportunities in tackling migration and to support
development.
Ms. Pandor (South Africa): I wish to join my
colleagues in offering our country’s condolences to
those who lost loved ones and compatriots in the tragic
boat accident that occurred off the coast of Italy.
With regard to this debate, we would like to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and the various agencies and institutions
that are working on the subject of managing migration
in a humane and orderly fashion. We also welcome the

13-4978731/46

A/68/PV.25

statements made earlier in this meeting on behalf of the
African Union and of the Group of 77 and China.
We meet in this High-level Dialogue united in our
resolve to advance international cooperation in the area
of migration. While we welcome the thematic focus
on migration and development and, of course, all the
deliberations on the subject, we do think it important to
give attention to the challenge of migration in a context
of poverty. How might poor countries convert migration
into an opportunity for development rather than a
further addition to the poor and most vulnerable in
their countries? Many developing countries experience
migration in a context of poverty. How do we include
them in this debate? How do we include their particular
interests?
We must be wary of assuming a nexus between
migration and development, because the two may not
always coincide for the poorest countries of the world.
Some are vulnerable because of inadequate immigration
systems and low levels of security, and they become
victim to criminal syndicates that steal identities and
traffic women and children. We must respond to the
challenges of those countries as well.
We believe this Dialogue must help countries
resolve current migration challenges by creating links
among stakeholders that will lay the basis for effective
solutions to intractable challenges. The Dialogue must
serve as a platform for the renewal of commitments
at the highest level. We hope that the conclusions will
signal a vibrant political commitment to advancing an
agreed international agenda on migration.
South Africa believes the debates on international
migration are appropriately located within the United
Nations system. They should happen here, and
monitoring must be done by United Nations institutions.
We believe that will allow all Members an opportunity
to discuss the subject on an equal footing.
As colleagues have said, migration is a global
phenomenon today. People are moving to seek better
opportunities, and global corporations are looking
for scarce skills and talented individuals. Regular,
documented migration holds benefits for migrants as
well as for countries of origin, transit and destination.
Unfortunately, irregular and illegal migration causes
difficulties for Governments and for migrants. We also
recognize that at times people are forced to migrate to
survive. It is not always a matter of choice.

32/46

03/10/2013

We as a country are not yet fully at a point where
we can effectively administer all these different forms
of migration. The partnerships we build here must help
us to develop our national capacities to administer
our populations and effectively manage international
migration.
We are working, with the support of the African
Union, to help countries develop national population
registers and legal frameworks that will support
migration. We believe our commitment to human rights
is signalled by the manner in which we have received
migrants in our country and in which they enjoy social
welfare, support and legal access to all rights in South
Africa. We must ensure that all our institutions and
our countries have frameworks that support a form of
migration that leads to development. We begin from
the premise that the responsibility of our country is
to fight poverty, inequality and underdevelopment,
while promoting migration policies that will lead to
socioeconomic growth, enhance skills training and
promote human security, global partnerships and
capacity-building to benefit our country and migrants
equally.
Given the reality of and the challenges posed by
international migration, we are of the view that when
managed and supported effectively, international
migration can contribute to social and economic
development. We believe that it is vital that this debate
on migration and development be fully integrated into
the deliberations on the post-2015 development agenda.
We believe migration should infuse all aspects of
development that will make up that agenda.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Ms. Malmström (European Union): On behalf
of the European Commission and the States members
of the European Union (EU), I would like to begin by
expressing my deepest sorrow over the horrible tragedy
that occurred outside Lampedusa this morning. Our
thoughts are with the victims and their families.
The European Union and its member States would
like to reaffirm their commitment to a more consistent,
comprehensive and better-coordinated approach to
migration and development at all levels, and to identify
measures that promote the role of migrants as agents
of innovation and development. Working together on
a global agenda should produce tangible, effective,
inclusive and forward-looking results. Those results

13-49787

03/10/2013

should improve the life of migrants and benefit all
countries and societies.
This High-level Dialogue comes at a crucial moment
in time, as we enter the final phase for implementing the
Millennium Development Goals and begin setting the
post-2015 agenda. It is clear that migration and mobility
have contributed to the achievement of many of the
Millennium Development Goals. There is no doubt,
for instance, that human capital transfers constitute an
important asset for countries of origin. Remittances
and the mobilization of diasporas to assist their country
of origin, notably through investments, constitute
new sources of private financing for development. We
should all continue to work together to lower the cost
of remittances.
We believe that migration has clear links with
development and should be taken into account in the
context of the post-2015 agenda. It is an enabler of
inclusive and sustainable growth and a key aspect
of global population dynamics. Much progress has
been made in recent years, but more systematic and
comparable work is needed to build up a sufficient
knowledge base on how migration can facilitate or
hinder projects aimed at achieving the development
goals. That goes in particular for the sectors most
influenced by demographics and labour issues.
The EU and its member States believe that it is
necessary to broaden the migration and development
agenda in order to better address the full range of
positive and negative impacts that migration can have
on sustainable economic, social and environmental
development. We must continue to adjust and advance
policies to better meet the current challenges and
opportunities. Allow me to mention briefly three
examples.
First, we must recognize that almost half of all
international migrants reside in the global South.
That shows the growing importance of migration
and mobility between developing countries, which
requires greater attention at all levels. That issue in
particular should be addressed in national and regional
development policies.
Secondly, we should acknowledge that refugees and
other persons in need of protection — especially those in
protracted situations — present significant challenges
for host countries and host communities, which should
be addressed through long-term development planning,
targeted initiatives and the enjoyment by refugees of

A/68/PV.25

their rights. Empowerment can enable refugees to make
important contributions to host communities and local
and national economies.
Thirdly, internal mobility within a country, in
particular between rural and urban areas, can produce
opportunities and challenges similar to international
migration. Cities have the potential to act as catalysts
of social change, and exchanges of knowledge and
experiences between cities worldwide should be
promoted.
The EU and its member States believe that all
States should respect the dignity and uphold the human
rights of migrants, regardless of their status. Particular
attention should be given to the most vulnerable, such
as unaccompanied minors, children and victims of
trafficking.
Let us make sure that the protection of migrants’
human rights remains a cross-cutting policy priority.
We should also uphold and ensure the implementation
of the relevant international human rights instruments.
That goes far beyond the individual migrant, and it
also benefits the home society and the society in which
migrants live and work.
I hope that we can all agree that trafficking in
human beings is a serious crime and a gross breach
of human rights. It is crucial that all countries ratify
and implement the international instruments on
preventing and fighting smuggling and trafficking
in human beings. It is equally important to take firm
action against all forms of exploitative employment
of migrants, including by implementing sanctions for
employers of irregular migrants.
Let us also agree today that more attention should be
given to the assistance and protection needs of migrants
caught up in dire humanitarian and life-threatening
situations and distress, whether en route or during their
stay in host countries. Seven years ago, the first-ever
High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development took important steps to improve global
migration management, in particular by establishing
the Global Forum on Migration and Development.
Six successful meetings have now proved that
the Global Forum is a valuable platform for frank and
open discussions. By exchanging experiences and
good practices, it has enabled trust to be built among
participants — Governments, civil society and the
private sector. We should now take one step further

13-4978733/46

A/68/PV.25

and increase the participation of development actors.
We would also like to use this opportunity to recognize
the significant contribution made over the years by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Migration.
The EU and its member States are convinced that
improved coordination and coherence among all United
Nations agencies and other international and regional
organizations that deal with migration and development
are essential. We believe that the International
Organization for Migration, as the leading international
organization in that field, could take a proactive role in
stepping up coordination within the system.
Allow me also to share with the General Assembly
the positive experience of the EU and its member States
in the development and implementation of the Global
Approach to Migration and Mobility. Since 2005, it
has provided a comprehensive framework for external
action on migration. On that basis, the EU and its
member States are engaged in regional and bilateral
dialogues with a broad range of countries and regions.
Within that framework, several EU member States
have concluded and implemented bilateral agreements
and partnerships with several States. We therefore
urge all States to engage in international dialogue and
cooperation to identify shared priorities and strengthen
bilateral and regional migration management.
In order to harness the benefits of migration and
minimize the negative aspects, we need migration to
be well managed. Effective return and readmission
policies are prerequisites for well-managed migration,
and all countries should meet their obligation under
international customary law to readmit their own
nationals and take appropriate measures.
But States and international organizations cannot do
all that alone. We need the effective involvement of the
private sector, employers’ and workers’ organizations,
academia and civil society, and migrants’ and human
rights organizations on the global, regional, national
and local levels.
Let us agree today to address the global challenges
and work to achieve tangible, effective and forwardlooking results. Let us identify ways to improve the
lives of migrants and their families. And let us take
decisive steps to maximize the benefits that migration
and development can bring.

34/46

03/10/2013

Let me conclude by emphasizing the importance
that the EU and its member States attach to this HighLevel Dialogue and its follow-up.
Mr. Barakauskas (Lithuania): I would like to
underline the importance that Lithuania attaches to
the High-level Dialogue on International Migration
and Development in our role as the current President
of the Council of the European Union. In that respect,
allow me to recall the conclusions of the Council of
the European Union and of the representatives of the
European Union member States meeting in the Council
on the 2013 High-level Dialogue on International
Migration and Development and on broadening the
development-migration nexus, which define the
approach of the European Union and its member States
for the High-level Dialogue.
Lithuania fully supports what has been said by
Commissioner Malmström on behalf of the European
Union and would like to add some additional remarks.
The European Union and its member States
are convinced that economic growth can be further
underpinned by policies on global and intraregional
labour mobility, such as policies that ensure more
targeted skills development, skills certification and
skills recognition schemes, especially in sectors where
there is a shortage of trained personnel. For example,
training partnerships could make valuable contributions
to increasing the supply of trained personnel for
both countries of origin and destination in sectors
experiencing labour shortages, through appropriate
mechanisms to match demand and supply.
In that context, it is necessary to consider reviewing
possible barriers to mobility in order to facilitate
economic relations, prosperity and regional integration,
taking into account the situation of the respective labour
markets and security concerns. In our view, regional
organizations are particularly well-placed to facilitate
regional mobility, which is why processes and regional
organizations involved in promoting orderly, regular
and safe intraregional migration and mobility between
developing countries should be supported.
It is crucial to ensure adequate protection,
empowerment and decent working standards for
migrant workers. Potential migrants should receive
accurate information about immigration procedures,
entitlements and obligations. That would contribute to
reducing the vulnerability of migrants.

13-49787

03/10/2013

I would also like to highlight a number of issues
under consideration as perceived from our national
perspective. Lithuania, with its population of 3 million
people, has a very long emigration history and a
strong diaspora. Like many European countries,
Lithuania experienced large-scale emigration at the
beginning of the last century. Migration, especially
emigration, became a reality again during the 1990s,
and especially over the past few years. It is estimated
that today more than 1.3 million people of Lithuanian
origin reside outside the borders of Lithuania, of
whom about 300,000 hold Lithuanian citizenship. The
Lithuanian Government therefore considers it a priority
to exploit that potential by promoting the idea that no
matter where Lithuanians reside, they should have the
opportunity to develop contacts with their country of
origin and contribute to its development.
In our efforts to find innovative ways to engage
the Lithuanian diaspora to participate in State life and
contribute to its development, we have learned some
important points. Lithuania will share its experience in
that regard at round table three tomorrow morning.
Let me conclude by stressing the importance that
the European Union and its member States attach to
this High-level Dialogue and its follow-up.
Mr. Thapa (Nepal): Allow me to extend my warm
felicitations to all of the participants in the High-level
Dialogue. The history of civilization bears testimony to
the fact that there exists a close nexus between migration
and development, but migration has yet to come into
the mainstream of the development discourse. The
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) bypassed it,
and other internationally agreed development goals have
treated it with scant regard. As the world community is
at a juncture as it seeks to advance the attainment of
MDGs and the framing of the post-2015 development
agenda, I believe that this High-level Dialogue will be
a turning point in addressing that important issue and
bringing it into the mainstream process.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Fiji on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China. I would also like to associate
myself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Benin on behalf of least developed countries.
Migration is a common feature of the globalized
and interdependent world, but the question remains
as to whether we want to make that important
phenomenon regular, managed, transparent and

A/68/PV.25

accountable, so as to bring about a win-win situation
for countries of origin and destination alike. Countries
in the North as well as in the South have benefited from
the migration of workers. Destination countries have
filled the gaps resulting from labour shortages in their
efforts to advance their socioeconomic development,
and sending countries have received remittances for
general welfare of the families and households, which
help to reduce poverty and sustain economic growth.
But, migrant workers, particularly those in the low- and
semi-skilled categories, are often subject to various
risks and vulnerabilities. The protection of the basic
rights of the most vulnerable section of the migrant
workers, especially low-skilled workers, women and
girls, in destination countries must therefore be granted
increased attention.
More effective mechanisms of cooperation and
collaboration among sending, transit and receiving
countries at the bilateral, regional and global levels
are needed in order to protect the rights of workers and
take into account their contribution to development.
More analytical studies and research are needed to
fully understand how migration and migrant workers
contribute to the complex developmental process,
beyond growth in gross domestic product (GDP) alone.
For a country like Nepal, where remittances
from migration represent around 25 per cent of
GDP at present and where around 1,500 youths
leave the country for foreign employment every day,
labour migration is an issue of high importance and
urgency. The circular migration of youths to southern
destinations plays an important role in the economy
of Nepal. For us, the safety and security of workers
at all stages of the migration process, issues such as
decent work, regular and market-based pay and the
observance of health standards at work are crucial.
We call on the countries of the North to open up their
labour markets for regularized cyclical migration
in a more transparent manner. We are committed to
maintaining transparency and accountability in the
recruitment process, which need to be supported by a
positive environment in the market place. In particular,
we seek to avoid exploitative and abusive practices by
employers and their middlemen. Lowering the cost of
recruitment and of the transfer of remittances provides
great respite to the workers and facilitates the arrival of
remittance proceeds to poor countries in need.
We emphasize the importance of regional initiatives
such as the Colombo Process and the Abu Dhabi

13-4978735/46

A/68/PV.25

Dialogue, which are aimed at ensuring safe, managed,
predictable and mutually beneficial migration, and we
call for the proper functioning and strengthening of
such initiatives, which serve the interests of origin and
destination countries alike.
At the global level, the Global Forum on Migration
and Development must be strengthened to provide
broader education and awareness-raising on relevant
issues and build confidence in steering through the
migration process in a managed and orderly manner.
Similarly, the role of the international organizations
responsible for migration issues should be geared up,
so as to better serve the legitimate interests of workers.
In order to realize an inclusive, sustainable and
people-centred development approach, as envisaged in
the post-2015 development framework, international
migration and its contribution to the development
of origin and destination countries must be granted
adequate attention. The substantive increase in
the number of migrant workers and in the flow of
remittances is already visible, but at the same time
the development dimension of migration must also be
reflected in the future development agenda.
Ms. Sommaruga (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland was, for a long time, a country of emigration.
Today, in terms of our own population, Switzerland
has one of the highest rates of immigration in the
world. Immigration makes an important contribution
to Switzerland’s economic, social and cultural
development. However, certain voices have begun to
be raised to demand restrictions on immigration to our
country.
On the other hand, there are other European countries
that seek to attract greater numbers of migrants in order
to address the labour shortfalls in many sectors of their
economies. There are, furthermore, those who leave
other European countries particularly impacted by the
financial crisis to try their chances on other continents.
Those examples show that migration is constantly
changing, and with it so too are the demands it places
on States. Today many countries are, at the same
time, countries of origin, transit and destination. That
means that very different countries located on different
continents have things in common when it comes to
migration. We must see this as an important opportunity.
Where there are similarities, there are automatically
opportunities for cooperation. Switzerland fosters
such cooperation through bilateral partnerships on

36/46

03/10/2013

migration. On the basis of a regular dialogue, we carry
out joint projects to learn from each other and to find
solutions to problems.
But important regional or global issues cannot
be dealt with only in a bilateral framework. Such
consideration needs to be complemented by a
multilateral dialogue. With the Bern Initiative of 2004,
Switzerland took the first step in a continuous effort
to foster an open dialogue on immigration. Dialogues
need strong partners. I would like to particularly
acknowledge the important role played by Sir Peter
Sutherland. Civil society’s five-year action plan is a
constructive contribution to the High-level Dialogue.
We also welcome the recent decisions of the Global
Migration Group, and we will continue to support its
work. However, Switzerland would also like to invite
the Group to consider the possibility of a joint debate
on how to make the Group a stronger partner at the
policy and operational levels.
The issue of a dialogue on migration and
development should remain on the United Nations
agenda. We are convinced of the value of regular
high-level dialogues. Such gatherings allow us to take
stock of the situation and set the agenda at the political
level. At the same time, they complement expert-level
processes, such as the Global Forum on Migration
and Development. Switzerland continues to offer full
support to the Forum, which is the main platform for
global dialogue for States.
We fully subscribe to the eight-point programme of
action outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/68/292). Allow me to highlight three aspects of that
agenda.
First, human trafficking is an unspeakable violation
of the most fundamental human rights of women,
children and men. It is our duty to prevent trafficking,
protect victims, punish perpetrators and join our forces
through partnerships. Switzerland is determined to put
an end to that form of modern slavery and has included
those principles in a national action plan.
Secondly, although it is not formally reflected in
the current framework, it is widely acknowledged
that migration has contributed significantly to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
Switzerland will work for the integration of migration
into all relevant fields within the post-2015 framework.

13-49787

03/10/2013

Thirdly, Switzerland endorses the call by the
Secretary-General for better protection of the human
rights of migrants. Around the globe, migrants find
themselves in terrible situations. A pragmatic and
coordinated approach among all actors is needed to
effectively protect the rights of migrants.
Strong international cooperation, as important as it
is, cannot free a State from its responsibilities. States
must bear the primary responsibility for protecting the
rights of migrants and for helping them to integrate,
while expecting them to contribute to the harmonious
life of their communities. Our societies will enjoy
the benefits of migration only when States meet their
responsibilities in that regard.
Mr. Molapo (Lesotho): I would like to start by
extending the sympathies and condolences of His
Majesty the King, the Government and the people of
Lesotho for the tragic events that occurred this morning
off the coast of Lampedusa.
It is a great honour to deliver these remarks on this
very important occasion of the United Nations Highlevel Dialogue. The Dialogue seeks to identify concrete
measures to strengthen coherence and cooperation
at all levels with a view to enhancing the benefits of
international migration for migrants and countries alike,
as well as migration’s important links to development,
while reducing its negative implications. It comes
at an opportune time, when the United Nations is in
the process of formulating the post-2015 development
agenda.
Migration remains an enabler of development at the
family, national and international levels. It touches the
core of families’ lives. The migration and development
discourse traditionally perceived migration as a problem
to be solved by fostering development in the countries
of origin. It has since recognized mobility as an integral
part of development that presents both important human
development opportunities and trade-offs and costs.
Migration has increasingly become multidirectional,
with the South-South migration being at the same level
as North-South flows. Hence, countries of the North
and South face the same challenges when it comes to
governing migration.
Lesotho is both a least developed country and a
landlocked developing country. That geographical
position has exposed Lesotho to a combination of
migration challenges and opportunities. Lesotho’s
economic opportunities have been characterized by

A/68/PV.25

migration since the mid-nineteenth century, when
Lesotho was regarded as a labour reserve for South
African mines. Since then, a significant proportion of
Lesotho’s labour force has been flocking to the Republic
of South Africa as migrant workers. The positive side of
that scenario is evidenced by the magnitude of migrant
remittances to Lesotho, which constitute 25 per cent of
the country’s gross domestic product, exceeding official
development assistance, foreign direct investment and
Southern African Customs Union revenues. In fact, in
real terms, Lesotho is one of the top recipients in the
world.
I cannot be complacent about the gains we make
from remittances received from a single source,
because, on the other hand, Lesotho is losing some
of its best minds in other sectors through migration.
Perhaps it is time for us to balance the scale and devise
strategies for enhancing the benefits of migration for
migrants in countries of origin and destination alike
through, inter alia, the facilitation of other forms of
diaspora contributions.
At this point, I would like to share with
representatives one of the major initiatives Lesotho has
undertaken in its quest to manage migration in a coherent
manner. Lesotho has drafted a comprehensive migration
and development policy. Among the key issues, the
draft policy discusses migration data management, the
“brain drain”, skills development and retention, the
Basotho diaspora, remittances, international migration,
migration and gender, migration and health, informal
cross-border trade, human trafficking, social security
for migrant workers and cross-border management.
Those issues are pertinent to the migration and
development discourse in Lesotho.
I wish to conclude by emphasizing the importance
of the nexus between migration and development.
Migration is a stimulus for human development, and
as such it is fitting to seek to understand migration
dynamics and to embark on comprehensive approaches
to its management. While we respect the freedom of
movement as a fundamental element of human rights,
we also need to cautiously pay attention to the abuse of
those rights.
Mr. Souhail (Morocco) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to commend the President for
having convened this second High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development. It offers the
international community a precious opportunity to take

13-4978737/46

A/68/PV.25

stock of the past seven years, when there has been an
unprecedented mobilization of interest around a subject
that is complex and sensitive, one that essentially allows
us to link the past, present and future of humankind. My
country associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Fiji on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China. Over the past 20 years, the movement of people
has continued to grow, owing mainly to economic and
demographic disparities. According to data provided by
the Population Division of the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs at the United Nations, the number of
international migrants in the world has increased from
155 million in 1990 to 214 million in 2010.
For most of those migrants, the main objective has
remained the same, namely, to find better opportunities
to improve their living conditions and those of their
families, thereby contributing to growth and well-being
both in the countries of origin and in the countries of
destination. Migrants boost the economy and increase
growth in the gross domestic product of the country
of destination. Migration also contributes to mitigating
the problems of unemployment and, to some extent, to
the financing of human and economic development in
the country of origin through remittances.
However, the past decade has also seen major
changes in the breadth, intensity and destination of
migratory flows. Migration from one developing
country to the next remains significant. However, there
are new poles of economic growth in the South, creating
South-South flows. As a country of origin, transit
and destination, Morocco makes the dual effort of
responding to the needs of Moroccans residing abroad,
while also creating strategic, legal and institutional
instruments in line with international standards that
govern the stay of foreigners within its territory.
On 9 September, at a meeting devoted to migration,
His Majesty King Mohammed VI reiterated that the
issue of migration, which is a subject of legitimate
concern and sometimes even of polemical discussions,
should be addressed in a global and humanistic
manner, in line with international law, with greater
multilateral cooperation. In that framework and in
order to implement those goals, a number of meetings
have been held in the form of working groups that
have been charged with examining cases recognized
as refugee cases by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in Rabat. Hearings
for those concerned began on 25 September. We also
had to establish case-by-case assessment criteria for

38/46

03/10/2013

reviewing the legal status of certain groups of foreigners
with irregular administrative status in Morocco.
Humanitarian situations involving vulnerable people
and those who carry out regular professional activities
in our country will be given priority. Other working
groups will be charged with renewing the legal and
institutional framework for dealing with asylum and
the fight against human trafficking. Finally, we will
have to redouble our diplomatic efforts to promote our
country’s stance and propositions in the main forums
addressing migratory flows and to revive regional and
international cooperation in that regard.
Meanwhile, Morocco, which was one of the first
States to ratify the Convention on the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, will
continue to work with the United Nations system to
implement the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework for the period 2012-2016, which includes
refugees and migrants among the groups requiring
special attention. The international dialogue on
migration and development has made significant
progress over the last decade, making it possible
for migration to go from being a taboo subject to an
item that is constantly on the international agenda.
Therefore, thanks to the combined efforts of regional
consultative processes and the international dialogue on
migration conducted by the International Organization
for Migration and other groups, the debate on migration
has become more constant and structured.
However, the Global Forum on Migration and
Development remains merely a place for dialogue
and lacks a concrete implementation tool, given
that much of the process happens outside the United
Nations system. The second High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development will give
Member States an opportunity to bring migration into
the work of the United Nations in an effective manner
as part of the framework of the post-2015 development
agenda. Morocco can only welcome the large-scale
mobilization around that topic.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
At the national level, we have already committed,
with our new immigration policy, to integrate migration
into the global migration strategy and various sectoral
strategies. A similar effort has just been launched
regionally, with the launch two days ago of the African
Alliance for Migration and Development, made up

13-49787

03/10/2013

primarily of those countries that participated in the
Rabat Process. Morocco fully supports humanitarian
action in Africa as one of the main objectives of
its foreign policy. It also supports the work of and a
recent initiative by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for International Migration and
Development in times of crisis.
The international community must increase its
awareness of the humanitarian consequences of acute
crises affecting migrants, as a matter of urgency.
It is also essential that we identify how to help such
persons in accordance with existing international law,
humanitarian principles, and shared responsibility,
which are principles that are generally accepted as
good practices both internationally and nationally. In
the event of migration-based crises, the operational
framework of the International Organization for
Migration is a good starting point.
Allow me, in conclusion, to highlight once again
the urgent need for concerted action by the international
community on migration and development. The process
of globalization began during the previous century with
the mobility of goods, services and capital. The twentyfirst century will be a time of human mobility. The
point is no longer to try to see whether more people
in the world will move to different parts of the world
but, rather, under what conditions those migratory
movements will take place. The recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/68/292) provide a platform that will enable the
success of international migration on the basis of
judicious and fruitful international cooperation. We
believe that such a commitment will allow us to build a
better future for tomorrow.
Mr. Saleh (Eritrea): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate the President for organizing this High-level
Dialogue on International Migration and Development.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report. Many of the global issues that we try to address
at the United Nations have their own complexities
and implications on the policies and actions that we
would like to undertake. In that connection, the topic
of international migration and development is no less
complex. I am convinced that this High-level Dialogue
will allow us to assess the progress and challenges
of international cooperation within migration and
development.
Migration has always been a part of the
human condition. Today, people’s movements are

A/68/PV.25

affected by and have an effect on faster and better
communication. Transportation systems have created
a web of interdependence and interconnectedness,
rendering international migration a complex issue with
overarching global policy implications.
Today’s world is beset by suffering; rising youth
unemployment, unresolved conflicts, political and
economic crises, changing climatic conditions, global
economic inequalities and political inducements are
among the contributing factors to the current rapid
mobility of people from many countries and regions.
International migration is a multidimensional reality
of major relevance for the development of origin, transit
and destination countries. We should not shy away
from addressing it head-on so that it also becomes
a positive force for the achievement of the post2015 development goals. There is a dynamic linkage
between migration and development, and we should be
able to address the challenges and opportunities that
it presents. My delegation believes that building on its
positive implications for countries of origin, transit
and destination represents a way forward. To do that,
reliable statistical data on international migration are
needed, including, where possible, on the contributions
of migrants to development in both origin and
destination countries.
International migration is not without its own
problems or perils, as we heard this morning with
regard to the sad and tragic incident in Lampedusa. I
wish to extend my condolences to the families of the
victims. Many migrants face death, abuse, violence,
horror and exploitation, and may become subjects of
organ harvesting by organized criminal elements.
Human trafficking ought to be combated in all its
manifestations. We need to cooperate and build a
common front by fully implementing the Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons.
While the introduction and consolidation of
coordinated policies for safe, orderly and legal migration
is vital in reducing the vulnerabilities of migrants, I
wish to stress that it is important that, irrespective of
the status of the migrants, they need to be allowed to
live in dignity and security and have their basic rights
respected, including the issuance of residence and
work permits. There is no doubt that migrants’ access
to education, training and decent work would greatly
benefit the theme under discussion. Integration policies
ought to be considered and reinforced. Involuntary, or

13-4978739/46

A/68/PV.25

forced, repatriation cannot be acceptable. Their right to
voluntary return to and reintegration in their country of
origin must also be respected without any interferences
or impediments from any quarter.
As a commitment to the protection of Eritrean
migrants from abuse, including xenophobia and racism,
Eritrea has signed seven of eight core conventions of the
International Labour Organization (ILO). The eighth
convention is in process, and ILO Convention No. 189,
on decent work for domestic workers, has already been
submitted to the competent body for ratification.
Eritrea has a relatively large diaspora population.
In 2007 a dedicated department for Eritreans living
overseas was established within the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, in addition to the existing diplomatic
structures within its embassies and consular missions.
The role and contribution of Eritreans abroad in the
struggle for independence had laid the foundation for
their active participation in the social, political and
economic development of the country.
Eritrea has a long history of changing the road
map from “brain drain” to “brain gain”, as several
professional Eritreans in the diaspora were involved
in the liberation movement. Eritreans in the diaspora
enjoy the rights of full citizenship, including the right
of representation in the National Assembly and the right
to own properties and open businesses. Eritreans in the
diaspora support their families through remittances,
and a significant number of them fulfil the 2 per cent
per cent recovery and rehabilitation tax promulgated
by the National Assembly in 1995. However, there are
campaigns in certain countries that want to impede the
contributions of Eritreans in the diaspora by politicizing
the issue. The diaspora’s rights to contribute to poverty
alleviation and the overall sustainable development
programmes ought to be enhanced, not impeded.
Our major challenge is how best to consolidate
and maximize the benefits of migration and mitigate
its effects. Closer international cooperation aimed at
enhancing the contribution of migrants to development
is needed today more than any time before. I would like
to express my delegation’s commitment to an effective
and inclusive agenda on international migration that
integrates development and strengthens existing
institutions and frameworks at all levels.
Ms. Richards (United States of America): I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly
and those in the Secretariat who have organized this

40/46

03/10/2013

important dialogue. I am very pleased to see many
familiar faces here in New York.
Let me start by recognizing our Mexican colleagues
for their hard work in their efforts to find consensus
and constructive approaches to the challenging issues
surrounding migration and development. We think
their work shepherding the declaration that was agreed
to earlier (resolution 68/4) has set the stage for a
successful and substantive High-level Dialogue.
In my public remarks I have emphasized the
importance of focusing on concrete outcomes that
can move the migration dialogue forward rather than
on divisive institutional and procedural issues that do
nothing to improve the lives of migrants.
Let me briefly mention three areas that I believe
can be advanced by this High-level Dialogue. The
first is migrants in crisis, the second is trafficking in
persons and the third, to a certain extent, is migration
in development.
There are unprecedented numbers of migrants
living and working outside their countries of origin.
We have recently seen several situations where, due to
conflict or natural disaster, large numbers of migrants
have been trapped in crisis situations. Examples include
the unrest in Libya, the earthquake and tsunami in
Japan in 2011, and Hurricane Sandy right here in the
United States last year.
To begin the dialogue, I propose to begin to focus
on lessons learned from situations like the Libya crisis,
where migrants, through no fault of their own, were
stranded without recourse because of events outside
their control.
I applaud the leadership shown by Peter Sutherland,
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative on
Migration, on the issue of migrants in crisis and his
excellent leadership on migration overall. I hope he will
continue to help identify the most challenging emerging
migration issues and work with States and international
organizations to develop innovative solutions.
I have agreed to help lead an initiative with the
Philippines and other interested countries — working
closely with the International Organization for
Migration, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and civil society groups — to
address the situation of migrants in crisis. The process
for that initiative still needs to be engineered, but
I envision a State-led process aimed at examining

13-49787

03/10/2013

the responsibilities of different actors in those crisis
situations, perhaps reporting back on progress during
the 2014 and 2015 meetings of the Global Forum on
Migration and Development. To begin, I ask this Highlevel Dialogue to endorse the idea of us moving forward
informally through such a State-led process. That will
serve as a lasting legacy of this Dialogue.
Trafficking in persons is a key priority for the
Obama Administration, as it has been for prior United
States Administrations and is for many members of
the United States Congress. In acknowledgement of
the importance of the issue, the State Department’s
trafficking office is part of the United States delegation
here today.
We must affirm our commitment to protect
trafficking victims by encouraging increased efforts
to identify them among migrant populations and by
cautioning against conflating them with people who are
smuggled or who migrate without papers. We should
ensure that victims are not penalized as criminals.
Assisting victims requires a global approach that
puts victims at the centre of our response — getting
them out of harm’s way, ensuring that their abusers
are brought to justice and helping them recover and
move forward with their lives. This forum provides the
perfect opportunity to remind Member States that we
have an excellent tool for fighting this modern form of
human slavery in the Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols. While 157
States have ratified the Convention, not enough have
implemented it and put it into practice. This High-level
Dialogue will have a lasting legacy if it can serve as a
catalyst for States that have not ratified the Convention
and its Protocols to do so and for those States that
have ratified the Convention to fully implement it.
That would make a world of difference to victims and
potential victims of trafficking throughout the world.
Thirdly, migration and development are huge
topics. We need to begin to narrow our discussions and
focus on issues within the topics where there is reliable
evidence and a common understanding. An issue
that has broad support now is reducing the overhead
cost associated with sending remittances. Although
the Group of 20’s “five in five” target — to reduce
remittance costs to 5 per cent in five years — was not
achieved in the hoped-for time frame, continuing to
work towards a 5 per cent benchmark could be useful
for the international community and would free up

A/68/PV.25

billions of dollars for those individuals and families
that benefit from remittance flows.
I look forward to a successful High-level Dialogue
and thank all members for their commitment to
bettering the lives of migrants and acknowledging their
contributions to development.
Ms. Del Carmen Guillén (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, my delegation wishes to join
others in expressing our sense of solidarity and our
grief over the sad events near the Italian island of
Lampedusa.
Mexico recognizes that the link between migration
and development is a global challenge. The commitment
of States participating in this second High-level
Dialogue on International Migration and Development
is to reach agreements and undertake subsequent
actions to achieve a more coherent and balanced vision
of migration that starts with the recognition of its
indisputable human dimension and its contribution to
development in countries of both origin and destination.
That is why we welcome the adoption of the declaration
of this High-level Dialogue (resolution 68/4), which my
country promoted and which highlights the importance
of this issue at the United Nations, especially given
its links with development and the need to give it due
consideration in the post-2015 development agenda.
Given the complexity and magnitude of the
migration phenomenon for our country, the Government
of Mexico, led by President Enrique Peña Nieto, has
recognized it as an important priority for the Mexican
State. Its cross-cutting nature necessarily places it
among the major national challenges that Mexico has
identified and seeks to address through an agenda
agreed among the main political forces. The migration
challenges that we in Mexico must respond to today
arise from the specific needs presented by the various
migrant flows.
We have one of the largest diasporas in the world,
and therefore must undertake demanding and extensive
efforts to care for and defend Mexicans abroad. We have
already seen a substantial increase in irregular transit
migration through our territory, with the subsequent
challenges of ensuring migrants’ safety and full respect
for their rights. There has been an increase in the number
of migrants who are particularly vulnerable, which
multiplies the efforts and services needed for legal care
and assistance to them. Finally, the significant growth
in the number of Mexicans returning to the country

13-4978741/46

A/68/PV.25

deserves special mention, as we are approaching a net
migration rate that is close to zero.
On behalf of the Government of Mexico, I would
reiterate that the common effort to link migration and
development requires that we improve our human
rights approach and assume greater responsibility in
it. It requires that we ensure more dignified treatment
for vulnerable migrant populations and that nations
continue to move towards decriminalizing migrants.
It requires that international aid for specific projects
and programmes give greater attention to appropriate,
humane and legal aspects of international mobility.
In that context, we affirm that the conclusions and
commitments arising from this High-level Dialogue
with these aims will have Mexico’s full support.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): The issue of international
migration and development has rightly received
increasing international attention. Indonesia therefore
welcomes the convening of this High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development.
Migration undeniably contributes to the development
both of countries of origin and of destination. Over the
past 20 years, the number of international migrants
has increased significantly. For Indonesia alone, it is
estimated that 4.5 million Indonesians make a living as
migrant workers overseas.
However, despite all its positive impacts, migration,
if not managed properly by both countries of origin
and destination, can pose challenges and possibly
have negative ramifications. For countries of origin,
migration can affect their development programmes
due to “brain drain” and the decreased availability of
highly skilled and talented workers. As for destination
countries, migration can cause an overreliance on
a foreign workforce and generate social problems,
particularly in periods of high unemployment and
economic uncertainty.
While migrants can undoubtedly benefit from many
opportunities provided in the country of destination,
individual migrants and their families are also
vulnerable to possible intolerance, abuse, exploitation
and discrimination. It is therefore important that their
vital role as agents of and contributors to development
be recognized by both countries of origin and of
destination. To that end, there is a need to change
societal mindsets and attitudes in destination countries
so that they treat migrants equally and embrace them
as their own. Similarly, migrants should also adapt to

42/46

03/10/2013

the new environment and communities. They need to
respect and abide by the rules and regulations of the
countries of destination.
It is pertinent to note in this context the important
role and contribution of civil society in finding
responses to the challenges and opportunities posed by
international migration.
Indonesia has its own challenges to face in
addressing the negative impact of migration.
Recognizing the increasing problems faced by our
migrant workers — mainly unskilled and low-skilled
workers, especially women, in informal sectors — the
Government of Indonesia continues to strengthen its
efforts for the promotion and protection of the rights of
migrant workers.
At the national level, we have ratified and
implemented the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
and Members of Their Families. Indonesia calls on
countries that have not yet ratified the Convention to
consider doing so at the earliest possible date. We are
also expanding the scope of protection for our migrants
by establishing citizens’ service units in our embassies
and consulates in various countries, and we have
developed a “zero domestic workers road map 2017” to
promote the safe and regular migration of professional
and skilled workers.
At the regional level, Indonesia continues to promote
and implement the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Declaration on the Protection and Promotion
of the Rights of Migrant Workers. In August, we hosted
a conference in Jakarta on regional cooperation on
international migration, mobility and best practices on
migration and development in South-East Asia.
At the multilateral level, we have actively engaged
in forums on migration issues such as the Colombo
Process, the Abu Dhabi Dialogue, the Global Forum
on Migration and Development and this High-level
Dialogue.
Within the framework of the post-2015 development
agenda, the important role of migrants as agents for
development has been emphasized in the report of
the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post2015 Development Agenda, which the President of
Indonesia had the honour to co-chair. We are pleased
to note that the issue is also given adequate attention
in the Secretary-General’s report entitled “A life of

13-49787

03/10/2013

dignity for all” (A/68/202). In that context, we welcome
the declaration adopted at this High-level Dialogue
(resolution 68/4). We believe it can pave the way to
addressing migration in a coherent, comprehensive,
balanced and action-oriented way, and with a
people-centred focus.
As the declaration clearly reflects, migration
is a transnational process and a cross-cutting and
multidimensional issue by nature. Neither countries
of origin nor countries of destination are in a position
to address every issue of migration alone. Inter-State
cooperation is a must. Partnership in managing
international migration is indeed essential.
Mr. Metnar (Czech Republic): I am pleased to
represent the Czech Republic today at this High-level
Dialogue on International Migration and Development.
The Czech Republic fully supports the statements
delivered earlier by the European Union’s Home Affairs
Commissioner and Lithuania’s Minister of the Interior
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States.
The United Nations High-level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development offers a
unique opportunity to work towards a global agenda on
the issue and to address persisting and new challenges
linked to intemational migration. Since the first Highlevel Dialogue, in 2006, my country has become a
destination for many foreign migrants. We have greatly
valued their contributions to the Czech Republic’s
social and economic development and to our cultural
diversity. The increase in migration has at the same
time posed challenges for our State and has necessitated
new structures and legislation to manage it. We have
started to develop policies aimed at encouraging
foreign nationals to consider the Czech Republic as
a destination. At the same time, we have put in place
integration strategies for legal migrants, which are a
crucial element of migration and mobility.
Our accession to the European Union has linked our
country with the global migration system. We have been
working on international cooperation with countries
of origin as an integral component of building a new
migration system. The external dimension of migration
is a necessary part of overall migration management.
We cooperate with our partner countries in a balanced
manner, taking into account all aspects of migration.
Effective migration management should be based
on intensive cooperation and a partnership approach

A/68/PV.25

in managing migration among the countries of origin,
transit and destination. That partnership approach is
advocated in various regional consultative processes,
such as the Prague Process, which we initiated
during our presidency of the EU. It is essential that
complementarity at this practical, operational level
be combined with a consultative, State-owned,
non-decision-making process. The Global Forum on
Migration and Development, which arose from the
first High-level Dialogue, is a good example of such
cooperation.
As we see it, international migration is without a
doubt a global agenda that needs to be addressed at the
highest possible level. Practical solutions, however, are
most effective when implemented at the regional and
local levels. Such an approach ensures that migration
management is implemented at the level as close
as possible to migrants and has a migrant-centred
approach.
Mr. Al-Hajri (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express the condolences of the State
of Qatar to the families and States of the victims of the
tragic accident that led to the sinking of a ship in the
Mediterranean this morning. Such an accident gives our
meeting today an added importance and responsibility.
Qatar would like to associate itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the representative of Fiji
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
I would also like to express our deep appreciation
and gratitude to Mr. John Ashe, President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, for holding this
High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development. Our dialogue gives the international
community an opportunity to evaluate international
migration policies and programmes and to enhance
international cooperation and partnership in that
field. Moreover, it gives us a chance to offer thoughts
on practical measures for follow-up on integrating
migration and the flow of labour into the post-2015
sustainable development agenda.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
the guests who are participating in today’s important
event. We realize the significance of foreign labour and
migrant labour in achieving sustainable development in
both countries of origin and destination, because they
are an important, effective part of the implementation
of development programmes in their countries of
destination, as well as in raising standards of living,

13-4978743/46

A/68/PV.25

alleviating poverty and supporting socioeconomic
development through the revenue that they send
back home. Moreover, the flow of workers enhances
economic and political ties and deepens friendships
between their home countries and the countries where
they work.
We would like to reaffirm the concept of a common
responsibility between the countries of origin and of
destination and the need to devise approaches that are
balanced and comprehensive in order to care for and
protect the rights of migrant workers and their family
members and to absorb those who return. Since we
realize that xenophobia has been growing in some States,
we affirm the need to continue working to defend the
rights of migrants, as stipulated by international and
regional agreements and instruments, and to keep them
away from politics and racist practices.
Because the State of Qatar cares about guaranteeing
the rights of all residents of the country, with no
exception, our Constitution stipulates equality for all
before the law. Article 35 of the Constitution states that
all persons are equal before the law with no distinction
on the basis of gender, origin, religion or language.
Moreover, article 52 stipulates that every resident of
the country should be given legitimate residency and
must be treated as such according to the law. Article
30 stipulates that the relationship between employers
and employees must be based on social justice. That
right must be guaranteed to all employees without any
distinction as to the nationality of the worker, whether
Qatari or foreign. Furthermore, the Qatari labour law
of 2004 enhanced workers’ rights as stipulated by the
permanent Constitution of the State, which supports
the means of protecting those rights without any
discrimination.
In addition to legislative and constitutional
guarantees for workers’ rights, the State of Qatar
has signed many International Labour Organization
conventions and has taken steps to guarantee respect
for and implementation of those rights by signing
bilateral agreements with many countries of origin in
order to manage their recruitment process from the first
contracting stage until the contract is fulfilled and the
worker returns to his country of origin.
Today, I would like to highlight the progress that
Arab States have made by participating in bilateral,
regional and international dialogues, as well as by
engaging in Arab and international cooperation

44/46

03/10/2013

in international migration. We wish to highlight
the regional consultative meeting on international
migration and development in the Arab region, held in
June in Cairo. It was organized by the Secretariat of
the League of Arab States, the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia, and the International
Organization for Migration in preparation for our highlevel dialogue today.
With regard to challenges facing the Arab world,
including the rise in irregular migration and the
movement of skilled labour to and from the Arab world,
we note the lack of statistics and accurate comparative
studies of the effects of migration on development. We
also note the lack of comprehensive policies to integrate
migrants into the different policies of the State, whether
social, political or environmental. In most cases,
migration from the Arab world is the result of economic
factors such as poverty and unemployment. Therefore,
it is important to make a commitment to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals in a manner that would
affect migration, especially the brain drain. We must
give expatriate communities and youth a larger role
in order to participate in development. We believe in
the need to give expatriate Arab communities a voice
in the dialogue between civilizations and religions,
which would heighten their role as a bridge for cultural,
economic and civilizational interactions between the
Arab world and the countries of destination.
We would also like to note the marked increase in
the number of refugees and displaced persons resulting
from the political conditions and conflicts that some
Arab States are experiencing, such as the continued
Israeli occupation of Arab territories, which imposes
a burden on development plans and requires unifying
international efforts to deal with the problem.
We realize that the issue of migration and the
conditions of migrants and their rights no longer
represents an economic, social and humanitarian
concern alone. It has begun to have a political impact
in the regional and international arenas. We wish to
enhance the positive aspect of Arab migration and
minimize the negative repercussions it could have on
development as well as on scientific and technological
development. We also are aware of the effect of the
Arab brain drain on developmental efforts, and we
would like to integrate the issue in the post-2015
development agenda. We look forward to holding more
regional consultative processes in order to exchange
best practices, lessons learned and experiences so that

13-49787

03/10/2013

we can overcome the challenges we face, keeping in
mind the original characteristics and particularities
in the different areas of the world in terms of needs,
requirements and related problems.
Mr. García (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
Migration is a phenomenon as old as humankind itself.
Humans have always moved from one place to the next,
but only recently has it been considered a problem.
Only recently has it appeared on the national and
international agendas.
The countries of the Central American region,
particularly those of the so-called northern
triangle — Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador — have
a migratory situation that in some academic circles
has been qualified as explosive, as more than 20 per
cent of its population is residing abroad. The case of
El Salvador is paradigmatic, with more than 30 per cent
of our population, approximately 2.9 million, living
abroad. Of those, 2.5 million live in the United States,
which is the primary destination country for Central
American and Salvadoran migration. In the latter case,
the most recent census in the United States shows that
the number of Salvadorans in that country increased by
159 per cent.
Given the magnitude of the migratory flow in
the region and its persistence over time, international
migration has increased in many countries of the
region, consolidating itself as structural phenomenon
for the economic and social life of the countries of
Central America, including El Salvador.
That structure has come about in at least three
different ways. After three decades of intense migratory
flow, its dynamic and nature no longer depend on its
original causes. Today, it depends more on its own
internal logic with relative autonomy. Migration is now
a long-term phenomenon and does not respond to shortterm or circumstantial measures. Short-term measures
can affect its intensity and nature, but will not lead to a
drastic modification.
Lastly, migration and remittances are essential when
it comes to the operation of the economy and society in
those countries. The weight of remittances in the gross
domestic product is such that it is no longer possible
to achieve macroeconomic balance without them. That
also has to do with access by large contingents of the
population to health services, in particular sexual and
reproductive health services, education and housing.

A/68/PV.25

The recognition of the structural nature of
migration produces at least three great challenges to
States — first, a reduction in and the de-incentivization
of forced migration, especially in the structural sense;
secondly, the protection of the human rights of migrants
in both transit and destination countries; and, thirdly, a
strengthening of relations with the diaspora with the
country and communities of origin.
The first objective recognizes the complex factors
that arise in migration and are fundamentally related
to economic factors, such as employment and income,
and social factors, such as the link between individuals
and their community and family, and to the depth of the
relationship between the individual and the migratory
phenomenon, inter alia.
The second objective, de-incentivizing migration,
implies creating the conditions for potential migrants
to put down roots in their home countries and in their
communities. The second objective implies a shift in
the focus of international relations, with the migrant
being viewed independently of his status, as a subject
with rights and thus worthy of the attention of the State.
We are talking about building a new kind of citizenship.
Finally, the third objective makes it necessary
to support the idea that building democracy and
development is possible only if we incorporate the
power of the diaspora, which provides far more than
remittances, for example, investment opportunities and
businesses in the diaspora, the strengthening of migrant
organizations and their links to communities in terms
of social investment and turning “brain drain” into
“brain gain”. In the end, we need comprehensive and
integrating measures, with major efforts in the areas of
coordination among institutions and the participation
of migrants themselves in the achievement of the goals
I have referred to in this statement.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that, following the consecutive meetings of
the Main Committees on Tuesday, 1 October 2013, the
following representatives have been elected Chairs of
the six Main Committees of the General Assembly at
its sixty-eighth session and are accordingly members of
the General Committee for this session.
They are: First Committee, His Excellency
Mr. lbrahim Dabbashi (Libya); the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee),

13-4978745/46

A/68/PV.25

His Excellency Mr. Carlos Enrique García González
(El Salvador); Second Committee, His Excellency
Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo (Senegal); Third Committee,
His Excellency Mr. Stephan Tafrov (Bulgaria); Fifth
Committee, His Excellency Mr. Janne Taalas (Finland);
and Sixth Committee, His Excellency Mr. Palitha
Kohona (Sri Lanka). I congratulate the Chairs on their
elections.

46/46

03/10/2013

The Chairs of the six Main Committees and the
21 Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly having
been elected, the General Committee of the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session has been fully
constituted in accordance with rule 38 of the rules of
procedure.
The meeting rose at 2.40 p.m.

13-49787
