NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

..

~

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SE.CURITE·
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 108
225eme seance

225th meeting

30 dece~bre 1947

30 December 1947

(3.8 PI.)

Lake Success
New York .
z·s ·-trt f

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES_

Two hundr ed and tlyenty-fifth meeti ng

Deux-cent-viugt-cinquieme seanc e
Pages

Page

Provisional agenda . . . .- . . 2821
435. Adoption of the agenda . . . . 2821
436. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian quest ion.. . . . . 2822
437. Remarks on departure of three mem2823
bers of the Security Council . .

434.

4.34.

435.
436.
437.

Ordre du jour provisoire -. . .
Adoption de l'ordre du jour . .
Suite de la discussion de la question
indonesienne . . . . . . . .
Allocution cl l'occasion du depart de
trois membres du Conseil de securite

2821
2821
2822
2823

Docum ents

Docum ents

The following document, relevant to the two
hundred -and twenty-fifth meeting, appears-as
follows:

Le document se rapportant cl la deux-cent-vingtdnquieme seance figure - d~ns la publication
suivante:

Official Records of the Security Council:

Proces-verbau.17 officiels du Conseil de securite:

Second Year, Supplement No. 8, Anne~ 17
Letter from the representative of tIle United
States of America to the Secretary-General
dated 17 Februa ry 1947 and enclosed draft
trusteeship agreement for the former Japanese
mandated islands (document 5/281)

Deu.17ieme Anne~, Supplement No 8, Anne~e 17
Lettre, ell date du 17 fevrier 1947, adressee
par le reprtsentant des Etats-Unis d'Amerique
au Secretaire general et projet d'accord de tutelle sur les iles anterieurement sous mandat
japonais (document S/281/ Corr. 1)

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

DE
PROCES..VERBAIJX OFFICIELS

OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

1'1'0. 108

No 108

DEUXIEME ANNEE

-I"WO ffiJNDRED AND TWENTY·FIFTH
MEETING

DEUX.CENT.VINGT.CINQUlEME
SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, 'New York,
on Tuesday, 30 December 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue aLake Success, New-York,
le mardi 30 decemlJ.re 1947, 15 h8U1'81.

President: Mr. J. HOOD (Australia).

President: M. J. HOOD (Australie).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Unio'n of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, :Betgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiqu~
socialistes sovietiques, Royatime-Uni, Etats-UDi.
d'Amerique.

434. Provisional agenda
(document SI Agenda 225)

434. Ordre du jour provisoire
(docuDlentS/Agenda 225)

1.

a

Adop~ion of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. The Indonesian question:
Work of the Committee of Good Offices in
Indonesia established by the resolution of the
Security Council of 25 August 1947.1

2. La. question indonesienne:
Travaux de la Commission de bons offices
en Indonesie creee par la resolution du Conseil de securite du 25 aout 1947.1

435. Adoption of the agenda

"435. Adoption de l'ordre du jonr

The PRESIDENT: Is there any objection to the
adoption of the agenda?

Le PRESIDENT: Y a-t-il des objections a l'adoption de l'ordre du jour?

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
I have no objection to the adoption of the agenda,
\ but I wish to ask the President exactly what item
2 is. It is stated here to be just the Indonesian
question and there is no reference to any docu,ment. The last time we met, the President told us
that it would be useful to meet today, as we then
thought we should have a report from the Committee of Good Offices. I do not know whether
we have that report or not; I think not.

'Sir AlexanderCADoGAN (~oyaume-Uni): (wer
duit de l'anglais) : Je n'ai pas d'objections al'adoption de l'ordre du jour, rnais je voudrais demander
ap President sur quoi porte.ex~ctem~nt le point 2.
En effet, l'ordre du Jour mdlque slmplement la
question indonesienne, et it n'est fait mention
d'aucun document. A notre precedente seance, le .
President nous a declare qu'il serait utile de nous
reunir aujourd'hui, car nous pensions. alors etre
saisis du rapport de la Commission de bans offices.
J!ignore si nous avons re~ ce rapport, mais je
presume que non.

I

If we do not have it, there is no indication of
the particular aspect of the question that is in-

Dans la negative, rien n'indique de quels aspects
particuliers de la question nous avons a deliberer,

lSee Official Records of the Security Council, Second
.

lVoir les Proces-Verba10: offieiels du Conseil de seC1bnU, Deuxieme Annee, No 83.

b_y...e....ar_,=NO 83.

...........

tended to be discussed, and I submit that 't would
be improper, and probably undesirable, for the
Security Council to have a general discussion on
the Indonesian questio~ while the Committee
which was appointed on our initiative is just getting down ,to its work on the spot.

et j'estime qu'il serait deplace, et probablement
inopportun, de la part du Conseil de securite, d'engager une discussion generale Sur la question indonesienne, alors que la Commission nommee sur
notre initiative commence a peine }ies travaux sur
les lieux.

If there is no report, perhaps the President
would be able to tell us what the prospects are
with regard to the date at which that report will
be received, 50 that we could then have a later
meeting to discuss it. I say this only because there
is .no indication of any particular aspect of the
problem with which we should occupy ourselves
today; I think it is undesirable to have a general
discussion at this time.

Si le rapport n'est pas encore parvenu au Conseil, le President pourra peut-etre nous dire a
quelmoment on devrait le recevoir, de scrte que
nous pUlssions prevoir une seance ulterieure pour
l'examiner. Je fais cette remarque uniquement
parce que'rien ne precise de quels aspects partkuliers du probleme nous avons a noos occ1.1per al!jourd'hui. ]'estime qu'il est inopportun, a l'heure
actuelle, d'ouvrir une discussion generale. .

The PRESIDENT: I should explain that the inclusion of this item on the agenda was, of course,
in anticipation of the possible receipt of the interim
report which had been pl'omi:<j by the Committee
of Good Offices. The Security Council will recall
that at the two hundred and twenty-fourth meeting1- we had a communication before us from the
Chairman of the Committee of Good Offices indicating that a telegraphic report might be available in New York on or about 22 December. That
report did not arrive. There has been a further
communication since. then from the Chairman of
the Committee of Good Offices, which I think the
members of the Security Council now have before
them, indicating that a fuller report is in preparation and will be forwarded by air mail on .its early
completion.

Le PRESIDENT (tmduit de !'anglais) : Je dois
preciser que le point en question l:l. ete inscrit a
l'ordre du jour en prevision de la reception eventuelle du rapport provisoire que la Commission de
bons offiees a promis. Les membres du Conseil de
securite se rappellent qu'a la deux-cent-vingt-quatrieme seanCe, l n011s avions reeu du President de
la Commission de bonsoHices tine communication annon<;ant qu'un rapport envoye par telegramme nous parviendrait ici, a New-York, aux
environs du 22 decembre. Ce rapport ne nous est
pas parvenu. Depuis, nous avons re<;u du President de la Commission debons offices une nouvelle communication, que.1es membres du Conseil
de securite ont, je crois, entre les mains, et qui
nous apprend que la Commissio~ prepare actuellement un rapport plus complet qui, aussitot termine, nous sera transmis par la poste aerienne.

I understand that is the latest,advice from the
Committee, and it is of course unknown whether
the report is actually on its way. It certainly has
not been received. In the circumstances, I find no
reason to dissent from the observations of the
representative of the United Kingdom.

TelIes sont les dernieres nouvelles re<;ues de la
Commission et nous ignorons evidemment si le
rapport est eHectivement en route. Ce qui est certain, c'est qu'il ne vous est pas.parvenu. Dans ces
conditions, je ne vois aucune raison de ne pas
souscrire aux observations du rep:J:esentant du
Royaume-Uni.

The'purpose of the inclusion of this item on
the agenda was merely to safeguard the position
of the Security Council in case the report had
been received in time for distribution and study
by members of the Security Council.

En inscrivant le point en question a l'ordre du
jour, on a seulement voulu eviter que le Conseil de
securite fUt pris au depourvu au cas ou le rapport
aurait ete re<;u en temps utile pour etre 'distribue
aux membres du Conseil de securite dans des
delais leur permettant de l'etudier.

The agenda was adopted.

.

L'ordre d$t jour est adopte.

436•. Continuation of the discussion on
the Indonesian question

436. Suite de la discussion de la question
indonesienne

The PRESIDENT: Ks there are no observations
on item 2 of the agenda, I propose that we should
adjourn discussion of the Indonesian question.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Comme le
point 2 de l'ordre du jour ne donne lieu a aucune
observation, je propose d'ajourner l'examen de la
question indonesienne.
.

The President's proposal was adopted.

La proposition du President est adoptee.

437. Remarks on departure of three
members of the Security Council

437. AUocution a l'occasion du depart
.de trois membres du Conseil de securite

The PRESIDENT: That concludes the formal
business of this meeting. This is the last meeting
of the Security Council for the year 1947 and it
might be fitting that the opportunity should be

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de !'ang!ais) : Ainsi se
trouve epuise l'ordre du jour oHiciel de cette
seance. La presente seance est la derniere du Conseil de securite pour l'annee 1947. Je crois qu'il

1-See Official Reco.rds of the Security CounriJ, Second
Year, No. 107.

rite, Deuxieme Annee, No 107.

lVoir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de secU-

3
taken to note formally the departure from the
Security Council of three of its present members.

convient .de saisir l'occasion pour prendre acte
officiellement du depart de trois. membres acttie1s
du Conseil de securite.

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): On the termination of
M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (tradwit de E'anglai.r): A
the membership of my country in. the Security l'expiration du mandat de mon pays au Conseil.de
Council, I wish to convey to my colleagues an securite, je tiens a exprimer a mes collegues ma
expression of deep appreciation for the !flatly profonde gratitude pour les nombreux temoiproofs of confidence and consideration with which gnages de confiance et d'estime dont les representhey have honored the representatives of Brazil tants du Bresil au Conseil ont ete honores. Il m'est
in this body. It was my arduous duty to succeed, echu la tache difficile, dans une assemblee aussi
in this distinguished company, an eminent fellow distinguee de prendre la succession de mon emicountryman, Ambassador Oswaldo Aranha, io nent compatriote, M. I'Ambassadeur Oswaldo
whose record of outstanding service to the cause Aranha; aux services exceptionnels qu'il a rendus
of peace on the American com:inent must be added a la cause de la paix sur le continent americain, il
his admirable efforts as a representative on the faut ajouter les efforts admirables qu'il a deSecurity Council as well as in his capacity as ployes, tant en sa qualite de representant at! ConPresident $luring two sessions of the General As- .seil de securite qu'en sa 9,ualite de President de
sembly of the United Nations, to promote inter- deux sessions de l'A!3semblee generale des Nations
Unies, en faveur de la collaboration internationale
national collaboration and world peace.
et de la paix mondiaie.
Ambassador Aranha's predecessor, the late
Ambassador Pedro Leao Velloso, likewise en::>yed the esteem and confidence of his colleagues
i;:l recognition of his.high qualities of discernment
and clear-sightedness his umhakeable faith in the
benefits of peace and the wealth of diplomatic experience which he had accumulated throughout a
lifetime of public service.

Son predecesseqr, feu l'Ambassadeur Pedro
Leao Velloso, fut egalement honore de l'estime et
de la confiance de ses collegues, en reconnaissance
de ses grandes qualites de clairvoyance et de. discernerr.ent, de sa. foi inebranlable dans les bienfaits
de la paix et d'une experience diplomatique eten··
due qui etait le resultat d'une existence vouee toute
entiere au service du bien public.

Our first representative on the Security Council,
Ambassador eyro de Freitas-Valle, distinguished
himself by bis constructive action during the organization and early deliberations of the ~..::curity
Council.

Notre premier representant au Conseil de securite, M. l'Ambassadeur eyro de Freitas-Valle,
s'est signale par l'action constructive qU;i1a menee
au cours de l'organisation et des premieres deliberations du Conseil de secnrite.

Whether through the efforts of my distinguished predecessors or through my own modest
contribution, the delegation of Brazil has brought
to the work of the Security Council a disinterested
effort for peace in the long-standing tradition of
international collaboration, the roots of which lie
in the innate vocation of the Brazilian people for
pacific solutions favouring the victory of persuasion over force. This tradition and this vocation
have always been a source of inspiration ror the
representatives of Brazil.

Par les efforts de mes eminents predecesseurs,
par 1l1a modeste contribution aussi, la delegation
du Bresil a foumi, au cours des travaux du Conseil de securite, un effort desinteresse pour la paix,
en harmonie avec sa longue tradition de collaboration internationale, dont les racines se trouvent
dans le gout !nne du peuple bresilien pour les solutions pacifiques qui favorisent la victoire de la
persuasion sur la force. Cette tradition et ce gout
ont toujours inspire les representants du Bresil.

It is my agreeable duty to refer also to t!'Je contribution of Brazil to the work of the Atomic
Energy Commission through the constructive
action of my country's representative on that
body, Captain Alvaro Alberto. The services which
he has rendered in this highly important field have
won for him the respect and esteem of his colleagues.

C'est pour moi un agreable devoir de mentiollner aussi la contribution que le Bresil a apportee
aux travaux de la Commission de l'energie atomique, par l'action constructive du representant
de mon pays au sein de, cet organe, le capitaine
Alvaro Alberto. Les services qu'il a rendus dans
ce domaine si important lui ont valu le respect et
l'estime de ses colU~gues.

Throughout the long months of 'almost continuous labour during which I have had the
honour of sitting at the side of my colleagues,
joining my efforts to theirs in the search for solutions which might adjust conflicts, and notwithstanding the' fact that such efforts have not always
been crowned with success, there has been no
lessening in my confidence in the future action of
the Security Council as the organ of the United
Nations primarily vested .with the function of
maintaining peace and security in international
life.

Au cours des longs mois de travail presque
continue1 pendant lesquels j'ai eu l'honneur de
sieger aux cotes de mes collegues, Joignant mes
efforts aux leurs dans la recherche de solutions
susceptibles de regler les conflits, et bien que ces
efforts n'aient pas toujours ete couronnes de succes, j'ai toujours garde la meme confiance dans
l'activite future du Conseil de securite, l'organe
des Nations Unies auque1 incombe, au premier
chef, la responsabilite du maintien de la paix et de
la securite internationales.

All human· work is by nature imperfect. All
progress is necessarily slow, as the result of an

Toute reuvre humaine est par nature imparfaite. Tout progr~s est necessairement lent, lors-

"'"""'IIl

4
unceasing effort to overcome opposition in a truly
dialectic process of trial and error. Imperfection,
failure even, are conditions of improvement, for
they determine the great impulses which ,are
capable of creatin g a b:rD-ader reality. Human
work should offer the aspect of an open and unfinished structu re demanding constant toil for its
completion.

qu'il faut un effort incessant pour vaincre l'opposition grace aux ressources des procedes par ta-tonnements et de la dialectique. L'imperfection, l'insucces meme sont des conditions necessaires ,au
progre s car elles determinent les grandes impulsions capables d'enge ndrer une realite plus large.
Et l'reuvre humaine ne saurait mieux etre representee que sous la forme d'une construction incomplete dont l'achevement exige un labeur constant.

The world is underg oing one of those grave
periods of disorganization from which always
arises the organization of the future, a period of
chaos from which will develop the order of tomorrow.

Le monde travers e actuellement une de ces
graves periodes de desorgani"sation qui donnent
toujou rs naissance a l'organisation de l'aveni lh
Une periode de chaos d'ou sortira l'ordre qe demain.

Le s~atu quo a ete aboli; un nouvel ordre est en
The statztS quo has been broken and a new'
de formation. Si d'une part le progre s et le
voie
one
the
on
ss,
progre
If
.
order is being created
sances 'techniques perhand, together with the development of technical , developpement des connais r peu a peu les forces
domine
de
e
l'homm
a
t
te
metten
domina
to
knowledge, is steadily enabling man
processus l'a prive, d'autre
the forces of nature, the same development, on de la nature, le meme, accentuant son isolement
securite
sa
de
acpart,
y,
the other hand, has deprived qim of securit
t a la rnerci d'abstractions dont
centuating his moral isolation and placing him at moral et le plac;an
e soit fonction.
destine
sa
que
the mercy of abstractions which presum e to con- on veut
trol his destiny.
Dans ces circonstances, it n'etait pas humaineIt would not humanly be possible in these cirshort
possible que le Conseii' de securite, apres
two
in
ment
l,
Counci
y
cumstances for the Securit
ice, ait pu resoudre
years of operation, to succeed ill solving all con- deux courtes annees d'exerc
ts ou conflits
d'intere
conflits
,
ts,
conflits
les
interes
tous
·of
s
flicts, some of which are conflict
l'herita ge
sont
,
plupart
la
pour
qui,
gies,
ancient
d'ideolo
the
in
rooted
many
y,
others of ideolog
la derde
bles
inevita
uences
conseq
les
ou
thp.
of
passe
du
past and many the inevitable consequences
guerre.
niere
late war.
Le Conseil de securite est un organe t:ssel.1tielleThe Security Council is essentially a political
composition, les membres
organ in the composition of which the permanent ment politique: dans sa une distribution de la
ntent
represe
ents
members represent a distribution of power com- perman
n de la situation internationale
mensurate with the presen t international situation. puissance en fonctio defini la structu re du Conont
'ils
Its structure, as defined in the Charte r elaborated actuelle. Lorsqu
Charte a San-Francisco ont
at San Francisco, obeyed the realistic conception seil, les auteurs de la realiste seIon laquelle la
tion
that the security of nations at the presen t stage of obei a une concep au stade actuel de leur devedevelopment cC/nnot be based upon ,international securite des nations se fonder uniquement sur le
loppement ne peut
law alone but must seek suppor t in power also.
droit international mais doit s'appuy er aussi sur
la puissance.
The Security Council was accordingly entrust ed
with the use of force whenever all attempts to
secure a peaceable solution proved unavailing.
This constitutes the principal innovation of the
United Nations by comparison with the League
of Nations.

En consequence, le Conseil de securite a ete
habilite a avoir :i.'ecours a la force chaque fois que
tous les efforts de reglement pacifique se seront
averes infructueux. C'est la que reside l'innovation principale de l'Organ isation des Nations
Dnies par rappor t a la Societe des Nations.

I1 n'y a qucun doute qu'un organisme internaThere is no doubt that an international organine peut renoncer entierement a l'emploi de
tional
force.
of
zation cannot altogether waive the use
devrait toujou rs rester la possibilite
There should always remain the possibility of an 'la force. 11
cl la force, lorsque toutes les resfinal
appe1
d'un
ultimate appeal to it after the resources of perion auront ete epuisees sans
persuas
la
de
sources
suasion have failed.
succes.
En derniere analyse, toutefois, toutes les tentaIn the final analysis, however, all attempts to
isation de la vie internationale sur
organize international life on a solid basis mu'st tives d'organ
doivent etre fondces sur l~ prisolide
base
be founded on the predominance of law rather . une
que de la force. Dans un
plutot
loi
la
de
.maute
xities
than that 'of force. In a world whose comple
croit de jour en jour,
xite
comple
la
dont
increase daily in ratio to technical progress, bring- monde
ue qui entraine
techniq
s
progre
du
e
cadenc
la
a
ing about ever-closer relations between peoples,
entre les
etroites
plus
en
relations de plus
there is a growin g interweaving of interests, and des
en plus
plus
de
ent
devienn
interets
les
,
peuples
conflicts tend for this reason to become more
ent
devienn
conflits
les
suite,
par
et,
ndants
inrlepe
innumerous and complicated. Force by itself is
force
La
xes.
comple
et
eux
nombr
plus
plus en
capable of solving them, and the unceasing inter- de
elle-meme ne peut les resoudre, et i1 faut sans
for
ry
necessa
is
ence
intellig
and
reason
of
vention
cesse l'intervention de la raison et de l'intelligence
their adjustm ent so that the changes required to

5
maintain in equilibrium the structure of peace,
which is always unstable, may he proposed a..d
put into effect.

pour les regler, de maniere qu'on puisse proposer
et mettre en reuvre les modifications requises pour
maintenir 1'equilibre de cet edifice instable qu'est
la paix.

This means that p'eace and security are more
and more the work of human intelligence ~nd
statesr:nanship and of the capacity to adjust and
solve the contradictions of reality, which is essentially subject to change.

Ainsi de plus en plus la paix et la securite sont
des reuvres de l'inte1ligence humaine et procedent
de la science politique et (1-;; l'aptitude a. concilier et
a penetrer les contradkaons de la realite qui, par
essence, est toujours mouvante.

La paix ne peut etre'un phenomene isoIe. C'est
Peace cannot be an isolated phenomenon. It is
rather a continuous process developed in time and plus exactement un processus cOlltinu dans le
space and requiring not only the adjustment, of temps et dans l'espace qui requiert non seulement
conflicts and situations, but also the exercise of le reglement des conflits et des situations litigieuconstant creative action. As the experience of the ses, mais aussi le jeu d'une activite creatrice conSecurity Council is broadened, and after correc-- tinuelle. A mesure que s'enrichira l'experience du
tion of the rigidity which the rule of unanimity Consel1 de securite, et lorsqu'on aura porte remede
has introduced into its procedure - that correc- a la rigidite qu'impose dans sa procedure la regle~
ti-on 'can be achieved through tacit agreement de l'uml.11imite, ce qui peut etre obtenu par 1'accord
among the permanent members - the action of tacite des membres permanents, le role du Conseil
the Council for the maintenance of peace will be- . de securite dans le mailltien de la paix sera de plus
come more and more effective. The ample powers en plus efficace. Les pouvoirs tres etendus dont
at its command offer immense possibilities for the il dispose oifrent d'immenses possibilites pour la
realization of a system of peace and security char- realisation d'un systl~me de paix et de securite
acterized not only by the absence of conflict, but caracterise non seulement par 1'absence de conalso by a ceaseless ':reativ~ effort i.n' internationai flits, mais aussi par un effort createur incessant ,
dans le domaine de la vie internationale.
life.
Such are the parting wishes which I should like
to expre5S, together with. my renewed thanks for
the proofs of esteem which I have received from
each and all of my colleagues.

Tels sont les vreux que je desirais fOrrrluler
avant (. - quitter le Conseil; en meme temps, je
tiens a l-:dlre ma gratitude pour les temoignages
d'estime que j'ai rec;us de tous mes collegues.

Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): The end of the
year is the traditional time for looking back over
the record of accomplished work. For the Polish
delegation, this date also marks the end of its
term as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council and I should therefore like to review
briefly its position during the two years of its
membership in this principal organ of the United
Nations.

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais) : La fin de l'annee est 1'epoque traditionnelle
ou 1'on fait le bilan du travail accompli. Pour la
delegation polon~ise, cette periode coincide egalement avec la fin de son mandat de membre non
permanent du Conseil de securite, et j'aimerais
passer brievement en revue l'attitude de ma delegation au cours des deux annees dui-ant lesqueUes
nous avons ete membres de cet organe essentiel
des Nations Unies,

It was a great privilege indeed, and at the same
time a great responsibility, to be elected by the
United Nations during its first General Assembly
as a member of the Security Council. No doubt
those who wanted to see Poland represented on
the Security Council took into consideration the
role Poland played during the war, its sufferings
during the period of German occupation and the
great contribution of the Polish nation which
fought in accordance with our hest historic tra.ditions on all the fronts - in the air; on the seas,
on land and in the under~round.

Ce fut certes un grand privilege, en meme temps
qu'une grande responsabilite, que d'etre elu membre du Conseil de securite au cours de la-premiere
session de l'Assemblee generale des Nations Unies;
Ceux qui souhaitaient que la Pologne fitt representee au Conseil de securite ont sans doute pris
en consideration le role qu'elle a joue pendant la
gtterre, les souffrances qu'elle a subies sous l'occupation allemande ainsique la genereuse contribution de la nation polonaise qui, sur taus lea
fronts-clans les airs, sur'les mers, sur terre et
dans la resistance--a lutte conformement cl. ses
meilleures traditions histoiiques.

The Polish delegation has always considered
that it represented on the Security Council not
only itself, or even the regional group from which
it has been chosen, but all the United Nations.

La delegation polonaise a toujours estime
qu'elle representait au Conseil de securite non
seulement son propre pays, non seulement le
groupe regional parmi lequel elle a ete choisie,
mais bien toutes les Nations Unies.

Its attitude in all problems which were brought
before the Council was dictated, therefore,· not
only by its own national interests. Its primary
consideration was given to the interests of peace
and security. It has always acted in accordance
with the letter and spirit of the Charter. It has
always' considered as its paramount duty to serve
the fundamental interests of the United Nations

Devant tous les problemes dont le Conseil a ete
saisi, son attitude a ete par consequent dictee. non
seulement par ses interets nationaux propres, mais
surtout par les interets de la paix et de la securite.
Elle a toujours agi conformement a la lettre et cl
l'espri.t de la Charte. Elle a toujours estime que
son premier devoir etait de servir les interets fondamentaux des Nations U nies et non les interets

"

j

-

6
and not the interests of one country or of a group
of countries. This 'principle has guided it during
its two years of work in the Security Council, as
well as in every other organ of the United Nations
on which it was represented.

particuliers d'un pays ou d'un groupe de pays. Ce
pliincipe l'a·guidee durant.les deux annees de son
activite tant au Conseil di~ securit equc dans tous
les autres organes des Nations Unies ou la Pologne
.
a ete representee

The war against fascism has taught us that
peace is indivisible and collective; and that wherever it is threatened, the security, the peace and
the freedom of our people are equally endangered.
To every Pole, therefore, the United Nations,
representing the universal interest in the maintenance of peace and security, represents at the
same time the primary and principal interest of
the Polish nation. The war has taught us that only
by a common effort of all nations, small and large,
can we maintain and guarantee the peace.

La guerre contre le fascisme nous a appris que
la paix est indivisible et collective et que partou t
ou eUe est menacee, la securite, la paix et les libertt~s de notre peuple sont egalement en danger. C'est
pourquoi pour chaque Polonais, les Nations Unies,
qui representent l'interet universe1 dans le maintien de la paix et de la securite, representent en
meme temps l'intetl~t capital et primordial de la na:' \
tion polonaise. La guerre nous a appris que 'seul
l'effort commun de toutes les nations, petites et
grandes, permet de maintenir et de garant ir la paix.

At the same time, we have learned that the role
in maintaining the peace varies, and that much
more responsibility in this matter is to be assumed
by the big Powers. This is a lesson of life which
we learned at the gravest hour of our nation, much
stl."Onger than any theory invented in a school or
in a laboratory. It was our desire, therefore, to
continue this new fonn of international collaboration, born in our common fight agains t the enemy
of humanity and embodied in the structure of the
United Nations, in the special position of the
Security Council and of the permanent members
of the Council.

En meme temps, nous avons appris que le maintien de la paix assigne des roles divers et que la
plus grande rcsponsabilite incombe,. dans ce domaine, aux grandes Puissances. Telle est la le<;on
que nous avons tiree des heures les plus graves
de la vie de notre nation, une le<;on beaucoup plus
forte que toutes les theories con<;ues dans les ecoles
et les laboratoires. En consequence, notre desir a
ete de poursuivre cette forme nouvelIe de cooperation internationale, nee de notre lutte commune
contre les ennemis de l'humanite, et incarnee par
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, par le Conseil
de securite et ses cinq membres permanents, a qui
incombe un role special.

We accepted the fact mat at the very basis of
the Organization of the United Nations lies the
principle of understanding and compromise. This
is the only way the United Nations can work and
its purposes. Whenever possible, therefore,
achieve
'\
my delegation has attempted to bring about such
compromise and understanding and it was one of
those which always - although often in vaincalled Y'JT understanding.

Nous avons accepte comme le fondement meme
de 1'0rganisation des Nations Dnies le principe
de l'entente et du compromis. C'est la pour 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies la seule fa<;on d'accomplir sa tache et de realiser ses desseins. C'est
pourquoi, chaque fois qu'elle l'a pu, ma delegation
s'est efforcee de favoriser la conciliation et l'entente; elle a ete de celles qui ont toujortrs fait appel, bien que ce ftit souvent-en vain, a la bonne
entente.

I must confess that the realization of the existing disagreements is by no', means gratifying. We
understand, however, that this cannot be ascribed
to the special position the five permanent members
e.njoy. We have opposed the clamour and propaganda of those who thought that by abolishing
these special rights they can improve the entire
Organization. We fully understand that we are
living in a transitional period when the effects of
the war are still in process of liquidation and when
the differences and disputes between the major
Allies are much greater than 3.t the time when we
were faced with one great problem - victory over
the enemy.

Te dois avouer qu~ la constatation des desacco~ds existants n'est guere encourageante. Nous
comprenons toutefois que cela ne peut etre dti a la
position speciaIe des cinq membres permanents du
Conseil. Nous nous sommes opposes allx clameurs
et a la propagande de ceux qui croient qu'en abolissant ces droits speciaux, ils pourro nt ameliorer·
1'0rganisation toute entiere. Nous comprenons
parfaitement que nous vivons' dans une periode
de transition durant laquelle les effets de la guerre
sont encore en voie de liquidation et que les divergences et les differends qui separent les principaux
allies sont beaucoup plus considerables qu'a
l'epoque ou nous avions a faire face a un seuI
grand probleme: la victoire sur l'ennemi.

My Government believes, however, that agreement on all the controversial issues is not only
possible but most essential. The preliminary re'quirement for such an agreement, which might
become the foundation of harmonious co-operation, is a proper understanding of the differences
in approach to various international problems.
Every effort must be made to lessen these differences in the approach to various problems by
having mutual respect and by constantly bearing
in mind the final goal of all of us - peace. Only
by workin g together can we win the peace as we
have won the war.

Cependant, mon Gouvernement estime qu'un
accord sur toutes les questions litigieuses est non
seulement possible, mais absolument essentiel. La
condition prealabIe d'un tel accord, qui pourrait
devenir la base d'une cooperation harmonieuse,
c'est une comprehension exacte des manieres divergentes dont on aborde les divers problemes
internationaux. Tous les efforts doivent etre
tentes en vue d'attenuer ces divergences de wes,
en respectant de part et d'autre et en gardan t constamment present a l'esprit ce but final qui noUs
est commun a tous, la paix. Ce n'est qu'en travaillant ensemble que nous pourrons gagner la paix
comme nous avons gagne la guerre.

7

Ad..

a.cs

Ai _ ,

2

The Polish delegation spoke in the Security
Council for those countries which wished to see
this collaboration maintained, strengthened and
extended. We based our co;:ception of international collaboration on the principles of law, justice and 'Ional sovereignty, rejecting violence,
force and "my form of pressure. We rejected also
the alleged solidarity which resembles the solidarity between the horse and the rider. Our will
for peace is dictated not by weakness, but by our
moral strength. We warted the United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, to be
organs of harmonious co-operation for the maintenance of peace and general prosperity. It is not
the fault of the Polish delegation that many of
these aims have not been achieved and many a
problem has remained unsettled. .

La delegation polonaise a parle au Conseil de
securite au nom des pays qui desirent que cette
collaboration soit maintenue, renforcee et etendue.
N ous avons fonde notre conception de la collaboration internationale sur les pdncipes du droit,
de la justice et de la souverainete des nations,
rejetant la violence, la force et toutes les formee
de pression. Nous avons rejete egalement cette'
pretendue solidarite qui fait penser a celle qui peut
exister entre le ..:heval et son cavalier. Notre desir
de paix n'est pas dicte par la faiblesse, mais par
notre force morale. Nous desirons que I'Organisation des Nations Unies, et le Conseil de securite
en particulier, soient des organes t1~ cooperation
harmonieuse pour le maintien de la paix et de la
prosperite j"enerale. Ge n'est pas la faute de la
delegation polonaise si beaucoup de ces objectif9
n'ont pas ete atteints et si bien des problemes sont
restes sans solution.

Considering that fascist centres, if allowed to
continue, may become a source of political complications and endanger the peace, the Polish delegation submitted to the Security Council and later
to the' General Assembly a proposal to extinguish
the centres of fascist unrest and aggression in
Spain and thus to bring to an end the regime
brought about by the war which Germany and
Italy waged against the Spanish people. We
found, however, "'::dl ~-:6ret, that a bloc of nations, contrary to their own interests and acting
against the will of the majority, has made impossible even the simple re-affirmation of the
resolution of the General Assembly of 12 December 1946.1

Considerant que les foyers fascistes, si on leur
permet de subsister. risquent de devenir une
source de complications politiques et de dangers
pour la paix, la del,egatioil polonaise a soumis all
Conseil de securite, et plus tard a l'Assembtee
generale, une proposition tendant a eliminer les
foyers fascistes de trouble et d'agression qui existent en Espagne, pour en finir ainsi avec Un regime installe a la faveu!' de la gucrre que l'A1Iemagne et l'Italie ont menee contre le peuple espagnol. Or, nous avons du constater avec regret
qu'un bloc de nations, agissant contrairement a
leurs propres interets et au mepris de la volonte de
la majorite, ont rendu impossible jusqu'a,la simr·le
reaffinuation de la resolution de l'AssembIee
g~nerale en date du 12 decemhre 1946.1

It was not Poland which supported the monarcho-fascist regime of terror and civil war in
Greece. We have consistently tried, along with
all the nations which defend the cause of peace
and security, to liquidate that centre of civil war
which co~stitutes a great danger to south-eastern
Europe. We opposed those who, in spite of the
unavimous resolution that no toreign aid should
be used for political purposes, went on pouring
at ms, ammunition and money to keep the fires of
civ11 war burning, notwithstanding the fact that
at the :>-'l.me time most war-stricken nations of
Europe were being refused economic aid for reconstruction, aid which is due to them, and that
that refusal was motivated by purely political
reasons.

Ce n'est pas la Pologne qui a soutenu, en Grece,
le regime monarcho-fasciste de terreur et de
guerre chrile. Nous no11S S01.1mes constamment
efforces, avec toutes les nations qui'soutiennent
la cCl.use de la paix et de la securite, de liquider ce
foyer de guerre civile qui constitue un grand
danger pour le sud-est de 1'Europe. Nous nous
sommes opposes a ceux qui, en depit de la resolution unanime prescrivant qu'allcune aide etrangere ne doit etre utilisee a des fins politiques, ont
continue de foumir des armes, des muniti0ns et
des subsides pour entretenir le feu de la guerre
civile, sans egard au fait que, dans le meme temps,
la pIupart des nations d'Europe durement frappees par la guerre se voyaient refuser, pour leur
reconstruction, l'aide economique qui leur etait
due, et que ce refus etait motive par des rai'sons
purement politiques.

We strongly advocated the withdrawal of
foreign troops from the territory of war-tom
Greece and demanded that the Greek nation,
which has a glorious tradition of fighting for
freedom, should be 'allowed the right of selfgovernment according to its own will, without
foreign intervention.

Nous avons fermement preconise le retrait des
troupes etrangeres du territoire de la Grece de':
chin~~ par la guerre; nous avons demande que la
nation grecque, dont on connait la glorieuse tradition de latter pour la liberte, puisse faire valoir
son droit a I'autonomie selon sa propre volonte et
sans latervention etrangere.

Bearing in mind the General Assembly's resolution of 14 December 1946,2 we demanded, in
oonformity with the principles of sovereign equality of nations, the withdtawal \Jf foreign troops

Ayant presente a l'esprit la resolution de l'Assemblee generale en date du 14 decembre 19462 ,
nous avons demande, conformement aux principes
de l'egalite souveraine des nations, le retrait des

ISee Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly dur-'
iug the second part of its first session, resolution 39(1).

lVoir les Resolutions adoptees par l'Assemblee generale
pendant la seconde partie de sa p...emiere session, resolution 39 (1).
2Ibid., resolution 41 (1).

2

Ibid., resolution 41 (1).

M

1.M41

from Greece, from Indonesia, from Egypt and
from Palestine.

troupes etrangeres de
d'Egypte et de Palestine.

Poland demanded an effective disarmament and
an effective control of weapon~ of mass destruction. Having started disarmament in. our own
country, we submitted plans both for disarmament
of conventional weapons and for control of atomic
energy. Instead, we find that no progress has been
made, that atomic bombs are being manufactured
and stockpiled, that experiments with new weapons are being continued and that a threat of
bacteriological war is becoming real. We wanted
to end the war of nerves which was started on
5 August 1945 by the blast in Hiroshima and
which since has been fought in the hearts and
minds of the common people of the world. We
wanted to see the warmongers branded and outlawed and mutual confidence installed in their
place, because what is lacking most in our work
is mutual confidence.

La Pologne a reclame le desarmement effectH
et un controle efficace des armes de destruction
massive. Ayant commence le desarmt=ment dans
notre propre pays, nous avons presente des plans
de desarmement, tant en ce qui concerne les armes
de type classique que le c01'ltrole de l'energie atomique. 'Mais nous devons constater qu'aucun progres n'a ete realise, que"l'on continue de fabriquer
et de stocker des bombes atomiques, a'experimenter des armes nouvelles, et que le danger de
la guerr(:: bacteriologique est devenu reel. Nous
voulions mettre un terme a la guerre des nerfs
qui avait debute le 5 aoiit 1945 par l'explosion
d'Hiroshima et qui, depuis, Se poursuit dans le
creur et dans 1'esprit du menu peuple du monde
entier. Nous voulions voir les fauteurs de guerre
stigmatises et mis hors la loi pour faire place a la
confiance mutuelle, car ce qui nous manque le
plus, dans nos travaux, c'est hien la confiance
mutuelle.

All these set-backs, however, have not undermined the confidence of our people in the United
Nations. We continue to stand firmly on the principles of the Charter which we have signed and
we fight for the sanctity of all treaties and agreements which have been concluded.

Tous ces echecs, toutefois, n'ont pas mine la
confiance de notre peuple dans les Nations Unies.
Nous continuons a maintenir fermement les principes de la Charte que nous avorlls signee, et nous
combattons pour 1'inviolabilite de tous les traites
et de tous les accords qui ant ete conclus.

Grece,

d'Indonesie,

In: the framework of our !oreign policy we
Dans le cadre de notre politique etrangere, nous
shall continue to participate actively in the solu- continuerons de participer activement a la solution
tion of all international problems and shall not de tous les problemes internationaux et nous ne
confine ourselves to the role of spectators. We nous bornerons pas a jouer le role de spectateur.
shall vigorously attempt to influence the course of Nous nous efforcerons energiquement d'influer
events ami, acting in conformity with our right sur le cours des evenements, et agissant en conto national existence, we shall fight to restrain formite avec :nos droits a 1'existence nationale,
aggression and to bring about a consolidation of nous lutterons pour faire echec a l'agression et
all constructive forces for peace. We shall try to .pour obtenir 1'union solide de toutes les forces
steer the course of national feelings and world constructhr.es pOUf la paix. Nous nous efforcerons
economy on the. road to peace and to strengthen de guider les sentiments natioriaux et 1'economie
the dearly bought independence and sovereignty mondiale sur 1a route de la paix, et de fortifier
of the nations of Europe. V.fp shall try to con- 1'independance et la souverainete que les nations
solidate the efforts of all Member States in order de 1'Europe ont si cherement acquises. Nous nous
to assure the economic reconstruction of the world efforcerons de coordonner les efforts de tous les
and to bring about a general prosperity based 011 Etats Membres en vue d'assurer la reconstruction
new economic. foundations. It is another lesson of economique du monde et d'amener une prosperite
this past war that not only peace and war are generale reposant sur de nouvelles bases econoindivisible - prosperity is indivisible as well.
miques. C'est la une autre des le<;ons de la derniere guerre: non seulement lapaix et la guerre
sont indivisibles, mais la prosperite, eUe aussi, est
indivisible.
There is no return to a Europe of the past. The
economic and political structure of that Europe
·was the cause of the war. We note with regret the
atter.lpt to eliminate dictinctions between aggressors and victims, between those who supported
the aggressor under the cover of neutrality and
those who carried the heavy burden of the war
to the very end.

Il n'est pas de retour possible a l'Europe du
passe. La structure economique etpolitique de
cette Europe-la. a ete la cause de la guerre. Nous
constatons . avec regret que certains s'efforcent
d'obtenir que 1'on ne fasse plus le depart entre les
agresseurs et les victimes, entre ceux qui ont soutenu l'agresseur sous le couvert de la neutralite et
ceux qui ont porte jusqu'a la fin le lourd fardeau
de la guerre.

New criteria are being put forward and from
them derive the claims for help and reconstruction
of Germany at a time when her victims are being
barred from most needed commodities. History
teaches that the ~.-:onomic hegemony of Germany
has always resulted in political hegemony and
that both have then created the war mcl.c~linery
which in time was let loose.

On propose de nouveaux criteriums et l'on pretend aider et reconstruire l'AUemagne alors que
les victimes de ceUe-ci sont encore privees des
biens les olus necessaires. L'histoire nous apprend
que 1'hegemvnie economique de l'Allemagne a
toujours leu pour resultat !;on 1egemonie politique,
deux conditions qui ont contribue a la creation de
la machine de guerre qui; le moment venu, fut
mise en mouvement.

9
If it is possible today, on this side of the Atlantic, to 'think of war, I say that to my people,
who twice in one generation have seen world war
and occupation, to the men and women of Warsaw
who are being denied mechanical tools and with
their bare hands are removing the rubble frpm
the streets of Warsaw, the very thought of war
is beyond the realm of possibility. That is why we
say that there is no return to a Germany which
may become a centre for future aggression.

S'il est possible aujourd'hui, de ce cote de l'Atlantique, de penser a la guerre, je dois dire que
pour notre peuple, qui a deux reprises en l'espace
d'une generation a connu la guerre mondiale et
l'occupation, pour les hommes et pour les {emmes de Varsovie qui, prives d'outils mecaniques,
travaillent, de leurs mains nues, au deblaiement
des decombres dans les rues de leur ville, la pensee'meme de la guerre est au dela du domaine des
possibilites. C'est pourquoi nous .dec1arons qu'it
ne peut y av-oil" de retour a une Allemagne capable de devenir un foyer d'agression dans l'avenir.

In the coming year the Security Council will
be faced with many difficult problems which will
require speedy solution. The war in Indonesia is
still being fought, Franco is still oppressing the
people of Spain, foreign troops are maintained in
many, countries and the majority of the people of
Greece are still forced to tolerate a Government
imposed upon them.

Au cours de l'annee qui va commencer, le Conseil de securite devra faire face a de nombreux
problemes difficiles qui demanderont une solution rapide. La guerre en Indonesie se poursuit
toujours; Franco continue a opprimer le peuple
d'Espagne; des t1"Oupes etrangeres sejoument encore dans de nombreux pays et la majorite du peupIe grec reste forcee de tolerer un Gouvernement
qui lui a ete impose.

The peoples of the world expect from the Security Council that in the next year it should bring
about real disarmament and solve all the problems
of international collaboration and tne problem of
placing an international police force at the disposal of the Security Council. My Government is
watching with great anxiety the developments in
Palestine which may require the intervention of
the Security Council.

Les peuples du monde esperent que le Conseil
de securite, au cours de l'annee prochaine, pourra
realiser un veritable desarmement et resoudre tous
les problemes de la collaboration internationale
ainsi que la question consistant a mettre une force
de police internationale a la disposition du Conseil
de securite. Mon Gouvernement suit tres attentiYement l'evolution de la situation en Palestine, qui
risque d'exiger l'interver..tion du Conseil de securite.

I may assure members that even from outside
the Security Council we shall continue to watch
their efforts with the greatest of interest,. and we
pledge here aga:in our full support of all new decisions which may lead to the realization of the
aims of the Charter, because peace in our time and
for future generations depends upon it.

Je puis assurer les mempres du Conseil de securite que meme en dehors du Conseil, nous ne cesserons de suivre leurs efforts avec le pl~s grand
interet et nous nous engageons de nouveau a soutenir pleinement toutes les decisions nouvelles susceptibles de conduire a la realisation des desseins
proclames dans la Charte, car la paix de notle
temps et la paix pour les generations futures en
dependent.

On his way to the Congress of the Socialist
Party, the chief representative of Poland, Mr.
Oscar Lange, whose name will always be associated with Poland's work in the United Nations
during its first two years of existence, sent to us
the following letter addressed to the members of
the Security Council, which, with the permission
of the President, I shall now read:

En route pour assister au congres du parti socialiste, M.. Oscar Lange, chef de la delegation
polonaise, dont le nom sera toujours lie a l'reuvre
de la Pologne au sein de 1'0rganis3;tion des Nations Unies pendant ses deux premieres annees
d'existence, a adresse aux membres du Conseil
de securite la lettre suivante dont je vais .maintenant donner lecture avec la permission du President:

"I regret very much that urgent political business at home prevents me from participating personally in this meeting of the Security Council,
which is the last attended by the representative of
Poland. I should like, however, to take this occasion to express my words of appreciation for
the friendly co-operation shown to me by all my
cCilleagues and by those with whom I have been
associated duritf"g the two years of Poland's term
in the Security Council. It was a great honour for
my country to have'been entrusted with the high
office of membership in the Security CounciL To
me, personally, it has been a great privilege to be
associated with and to be a colleague of all of you.

"Je regrette beaucoup que des affaires politiques
urgentes m'empechent de participer a cette seance
du Conseil de seculite, la derniere a laquelle assiste
le representant de la Pologne. J'aimerais toutefois
saisir l'occasion de remercier tous mes collegues
et taus ceux avec lesque1s fai ete en rapport pendant les deux annees qu'a dure le mandat de la
Pologne au Conseit de securite, du cQncours amical qu'ils m'ont tous apporte. Ce fut un grand honneur pour mon pays que d'etre investi des hautes
fonctions de membre du Conseit de securite. Pour
moi personnellement, ce fut un "grand privilege
d'avoir ete votre collegue a tous.

"As the representative of a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, elected by the
General Assembly, the representative of Poland
has always considered himself as a mandatary of
all the United Nations, a mandatary entrusted

"En tant que representant d'un membre non
permanent du Conseil de securite, elu paT l'Assemblee generale, le representant de la Pologne a toujours considere qu'it etait le mandataire de toutes
les Nations Vnies et qu'it etait de ce fait respon-

10
with the responsibility for international peace and
security. It is this responsibility which should take
precedence over any narrow nationalist or special
interest. I have tried to live up to it according to
the best of my conscience and wisdom. It is not
for me to judge to what extent I have been successful.

sable de la paix et de la securite internationales.
C'est a. cette responsabiHte qu'il faut donner la
primaute sur tous les interets limites au domaine
national ou particulier. Je me suis efforce de mettre en reuvre ces principes avec il:oute la conscience
possible et dans toute la mesure de mes moyens.
Ce n'est pas a. moi d'apprecier dans quelle mesure
j'ai reussi.

"As the representative of a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, the representative of Poland has always been conscious of the
special role entrusted by the Charter to the permanent members. This role, which results from
fundamental facts of history which none of us
can change, imposes on the permanent members
a special duty, the duty of seeking agreement and
conciliation, the duty of refraining from using
this Council or any other organ of the United
Nations as a means for organizing groups of
countries or world opinion against any of the
Powers.

"En tant que representant d'un membre non
permanent du Conseil de securite, le representant
de la Pologne a toujours eu conscience du role
special que la Charte confere aux membres permanents du Consei!. Ce role, qui est la consequence
de faits historiques fondamentaux auxqueIs aucun
d'entre nous ne saurait rien changer, impose aux
membres permanents un devoir particulier, celui
de rechercher l'accord et la conciliation, celui de
renoncer a. utiliser le Conseil de securite ou tout
autre organe des Nations Unies comme instrument servant a organiser des groupes de pays ou
des mouvements d'opinion mondiaux diriges contre une Puissance que1conque.

"The representative of Poland has made every
effort to promote agreement among the members
of the Security Council, particularly among the
permanent members. Such efforts were made by
Mr. Modzelewski in connexion with the Greek
question during the sessions in London. Such
efforts were made by myself, or by my colleague,
Mr. Katz-Suchy, in connexion with the questions
of Iran, Spain and Greece, in connexion with the
problems of admissions to membership, of disarmament and atomic energy, of the armed forces
to be placed at the disposal of the Security Council
and many others. Some of the efforts were successful,' others were not, but we are not discouraged because we firmly believe in the future
of the United Nations and in the special role entrusted to the security Council within the framework of our Organization. As firm s:tpporters of
the United Nations, we have done everything in
our power to maintain the authority of the Security Council, for example, in the cases of Indonesia and Egypt. For the same reason we advocated rapid and radical disarmament, a position
which my Government continues to uphold.

"Le representant de la Pologne a tout fait pour
amener l'accord entre les membres du Conseil de
securite, en particulier entre les membres permanents. On se rappellera les efforts deployes par
M. Modzelewski, au cours des sessions de Londres, en ce qui concerne la question grecque. Qu'il
me soit permis egalement de mentionner ceux que
men collegue, M. Katz-Suchy, ou moi-meme avons
deployes lors de l'examen de la question iranienne,
de la question espagnole et de la question grecque,
du probleme de l'admission de nouveaux membres,
de celui du desarmement et de l'energie atomique,
de la question des forces armees a. mettre a la disposition du Conseil de securite, et de beaucoup
d'autres questions. Certains de ces efforts ont ete
couronnes de succes, d'autres sont restes vains;
neanmoins, nous n'avons pas perdu courage car
nous crayons fermement en l'avenir de l'Organisation des Nations Unies ainsi qu'en la valeur du
role particulier qui a ete confie au Conseil de securite dans le cadre de 1'0rganisation. Accordant
notre ferme soutien a. l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, nous avons fait tom ce qui est en notre
pouvoir pour maintenir l'autorite du Conseil de
securite, notamment dans l'affaire indonesienne et
dans l'affaire d'Egypte. Pour la meme raison, nous
avons preconise un desarmement rapide et complet, et mon Gouvernement n'a pas modifie son
attitude a. cet egard.

"I should like to convey my greetings to the
new members of the Security Council. I wish
them will stay in my memory. The persunal assibilities which, by the wish of the General Assembly, have been assigned to them.

"Je voudrais maintenant saluer les nouveaux
membres du Conseil desecurite. Je leur souhaite
le plus grand succes dans l'accomplissement des
lourdes taches qui leur incombent, par la decision
de l'Assemblee generale.

"For me personally, the time spent as a member
of the Security Council will always remain one of
the most valuable periods of my life. The debates
we, have had and all those who participated in
them will stay in my memory. The personal associations formed will, I hope,< continue. For this
reason I refrain from taking leave of my friends
assembled at this table. Instead, I wish them all
a happy New Year, a year of successful work for
the benefit of the United Nations." Signed: Oscar
Lange.

"Pour ma part, la periode pendant laquelle j'ai
participe aux travaux du Conseil de securite sera
toujours pour moi l'une des 6poques les plus precieuses de ma vie. Le souvenir de nos deliberations
et de tous ceux qui y participerent ne s'effacera
pas de mon esprit. J'espere egalement que les relations personnelles que nous avons nouees ne seront pas rompues. C'est pourquoi je ne dirai pas
adieu aux amis assembles autour de cette table;
je leur souhaite une bonne annee, une annee de
travail fructueux pour le plus grand bien des Nations Unies." Signe: Oscar Lange.

:r

3 _

11
I have been acting with the Polish delegation
in various capacities during the past year and a
half. The time I have been associated with the
Security Council I shall always consider as the
most important period of my life. It was a grea.t
honour and privilege to be allowed to be associated with its members, to learn statesmanship
from all of them and to represent Poland in the
Security Council.

Pendant les dix-huit mois qui viennent de s'ecouler, j'ai ete appele a agir, a des titres divers,
au nom de la delegation polonaise. J e me so_uviendrai toujours de l'epoque ou j'ai pris part aux ti"avaux du Conseil de securite comme de la periode
la plus importante de ma vie. Ce fut pour moi un
grand honneur et un grand privilege d'avoir eu la
possibilite de collaborer avec les membres du Conseil, d'apprendre d'eux tous l'art de la politique
internationale et de representer la Pologne au
Conseil de securite.

With the end of the year, let me wish all the
members of the Security Council personally, to
their Governments and to the people they represent, every happiness and success in their work.

En cette fin d'annee, qu'il me soit permis de souhaiter cl tous les membres du Conseil de securite,
en man nom personnel, ainsi qu'cl leurs Gouvernements et aux peuples qu'ils representent, tout le
bonheur possible et la reussite la plus complete
dans leurs travaux.

I should like to convey my greetings to the new
members of the Security Council. My special
greetings go to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic which, in accordance with the principle
of equitable geographical distribution, and in
spite of the ill effects of those who wanted to see
it barred, is taking Poland's place 'qn the Security
Council.

J e voudrais egalement saluer les nouveaux membres du Conseil de securite et notamment la Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine qui, conformement au principe d'une repartition geog'l'aphique equitable, et malgre les efforts mal intentionnes de ceux qui voulaient la voir ecarter, succede cl la Pologne au Conseil de securite.

Let me once more express my thanks for the
help I have been given here by all the members of
the Security Council and their delegations, by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Trygve Lie, by the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Sobolev, and by
all the members of the Secretariat and the Press
who, in their various capacities, have made our
work possible. To all of you then go my best
wishes at thi:s solemn moment.

J e tiens cl exprimer une fois de plus ma gratitude pour l'aide que j'ai re<;ue ici de tous les membres du Conseil de securite et de leurs delegations,
de M. Trygve Lie, Secretaire general, de M. Soholev, Secretaire general adjoint, ains! que detous
les membres du Secretariat et de la ptesse qui,
chacun dans leur domaine, ont rendu possible notre
activite. A eux tous, en cet instant solennel, j'adresse mes meilleurs vreux.
-

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais) : Au nom
The PRESIDENT: In the name of the Security
Council I should like to thank the representatives du Conseil de securite, je tiens cl remercier viveof Brazil and Poland most warmly for their state- ment le representant du Bresil et celui de la Poments of cordiality to the Security Council and logne des declarations cordiales qu'ils viennent de
I should like to express my personal regret at faire au Conseil de securite, et je dirai combien,
their departure from this body. I am also sure personnellement, je regrette leur depart. Je suis
that I express the sincere sentiment of the mem- certain de me faire l'interprete des sentiments de
bers of the Security Council in conveying to the tous les membres du Conseil de securite en leur
representatives of Brazil and Poland the genuine . exprimant cl tous deux les regrets sinceres qu'e.
regret of the Security Council at their departure. prouve le Conseil cl les voir partir.
Qu'il me soit permis maintenant de prendre la
I should like now to make a few remarks as
representative of AUSTRALIA. The Security Coun- parole en tant que representant de l'AUSTRALIE,
cil has now completed its first two years of opera- pour presenter quelques observations. Le Conseil
tion and Australia, one of the six members -de securite a maintenant derriere lui deux annees
originally elected by the General Assembly, has d'exercice et l'Australie, l'un des six membres
elus cl l'cirigine par l'AssembIee generale, arrive
completed its term of office.
maintenant cl l'expiration de son mandat.
For my part, personally, I feel it would be more
fitting if the few remarks which it is my privilege
to make were being made by one or another of
my predecessors who represented Australia on
the Security Council, who have known the work
of the Security Council for a far longer period
than it has been my own privilege to know it.

J'aurais, quant cl moi, pre£ere que le privilege
de faire ici quelques remarques revint cl l'un de
ceux qui, avant moi, ont represente l'Australie au
Consei1 de securite et qui, plus longtemps qu'il ne
m'a ete donne de le faire, ont participe aux travaux du Conseil.

At all even'~s, I am certain that my predecessors
would wish, as I now wish, to declare on this occasion their warm appreciation for the help and
courtesy which the Austra1ian representatives on
this body have invariably received and to express
regret at the ending, in this particular context, of
personal relations which we think have always

Du moins, je .suis persuade que mes predecesseurs auraient tenu, comme mOl maintenant, a
adres .r en cette occasion au \Conseil leurs vifs
remerciements pour l'aide et la courtoisie que les
repl'esentants de l'Australie au sein de cet organe
y ont toujours trouvees, et cl exprimer leurs regrets de voir prendre fin, ici, des relations person-

ala

12
been friendly and cordial. I include in the'se re- nelles qui, cl. notre sens, ont toujours ete emprein,..
marks the Secretary-General, Mr. Trygve Lie, tes d'une cordialite amicale. 11 va sans dire que
and both the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. c~s remarques s'appliquent cl. M. Trygve Lie, SecSobolev, and the Secretary, Mr. Protitch.
,retaire general, ainsi qu'a M. Sobolev, Secretairegeneral adjoint et a M. Protitch, Secretaire.
Australia has been conscious of it~own very
real responsibility, as one ofthe originall members
of the Security Council, to assist in ensuring that
the foundation on which the Security Council
could develop into a vital organ, fulfilling the
purposes f9r which it was established, were -well
and soundly laid. We have ~lso been conscious of
our responsibility, as an elected member of the
Security Council, to the whole body of the United
Nations.

L'Australie a eu pleinement conscience de la
responsabilite veritable qui lui incombait, en tant
que l'un des premiers membres elus au Conseil du
securite, de contribuer cl. assurer l'etablissement de
bases· justes et solides sur lesquelles le Conseit de
securite puisse devenir l'organe essentiel capable
de realiser les de:sseins en vue desquels it a ete cree.
Nous avons ete conscients egalement de notre res~
ponsabilite a l'egard de l'ensemble des Nations
Unies en qualite de membre elu an Conseil de
securite.

Looking back on the w~rk of the Security
Si nous nous reportons aux travaux du Conseil
Council over the period of Australia's member- de securite pendant laduree du mandat de l'Ausship, the members will note that it has been one tralie, nous constatons que l'un· des traits essenof the features of that period that the task of tiels de cette periode a ete, pour le Conseil de
organization has had to proceed simultaneously securite, la necessite de proceder simultanement
with the facing by the Security Council of a large au travail d'organisation et a fexamen d'un grand
number of complex and difficult problems. In nombre de problemes complexes et di££iciles. Dans
such circumstances, it is a matter for satisfaction de telles conditions, it est satisfaisant de constater
that the Security Council has been able to proceed que le Conseit de securite a pu aller si loin et si
as far and as fast as it has done with the estab- vite en besogne dans l'etablissement de sa struclishment of its organizational structure. This de- ture organique. Evidemment, ce progres a ete favelopment was, of course, helped by the work of vorise par l'activite de la Commission preparatoire
the Preparatory Commission and of the Commit- et du Comited'experts du Conseil de securite, qui
tee of Experts of the Security Council, which did ont accompli une grande partie de la tache fondaa great deal of the necessary fundamental work. . mentale necessaire.
The rules of procedure of the Security Council,
while they are still incomplete and in need of some
revision, have for the most part enabled the Council to conduct its business in an orderly, if hot
always an expeditous, manner. Furthermore, the
Security Council has fulfilled its role in the appointment of a Secretary-General and in the election of the members of the Internatio!J.al Court
of Justice. Again, it has examined both last year
and this year a large number of applications for
new membership in the United Nations. At the
same time, while such basic procedures have been.
laid down, I must state frankly that in one respect
the Australian Government has felt reason, and
has frequently said so, for serious concern. I refer,
of course, to the way in which the voting procedure provided in Article 27 of tbe Charter has
been interpreted and exercised by certain of the
permanent members.

Le reglement interieur du Conseil de securite,
qui certes est encore incomplet et appelle certaines
revisions, a neanmoins permis au Conseil de fonctionner avec methode sinon toujours avec celerite.
De plus le Conseil de securite a rempli le role qui
lui etait assigne dans la nominatign du Secretaire
general et dans l'election des membres de la Cour
internationale de justice. En outre, il a examine,
tant l'an passe que cette annee, un grand nombre
de demandes d'admi,ssion a l'Organisation des
Nations Unies. Cependant, alors meme que cette·
procedure fondamentale a ete etablie, je doisdire
franchement qu'il est une question dont le Gouvernement australien a crn bon, comme it l'a souligne a mainte reprise, de se preoccuper serieusement. J e veux parler evidemment de la maniere
dont certains des membres permanents ont interprete et applique la procedure de vote prevue
l'Article 27 de la Charte.

I have. no intention at this time to enter into a
detailed discussion of this question. None the less,
it is the. view of my Government that unless the
permanent members exercise the privilege given
them by the Charter with moderation, with a sense
of responsibility and in the spirit of co-operation,
the Security Council can never fulfil the functions
assigned to it as a basic instrument of the United
Nations.

Je n'ai pas l'intention ici d'entrer dans un examen approfondi de la question. Neanmoins, mon
Gouvernement estime que si les membres permanents, dans l'exercice du privilege qui leur est
accorde par la Charte, ne font preuve de moderation, s'ils ne temoignent d'un sentiment certain de
leurs responsabilites et d'un esprit de cooperation,
le Conseil de securite ne pourra jamais s'acquitter
de la mission qui lui est assignee en tant qu'organe essentiel des Nations Unies.

It is our hope that in the coming year the
permanent members will pay due regard to the
views expressed by an overwhelming majority
of the Members of the United Nations during the
recent. General Assembly, and that appropriate
procedures may be worked out which will enable
the Security· Council to operate efficiently and
. effectively.

Nous esperons qu'au cours de l'annee qui vient
les membres permanents feront droit aux vreux
exprimes par la majorite ecrasante des Membres
des Nations U nies au cours de la recente session de
l'Assemblee generale, et que l'accord se fera sur
une procedure appropriee permettant au Conseil
de securite de fonctionner reellement de maniere
e££icace.

a

13
It must never be forgotten that all the members
of the Security Council- not only the elected
members, but all members - have a corporate
responsibility to ensure prompt and effective action for the maintenance of international peace
and security. After all, the Security Council derives its functions and powers from the Members
of the United Nations and acts on their behalf.
Such is the democratic principle which must guide
all the actions of the Security Council. It follows
from this principle that members of the Security
Council should place the interests of the United
Nations above their national interests. The Security Council must never become the tool or
instrument of purely national policies, nor the
platform for the conveyance of propaganda of
conflicting States or groups of States. .

Il ne faut jamais oublier que tom; les membres
du Conseil de securite-non seulement les membres elus, mais tous les membres, sans distinction
-sont solidairement responsables d'assurer une
action rapide et efficace pour le maintien de la
paix et de la securite internationales. Au demeurant, le Conseil de securite tient ses pouvoirs des
Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et
agit en leur nom. Tel est le principe democratique
qui doit guider le Conseil de securite dans tous ses
actes. Par suite, les membres du Conseil de securite ont le devoir de placer les interets de l'Organisation des Nations Unies au dessris de leurs
intt~rets nationaux. I1 ne faut pas que le Conseil
de securite devienne jamais l'instrument de politiques purement nationales, non plus qu'une tribune ou se ferait la propagande d'Etats ou de
groupes d'Etats antagonistes.

During its own term of office, Australia has
endeavoured at all times to examine each question
and each issue on its merits, in the light of the
purposes and principles of the Charter, -without
aligning itself with any bloc or group. We recognize and are convinced that the formation of rigid
blocs is utterly inimical to the w~ll-being of the
United Nations as a whole.

Au cours de son mandat, l'Australie s'est toujours efforcee d'examiner objectivement toutes les
questions et tous les cas, a la lumiere des buts et
des principes de la Charte, sans jamais calquer son
attitude sur celle d'un bloc ou d'un groupe que!
qu'il soit. Nous estimons, bien plus, nous sommes
convaincus, que la formation de blocs rigides ne
peut qu'etre extremement prejudiciable au bien
general des Nations Unies.

In order that the Security Council may examine
each situation or dispute in the light of proved
facts rather than of prejudices or preconceived
ideas, Australia has insisted at all times on a full
investigation of the facts at issue before a decision
was taken by the Security Council and has, where
necessary, advocated investigations on the spot.
In this connexion we believe that we have carried
our full share of responsibility in the various
Commissions and Committees established for such
purposes. I have in mind the Sub-Committee on
the Spanish question, the Commission of Investigation concerning Gfeek frontier incidents and
the Consular Commission and the Committee of
Good Offices in Indonesia. It is our hope that this
practice will become a firm precedent which will
be followed by the Security Council.

Pour que le Conseil de securite soit en me~ure
d'examiner toutes les affaires et tous It.s differends a la lumiere de faits etablis, et non en fonction de prejuges ou d'idees precon<;ues, l' ~ustra1ie
a toujours insiste pour qu'uneenquete approfondie
ait lieu avant que le Gonseil de securite prenne une
decision, et, le cas ecMant, l'Australie a preconise
des"enquetes sur place. A cet egard, nous estimons
avoir assume notre part de responsabilite dans les
diverses Commissions et les divers Comites crees
a de telles fins. Je pense notamment au SousComite charg~ de la questions espagnole; a. la
Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus
le long de la frontiere grecque, a la Commission
consulaire et a la Commission de bons offices en
Indonesie. Nous esperons que cettepratique constituera un precedent bien etabli qui sera suivi par
le Conseil de securite.

Without going any further into a review of the
Sans poursuivre la revue des questions dont le
specific questions which have come before the Conseil de securite a ete saisi pendant la duree de
Security Council during the period of our mem- notre mandat, je voudrais simplement ajouter
bership, I should like to add merely this. In the ceci : au oaurs de ses deux premieres annees d'exis. first two years of its life, the Security Council has .tence, le Conseil de securite a da faire 'face a
faced almost as many important political problems presque autant de problemes politiques importants
as were handled by the Council of the League of que le Conseil de la Societe des Nations au cours
Nations during the existence of that body. The de toute son existence. Dans bien des.cas, les deaction taken by the Security Council has in many liberations du Conseil de securite ont de<;u par lenr
cases been disappointingly slow and, in some lenteur et dans certains cas, elles se sont averees
cases, ineffective, notably, for example, in the , inutiles; c'est ainsi par exemple que dans la guesGreek question, where the Council was unable to tion grecl'1ue, le Conseil n'a pu prendre aucune
take any action at all and where the General As- mesure e "Assemblee generale a da exercer en
sembly was obliged to exercise a secondary re- seoond la :'csponsabilite du maintien de la paix et
sponsibility for the maintenance of international de la securite internationales.
peace and security.
. In other cases the Security Council, while taking some action, has not yet succeeded in reaching
.a final solution. I refer particularly to Indonesia,
in the case of which, on the initiative of Australia,
prompt action was taken earlier this year by a
resolution calling for the cessation of hostilities. 1

Dans d'autres cas, les mesures .prises par le
Conseil de securite n'ont pas abouti '3. des solutions
de£initives. Je pense notamment a la question indonesienne; c'est sur l'initiative de l'Australie1
qu'une decision rapide a ete prise at: debut de
l'annee sous la forme d'une resolution tendant a

lSee Officuu Records of the Sec1wity Coundl, Second
Year, No. 68, 173rd meeting.

lVoir les Proces-verbau% officiels du Conseil de secfI,rite,
Deuxieme Annee; No. 68, 1730me seance.

14
However, in spite of all the efforts which the
Australian delegation and others have made in
the Security Council, the initial impetus has not
been followed through as thoroughly and as
vigorously as we considered necessary. As a result, although some progress has been made, the
cease-fire order is not yet fully effective, and the
ultimate political settlement is not yet in sight.

la cessation des hostilites. Toutefois, malgre tous'
les efforts que la delegation australienne et d'autres de~egations ont deployes au Conseil de securite, l'impulsion initiale n'a pas ete suivie jusqu'au
bout de fa<;on aussi totale et aussi vigoureuse quenous l'avions juge necessaire. Aussi, malgre quelques progres, l'ordre de cesser le feu n'est pas.
encore entierement respecte, et le regIement poli-·
tique final n'est pas encore en vue.

)

Finally, by way of expressing the Attstralian
point of view on the conduct of the work of the
Security Council, I should say that it would seem
essential for the Council to press through to a
complete solution of the various questions which
come before it; and it is a matter for regret that
the list of questions of which the Security Council
is seiz~d constantly grows longer. Indeed, such
an approach to the work before the Council is the
more necessary in that the Security Council has
during even the very recent period assumed new
and in some respects most onerous responsibilities.

Qu'il me soit permis, enfin, d'exposer les vues·
de l'Australie sur la conduite des travaux du Conseil de securite: il est essentiel, a notre avis, qU?
le Conseil mette en reuvre tous les moyens en ,son
pouvoir pour parvenir a une solution complete des:
divers P!oblemes qui lui sont soumis, et l'on ne
saurait constater sans regret que la liste des ques-·
tions dont le Conseil de securite est saisi ne fait
qu'allonger. Une telle maniere d'aborder les questions soumises au Conseil est d'autant plus necessaire que cet organe a assume, au cours de ces·
derniers mois, des responsabilites nouvelles qui a.
certains egards sont extremement lourdes.

I mention, for example, the obligations laid on
the Council by virtue of its approval of the
Trusteeship Agreement for the former Japanese
mandated islands.1 The Council has also undertaken wide responsibilities in connexion with the
Free Territory of Trieste and, most recently of
all, in connexion with the implementation of the
General Assembly's resolution on Palestine. 2 All
these are considerable and heavy responsibilities
which will demand constant attention and the
highest degree of political wisdom.

J e citerai par exemple les obligations qui incombent au Conseil du fait de l'approbation qu'il'
a donnee a l'Accord de tutelle pour les lIes anterieurement placees sous mandat japonais.1 Le Conseil a egalement assume de grandes responsabilites
au sujet du Territoire libre de Trieste, et plus.
recemment encore, au· sujet de la mise en reuvre·
de la resolution de l'Assemblee generale relative
a la question palestinienne. 2 11 s'agit la de responsabilites considerables et particulierement lourdes,.
qui exigeront une attention constante et une sagesse politique extreme.

In the whole field of disarmament and the control of atomic energy, Australia has been, I hope
I am correct in s~ying, an active and not unuseful
partic;ipant in the discussions. We have sought to
make a positive contribution in the Atomic Energy
Commssion and in the Commission' for Conventional Armaments. It is true that so far the efforts
of those two bodies have proved unavailing in the
face of the basic differences of policy among the
permanent members of the Council. It is our hope
that the coming year will see substantial progress
made in this field and also in the organization of
armed forces to be put at the disposal of the
Security Council. Until such forces have been
organized, the Council will always be hampered
in the exercise of its responsibility, although we
hope that force will never have to be employed
to ensure the carrying out of the Council's de---=.-,
cisions.

Dans le domaine tout entier du desarmement
et du controle de l'energie atomique, je crois pouvoir dire que l'Australie a participe de maniere'
active et utile aux deliberations. Nous nous sommes efforces d'apporter une contribution reelle
aux travaux de la Commission de l'energie atomique et a ceux de la Commission des armementsde type classique. Certes, les efforts de ces deux
organes se sont jusqu'a present averes infructueux
du fait des conceptions politiques essentiellement
differentes qui divisent les membres permanents
du Conseil. Nous esperons qu'au coursde l'annee
qui va commencer des progres importants seront
realises dans ce domaine ainsi que dans I'organisation des forces armees a mettre a la. disposition du
Conseil de securite. Tant que de teI1es forces n'auront pas ete organisees, nous estimons, sans cesser
toutefois d'esperer que le recours a la force ne sera
pas necessaire pour assurer I'application des decisions du Conseil, que le Conseil sera toujours
gene dans l'exercice de ses responsabilites.

At the close of 1947, therefore, Australia sees
in the Security Council an important potential
instrument for the maintenance of peace and
security. Good progress has been made in organization. Many issues have been faced and
debated in the full light of public opinion and
have· been exposed, if not always completely
solved.

En cette fin d'annee 1947, i'Australie voit dans.
le Conseil de securite un instrument essentiel susceotible d'assurer le maintien de la paix et de la
securite. Des progres sensibles ont ete realises
dans le domaine de l'organisation. De nombreuses
questions ont ete abordees et examinees au grand
.jour, devant l'opinion publique, et, si le Canseil ne
les a pas toujours eniierement resolues, du moins
les a-t-il integralement exposees.

lSee Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 31, and ibid., Supplement No. 8, Annex 17.

lVoir les Proces-verbaux officiels df~ Conseil de securite..
Annee, No 31, et ibid., Supplement No 8,
Annexe 17.2Voir :les DOCftments officiels de la deuxieme sessionde l' Assemblee generale, Resolutions, No 18l(II).

2See Official Records of tlu! second session of the General
Assembly, Resolutiot'.$, No. 181 (II).

Deuxil~me

15
In the last resort, the success of the Council will
depend on the support given by all Members 'of
the United Nations. Australia, although after
tomorrow it will no longer be a member of the
Council, will, for its part, give this support to
the utmost. The successful functioning of the
Security Council and of all the agencies of the
United Nations is, and will continue to be, the
cardinal principle of the foreign policy of my
country.

p:n dernit~re analyse, le succes du Conseil dependra de l'appui qui lui sera donne par tous leg,
Membres des Nations Unies. Bien que demai~
l'Australie cesse d'etre membre du Conseil, elle
accordera, pour sa part, son appui le plus ferme
au Conseil. Travailler au succes du Conseil de
securite et de tous les organes des Nations Unies
est, et demeurera, le principe souverain de la politique etrangere de mon pays.

In conclusion, I am asked by the Foreign
Minister of Australia, Mr. Evatt, to convey his
most cordial wishes for the successful functioning
of the Council during the coming period.

Pour terminer, M. Evatt, Ministre des. Affaires
etrangeres de l'Australie, me prie de transmettre
aux membres du Conseil de securite ses VCVIX les
plus cordiaux pour le succes de leurs travaux
durant l'annee a venir.

The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

La seance est levee a 17 h. 25.

I

~SALES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
ARGENTINA
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Msina 500
BUENOS AIRES

FINLAND
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

AUSTRALIA
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.

FRANCE.

BELGIUM
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14·22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES

GREECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Lihrairie internationale
Place de la ConstitutioD
ATHENES

BOLIVIA
Libreria Cientifica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA. PAZ

GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

CANADA
The Ryerson Press .
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO
CHILE
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced846
SANTIAGO
CHRNA
The Commercial Press Ltd..
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI
COLOMBIA
Libreria Latina Ltda.
• Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA
COSTA RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE

Editions A. PedOD&
13, rae SoufHot

PARIS;,Ve

HAITI
Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale l11·B
PORT-AU-PRINCE
ICELAND
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVIK
INDIA
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEW DELHI
IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN
IRAQ
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
Th~ Bookshop
BAGHDAD

CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA lIABANA

LEBANON
Lihrairie universelle
BEYRCUTR

CZECHOSLOVAKIA
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

LUXEMBOURG
Lihrairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG

DENMARK
Einar Munksgaard
Nj1lrregade6
Kt1BENHAVN
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Lib~eria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CWDAD TRUJILLO
ECUADOR
Mufioz Hermanos y Cia.
. Nueve de Octuhre 703
Casilla 10·24
GUAYAQUIL

NETHERLANDS
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
'S·GRAVENHAGE
NEW ZEALAND
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON
United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON

EGYPT
Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAmo

NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de Publicaciones
MANAGUA, D. N.

ETHIOPIA
Agence ethiopienne de publicite
P.O.Box8

NORWAY
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO

ADDlS~ABEBA

Printed in the U.S.A.

---------

Price in the United States: 15 cents'

PERU
Libreria internacional del Peru,
S.A.
Casilla 1417'
LIMA
PHILIPPINES
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL
POLAND
Spoldzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA

)

SWEDEN
A.·B. C. K Fritzes Kungl.
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM
SWITZERLAND
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL.
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I
SYRIA
. Librairieuniverselle
DAMAS
TURKEY
Librairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU·IsTA1'\BUL
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESSURG and at CAPETOWN
and DURBAN

UNITED KINGDOM
H. M. Stationery. Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
.
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHESTER,
CA~DIFF, BELFAST, BmMINGHAM
J
and BRISTOL
'

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
International Documents Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Oficina de Representaci6n de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO
VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Machado
Conde a Piiiango 11
CARACAS
YUGOSLAVIA
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska U1. 36
BEOGRAD
April 1949 - 3,000

~9
