A/65/PV.59

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

59

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 7 December 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

OOOOO

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/65/69,
A/65/69/Add.1 and A/65/69/Add.2)
Report of the work of the United Nations
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on
Oceans and the Law of the Sea at its eleventh
meeting (A/65/164)
Report on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the regular process
for global reporting and assessment of the
state of the marine environment, including
socio-economic aspects (A/65/358)
Letter from the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Open-ended Informal Working Group to study
issues relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity
beyond areas of national jurisdiction (A/65/68)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.20)

(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementations of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Draft resolution (A/65/L.21)
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, at the outset, to thank both coordinators,
Ambassador Henrique Valle of Brazil and Ms. Holly
Koehler of the United States, for having conducted the
negotiations on the draft resolutions that the Assembly
has before it today (A/65/L.20 and A/65/L.21).
As we do every year in this Assembly, my
delegation wishes to reiterate that the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea represents one of the
major contributions to the strengthening of peace,
security, cooperation and friendly relations among all
nations. At the same time, it is one of the international
instruments with the greatest economic, strategic and
political implications.
The goal of the negotiators of the Convention was
to resolve all matters related to the law of the sea in
one single instrument. Its provisions, thus, represent a
delicate balance between the rights and the obligations
of States, a balanced that emerged after nine years of
negotiations. That balance must be preserved by all
States, individually and as members of international
organizations dealing with ocean affairs or other kinds
of organizations. That delicate balance is to be

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-67898 (E)

*1067898*

A/65/PV.59

preserved also when addressing new challenges having
to do with the law of the sea.
The Convention is a veritable constitution for the
oceans, with a clearly universal character, accepted as a
binding norm even by non-party States, as it constitutes
in itself customary international law. The Argentine
delegation will make a statement in explanation of vote
on the draft resolution on sustainable fisheries.
Nevertheless, I will make some remarks on the issues
dealt with in that draft resolution as well as in the draft
resolution on oceans and the law of the sea.
The question of biodiversity beyond the limits of
national jurisdiction is one of the new emerging issues
in the law of the sea. In February 2010, the second
meeting of the Ad Hoc Informal Open-ended Working
Group established by resolution 59/24 was held.
Argentina was concerned about certain proposals made
at that meeting and during the negotiation of the draft
resolution on oceans and the law of the sea, which
could have resulted in overburdening the Working
Group at a time it had not yet concluded an extremely
important debate: the debate regarding the legal regime
applicable, under the Convention, to marine genetic
resources in areas beyond national jurisdiction.
Likewise, my delegation would like to reiterate
that the ambiguity of the expression “areas beyond
national jurisdiction” has not made it easier to address
the issue of the conservation and sustainable use of
those resources, as it has blurred the distinction
between the two maritime areas beyond national
jurisdiction: the high seas and the Area.
We therefore reiterate once again that the
question of the legal regime is still outstanding — and
that is reflected in paragraph 165 of the draft resolution
that we will adopt — and should be addressed in the
context of the mandate of the Working Group, at its
next session, with a view to making concrete progress
in that regard.
In that context, we must pay due attention to the
fact that one of the goals of the Convention was to
develop the principles embodied in resolution 2749
(XXV) of 17 December 1970, through which the
General Assembly solemnly declared, inter alia, that
the Area of the seabed and ocean floor and the subsoil
thereof, beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, as well
as its resources, “are the common heritage of mankind”,
the exploration and exploitation of which “shall be
carried out for the benefit of mankind as a whole”.

2

This year, the twentieth Meeting of States Parties
to the Convention dealt with the question of the
workload of the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf with a view to adopting measures in
that regard.
My delegation therefore wishes to highlight two
aspects concerning that issue. On the one hand, it is
urgent that parties to the Convention continue to
address the issue of the workload of the Commission,
so that it can perform its functions expeditiously,
efficiently and effectively, and we must do so in a
realistic and conscientious manner. On the other hand,
it is more relevant than ever to remind all States that
the work of the Commission consists in drawing the
limit of the shelf, not in establishing the rights of the
coastal State, and that article 77, paragraph 3, of the
Convention provides that the rights of the coastal State
over the continental shelf do not depend on occupation,
effective or notional, or on any express proclamation.
That reminder is reflected in paragraph 50 of the draft
resolution on oceans and the law of the sea.
Allow me to refer briefly to the other two
institutions established by the Convention.
This year, at its sixteenth session, the
International Seabed Authority adopted regulations on
prospecting and exploring for polymetallic sulphides.
The adoption of that new set of regulations — after the
adoption, in 2000, of the regulations on polymetallic
nodules — is another step forward in the legislative
activity of the Authority regarding the resources of the
Area.
Nevertheless, there are still challenges ahead. We
therefore encourage the Authority to continue to work
towards the adoption of norms on marine scientific
research for the preservation of the marine
environment pursuant to the provisions of articles 143
and 145 of the Convention.
We welcome the presence in this Hall, as every
year, of the Secretary-General of the International
Seabed Authority, Mr. Nii Odunton.
In addition, this year, the Authority requested an
advisory opinion from the Seabed Disputes Chamber
on the responsibilities and obligations of States
sponsoring persons and entities with respect to
activities in the International Seabed Area. This is the
first time that those two institutions, which were
established by the Convention, interact with each other

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

pursuant to article 191 of the Convention in order to
fulfil the goal of safeguarding the common heritage of
humankind. Argentina is one of the States parties that
participated in the proceedings, and we welcome the
extensive participation in the advisory opinion process.
That participation clearly demonstrates States’
commitment to the regime established by the
Convention for the Area and to the institutions created
by the Convention.
I would like to stress our confidence in the
Tribunal’s maturity. It has been reinforced in its
jurisprudence as the tribunal that was established in
accordance with the Convention and specializes in the
law of the sea. We welcome, in that regard, the
statement by the President of the Tribunal, Judge José
Luis Jesus, and his presence among us today.
As regards the regular process for the assessment
of the state of the marine environment, my country
participated actively in the second meeting of the Ad
Hoc Open-ended Working Group, which in August
2010 submitted recommendations to the General
Assembly. Argentina welcomes the fact that the
Assembly followed the recommendations of the
Working Group.
Another element of the draft resolutions we will
adopt today to which my country attaches importance
is the Informal Consultative Process established by
resolution 54/33. Argentina supported the review of the
Process, which took place at the 10th meeting of the
Process, in the understanding that its continuation
depended on its being re-directed towards the original
objectives, which are closely linked to sustainable
development. The Argentine delegation acknowledges
both of the co-chairs, from New Zealand and Senegal,
for having conducted the 11th meeting of the Process
in accordance with the parameters arising from the
review of the Process.
As regards the draft resolution on sustainable
fisheries, my delegation must reiterate the need not to
abandon the rule governing all law of the sea
negotiations — inherited from the negotiation of the
Convention itself — which is to proceed by consensus.
That is the only way to ensure that resolutions of the
General Assembly are accepted. Unfortunately, that is
not what happened with respect to one element of the
draft resolution on sustainable fisheries, and my
delegation will make an explanation of vote in that
regard.

10-67898

In addition, at its sixty-sixth session, the
Assembly will examine the implementation of
paragraphs 83 to 87 of resolution 61/105 and
paragraphs 113 to 117 and 119 to 127 of resolution
64/72. In that regard, my country must reiterate that the
sedimentary resources of the continental shelf are
subject to the sovereignty rights of the coastal States
for the whole extension of that maritime area.
Therefore, the conservation and management of such
resources is subject to the exclusive power of the
coastal States, who have the responsibility of adopting
the necessary measures regarding such resources and
their associated ecosystems, which could be affected
by fishing practices that can have a destructive impact,
including the practice of bottom trawling. Argentina is
taking the necessary steps to adopt such measures for
the conservation of the sedimentary resources across
the entire extension of its continental shelf, and
encourages other coastal States to exercise that same
responsibility.
In light of the foregoing, we would therefore like
to highlight paragraph 119 of the draft resolution on
sustainable fisheries, which once again recalls the
exclusivity of the rights of the coastal State in areas of
its continental shelf beyond 200 miles.
Also regarding fisheries, my country wishes to
reiterate its concern about the growing trend of trying
through General Assembly resolutions to legitimize the
exercise
by
regional
fisheries
management
organizations of some type of authority over vessels
flying the flag of countries that neither are members of
such organizations nor have consented to such
measures, as that contradicts one of the basic norms of
the law of treaties.
Finally, as it has every year when we consider the
report of the Secretary-General on oceans, Argentina
would like to express its recognition to the staff of the
Division of Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for
their professional and devoted work and the assistance
that they voluntarily provide to Member States in the
matters under their competence.
Mr. Menon (Singapore): The 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea remains one
of the landmark achievements of the international
community. Enshrined within the Convention are finely
balanced compromises and carefully crafted provisions
designed to ensure the harmonious usage of our oceans
and seas. It has served us well for three decades, and it

3

A/65/PV.59

bears witness to what the global community can
achieve if we work together in a spirit of cooperation
and consensus for the collective good.
Singapore is an island nation. It is entirely
surrounded by the seas and sits astride one of the
busiest straits in the world, which has nourished us
from our founding as a trading post and continues to
sustain us today, even in this era of e-commerce. Ships
bearing goods from all over the world call at our port,
as they have for close to two hundred years, en route to
their final destinations.
It is therefore of utmost importance to our
survival and continued growth and prosperity that the
rights of passage guaranteed in the Convention
continue to be respected by all countries. As such, we
remain, like many countries, ever vigilant in order to
ensure that the Convention remains the fundamental
framework within which all activity related to our
oceans and seas is regulated.
The Convention has stood the test of time, but,
like any established code, it faces challenges in a time
beset by changes in the global order and the
accelerating pace of economic development. In that
regard, we see two potential challenges to the
Convention, which we think deserve more attention
from the international community.
First, globalization has shrunk the world,
including its oceans. As mankind devises new ways of
exploiting the resources of the oceans and seas, those
activities are increasingly coming under scrutiny from
various quarters and in numerous forums. We welcome
such attention as a positive development. Given the
scarce resources available in the oceans, it is vital that
we work together to manage them, lest we destroy or
deplete them in a frenzy of rapaciousness.
However, discussions on the management of
resources, whether bilateral, regional or even
multilateral, have sometimes focused solely on the
technical, scientific or environmental aspects of the
issue. While well-meaning, such an approach has led at
times to decisions being made or measures being taken
that can be difficult to reconcile with the Convention.
That has had the unfortunate effect of threatening
to undermine the complex web of interlocking rights
and obligations that are so carefully balanced within
the Convention. We therefore urge all countries to
ensure that a holistic approach is adopted to the

4

complex issues relating to the use of our oceans and
seas, and that mechanisms are created, as well as a
culture, whereby all experts dealing with issues
relating to our seas and oceans can have a full
discussion of the issue, which, in turn, will result in
solutions that will also be congruent with the wording
and spirit of the Convention.
The second challenge we see comes as a
consequence of an emerging multipolar world. As the
totem pole of global power is realigned, the temptation
will grow for national assertions that certain territories,
including parts of the high seas, are within their areas
or zones of influence. We must never forget that
international law governs the issuance and resolution
of such assertions.
The Convention has unequivocally guaranteed the
freedom of the high seas and the rights of transit
passage for the common benefit of all nations. That is
one of the cornerstones of the law of the sea, and the
international community must be ready to challenge
any attempt by any Power to undermine it.
In our modern world, what lies beneath our
oceans has become as important as what sails above it.
Virtually all modern commerce and communications —
international phone calls, e-mails, merchandise ordered
from Internet retailers — depend on the network of
submarine fibre-optic cables that links us together.
Those unseen and unsung cables are the true skeleton
and nervous system of our world, linking our countries
in a fibre-optic web.
However, that web is not invulnerable, and
damage to those submarine cables would cause
disruption and economic loss. While advances in
technology provide for automatic re-routing of data
traffic in such instances, global communications and
the Internet remain highly dependent on submarine
cables as key physical communication links between
countries, and we should never take that critical
communications infrastructure for granted.
If there should come a day when an accident, or
worse, a deliberate well-planned act of sabotage,
knocks out a key node or portion of those cables,
countries and even whole regions could suffer massive
economic losses, social disruptions, and compromises
to national security.
Despite that danger, many countries are unaware
of the critical importance of submarine cables, and

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

many States parties to the Convention have not paid
sufficient attention to their obligation under the
Convention to ensure that they exercise criminal
jurisdiction over wilful or negligent damage to those
cables in the high seas.
Given the importance of that issue, Singapore has
sought to introduce two paragraphs regarding
submarine cables in this year’s omnibus draft
resolution on oceans and the law of the sea. We thank
the many countries that have given us strong
expressions of support in favour of those paragraphs
and have worked closely with us for the inclusion of
those paragraphs in the draft resolution. The support
we have received demonstrates that the international
community is now beginning to turn its attention to
that issue.
We hope that the language in the draft resolution
will catalyse many conversations in various forums,
and that in times to come experts, Governments,
industry and other relevant actors in that area will
identify and address issues relevant to those cables and
work to ensure their security for the common economic
and social good of our world.
Singapore has always viewed the Convention as a
lynchpin of international relations. Although piracy and
other disruptions to shipping hijack the headlines, it is
a fact that millions of vessels traverse our oceans and
seas daily without incident. That is a strong testament
to the success of the Convention.
Mr. Borg (Malta): Malta wishes to align itself
with the statement made by the representative of
Belgium on behalf of the European Union. In that
regard, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive two-part report (A/65/69) and to the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for
the assistance given to Malta in the past year. We
would also like to provide some additional remarks
from a national and regional perspective.
It will be recalled that 43 years ago Malta called
upon United Nations Member States in this Assembly
to undertake a reform of the law of the sea, which
culminated in the adoption of the Convention on the
Law of the Sea on 10 December 1982. Malta’s
initiative in 1967 sought precisely to bring to the fore
and initiate a process that saw its vision for an
international order for the oceans and the seabed begin
to become a reality 15 years later. That universal treaty

10-67898

of law and order pertaining to the common heritage of
mankind has and will continue to have far-reaching
implications for the preservation and management of
the oceans.
Piracy and armed robbery at sea against vessels
continue to be an issue of grave concern to
international navigation and the safety of commercial
maritime routes. Malta, as one of the leading flag
States in the world, is very much concerned about the
increase in the frequency and ferocity of piracy attacks
on merchant ships and has always provided the
necessary support to ships registered under the Malta
flag that have suffered a piracy attack, in particular off
the coast of Somalia.
According to the International Chamber of
Commerce International Maritime Bureau, about
100 Malta flag ships have been attacked off the coast
of Somalia since December 2003. That is of prime
concern in terms of the safety of seafarers, given the
volume of trade transported through the Gulf of Aden.
It is imperative that that shipping lane be adequately
protected from any acts that might disrupt the flow of
international traffic through it.
Malta’s participation in Operation Atalanta is not
only a contribution to the efforts for safe international
maritime traffic but is also in line with Malta’s
commitments as a State party to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and to other relevant
maritime treaties to which Malta is a State party. It is in
that direction that we intend to promote a debate in the
international community on new issues in the law of
the sea that have cropped up since the conclusion of
the Convention in 1982.
My delegation wishes to reiterate the importance
that Malta attributes to the role played by the
International Maritime Law Institute (IMLI) in the
field of capacity-building since its establishment in
1988. In the words of the current Secretary-General of
the International Maritime Organization and Chairman
of the IMLI Governing Board, IMLI has helped to
ensure that a sufficient number of maritime law
experts, armed with the appropriate knowledge and
skills, would be available — especially within
developing countries — to help with the preparation,
implementation and enforcement of legislation giving
effect to the international instruments to which
Governments have become parties.

5

A/65/PV.59

The Institute has trained lawyers from 119 States
so far and has created a wide network of governmental
legal advisers, mainly from developing countries,
confirming its objectives and its successful and
effective capacity-building role in the field of
international law, which has been of critical importance
to the maritime community and the shipping industry at
large. Considering the many ongoing capacity-building
initiatives in the area of ocean affairs and the law of
the sea, it would be appropriate to explore whether the
time has come to adopt a cohesive and coordinated
approach to such initiatives within the United Nations
system.
As the Secretary-General stated in his report,
international migration by sea is often treacherous and
can lead to loss of life. Malta’s position at the centre of
the Mediterranean Sea has exposed it to huge influxes
of illegal immigrants over the years. In 2009, the
number of people arriving in Malta who were seeking
to migrate clandestinely by sea was 1,475. Though the
number of migrants arriving by sea has, in fact,
declined this year, the situation is not sustainable for
Malta owing to our country’s geographic and
demographic characteristics, in particular its small size
and population density. Despite those severe
difficulties, Malta has continued to honour its
international obligations towards genuine refugees and
persons qualifying for humanitarian protection, and has
awarded asylum to a very large number of persons
seeking it, relative to our country’s size and
population.
Back in 1988, Malta was the first country to
formally introduce the issue of climate change as a
political issue on the General Assembly’s agenda, and
has sought since then to ensure that climate change
remains a focus of high-level attention on the part of
the international community. Like other small islands,
Malta faces the prospect of severe adverse impacts
from climate change. Indeed, the future effect of
increasing emissions on the health of the seas and
oceans may be far more wide-ranging and complex
than has been supposed. That was confirmed in a
recent report on the environmental consequences of
ocean acidification published by the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP).
In that context, Malta, as a small island State, is
very conscious of the condition of its marine
environment and coastal regions. Paragraphs 133, 134
and 160 of draft resolution A/65/L.20 refer to the

6

importance and relevance of regional seas agreements
and conventions in protecting and preserving the
marine environment. Such regional cooperation
schemes and centres have proved very useful tools for
assisting countries by enhancing the enforcement, at
the regional level, of multilateral treaties on the
protection of the marine environment.
Malta is proud to be the host country of the
Regional Marine Pollution Emergency Response
Centre for the Mediterranean Sea (REMPEC), a
regional activity centre for the Mediterranean Action
Plan, which was the first regional seas programme
established by UNEP in 1976. REMPEC has so far
helped more than 13 Mediterranean coastal States to
draft their national contingency plans, and has also
facilitated the drawing up of subregional response
agreements. In an area such as the Mediterranean, so
highly charged with political differences, regional seas
programmes and technical cooperation are helping to
achieve the main goals of our Organization, namely, to
maintain peace and ensure a better livelihood for our
citizens.
In that regard, Malta welcomes the entry into
force of the Protocol for the Protection of the
Mediterranean Sea against Pollution Resulting from
Exploration and Exploitation of the Continental Shelf
and the Seabed and its Subsoil, adopted in 1994, which
is an implementation of the Global Environment Fund/
United Nations Development Programme/International
Maritime Organization GloBallast Partnerships Project
in the Mediterranean and the European Union-financed
regional project SafeMed II.
Malta is fully committed to the implementation of
the Barcelona Convention for the Protection of the
Marine Environment and the Coastal Region of the
Mediterranean, as well as its Protocols, which obliges
the contracting parties to take all appropriate measures
to prevent, abate, combat and, to the fullest possible
extent, eliminate pollution of the Mediterranean Sea
area caused by dumping from ships and aircraft or
incineration at sea, discharges from ships, exploration
and exploitation of the continental shelf and the seabed
and its subsoil, land-based sources and transboundary
movements and the disposal of hazardous wastes.
In that context, Malta is also looking forward to
the forthcoming entry into force of the Protocol on
Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) in the
Mediterranean, which builds on existing obligations

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

and measures by ensuring that management of the
coastal zone is conducted holistically and in a
sustainable manner at both the national and the
regional levels. Furthermore, the various provisions,
objectives and principles laid out in the ICZM Protocol
provide additional tools for States to implement good
governance in guiding economic development, research
and cooperation in order to safeguard not only
Mediterranean and European biodiversity but also the
cultural heritage of the Mediterranean coast.
Malta, as a State party to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and a maritime
nation, is totally committed to addressing the
multifaceted challenges facing the world’s oceans and
seas. It is with that commitment in mind that my
delegation is once again proud to co-sponsor the draft
resolutions that the General Assembly is considering
today on oceans and the law of the sea (A/65/L.20) and
on sustainable fisheries (A/65/L.21). Our thanks and
appreciation go to Ambassador Valle of Brazil and
Ms. Koehler of the United States for the excellent way
in which they have led the discussions and the
coordination process on those two draft resolutions.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate and thank both coordinators, Ms. Holly
Koehler of the United States and Ambassador Henrique
Valle of Brazil, for the remarkable professionalism
with which they led the negotiations on the draft
resolutions (A/65/L.20 and A/65/L.21) before the
General Assembly today. I would also like to thank the
United Nations Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea for its support and excellent work.
The adoption today of the omnibus draft
resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea and on
sustainable fisheries gives us an opportunity to
acknowledge the important work that the international
community has accomplished in those areas during the
past year, as well as to underline the challenges that lie
ahead regarding the governance of the oceans. It is also
an occasion to renew our commitment to working
collectively to remedy any gaps in the implementation
of our obligations under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, which we all
acknowledge as the legal framework that governs all
ocean and sea activities.
Tunisia greatly appreciates the important role of
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea in the
peaceful settlement of disputes and in ensuring the

10-67898

uniform interpretation and application of the
Convention.
My
delegation
welcomes
the
unprecedented decision to request the Seabed Disputes
Chamber of the Tribunal to provide an advisory
opinion regarding the responsibilities and obligations
of States sponsoring persons and entities with respect
to activities in the international seabed Area. We
consider that decision to be a sign of the growing
maturity of the institutions created by the Convention,
as well as a sign of States parties’ confidence in the
role of the Tribunal. We note as well the first maritime
boundary dispute submitted to the Tribunal by
Bangladesh and Myanmar. Tunisia, having made a
declaration under article 287 of the Convention and
choosing to settle disputes through the Tribunal,
welcomes the positive trend in the submission of
disputes to that institution and will continue to support
the Tribunal’s valuable work in that field.
My delegation welcomes the adoption by the
International Seabed Authority of the regulations on
prospecting and exploration for polymetallic sulphides
in the area beyond the limits of national jurisdiction,
and looks forward to an early finalization of the draft
regulations on prospecting and exploration for cobaltrich ferromanganese crusts. Those regulations will
contribute to the progressive development of the
regulatory regime for activities in the deep seabed.
However, it is our belief that the mining code will
remain incomplete as long as detailed regulations
governing the exploitation of the resources of the high
seas are not developed, at least in the medium term.
My delegation therefore supports the idea of
commissioning a preliminary study of the issues
associated with the development of exploitation codes
for that area.
Another factor negatively impacting the full
implementation of Part XI of the Convention is the
difficulty in determining the extent of the area of the
seabed as long as the precise delineation of all outer
limits of the continental shelf, as set out in article 76 of
the Convention, remains pending. While noting with
appreciation the measures undertaken by the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf to
improve its efficiency, we note with concern that, given
the high number of submissions, it is expected that the
delineation of all of the pending outer continental shelf
claims — and hence delineation of the deep seabed
area — will be a time-consuming process. Issues
related to the workload of the Commission need to be

7

A/65/PV.59

addressed through improved working methods and
through longer and more frequent sessions, which will
require innovative ways to facilitate the funding of
such additional work.
The question of biodiversity beyond the limits of
national jurisdiction is one of the emerging issues of
the law of the sea. We would like to recall in that
regard that the question of the legal regime governing
marine genetic resources in areas beyond national
jurisdiction is still outstanding. That issue is being
addressed within the mandate of the Ad Hoc Openended Informal Working Group to study issues relating
to the conservation and sustainable use of marine
biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction, which was established by resolution 59/24
and will hold its next meeting in June next year.
It is our hope that our deliberations on that
question will be guided by the principles embodied in
resolution 2749 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, in which
the General Assembly declared, inter alia, that the area
of the seabed and ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof,
beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, as well as its
resources “are the common heritage of mankind”, the
exploration and exploitation of which “shall be carried
out for the benefit of mankind as a whole”. My country
attaches particular importance to the early
implementation and operationalization of the principle
of the common heritage of mankind. For us, that is not
a vague and an imprecise concept but rather a principle
of international law.
Another challenge that needs to be addressed
more proactively is the question of illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing, which is an issue of great
concern to Tunisia, a coastal State where fishing
activities represent 1 per cent of gross domestic
product and provide employment for more than
100,000 people. As a responsible fishing country,
Tunisia is intent on addressing threats to sustainable
fisheries by committing to the conservation and
management of living marine resources and the
preservation of the marine ecosystem. In that regard,
Tunisia is among the few Mediterranean countries to
have introduced regulations on closed seasons for
fishing. A system of the compulsory observance of
biological rest periods was put in place to foster the
regeneration of depleted fish stocks. That system is
being implemented from July to September in the Gulf
of Gabes, for example, an area that is home to several
endangered fish species. Fishermen in that area are

8

offered compensation by the Government to offset part
of their loss of income during that period.
My country has also introduced regulations aimed
at ensuring data allowing for the traceability of fish
products. More recently, Tunisia undertook the
necessary measures to meet the standards set by the
European Commission’s regulations prohibiting the
import of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
products, which become effective in January 2010. It is
our conviction that combating illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing cannot be efficient, if it is not
undertaken on a global scale. More efforts and
commitments are required globally to close the gaps in
fisheries governance. The adoption in November 2009
by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations of the Agreement on Port State Measures to
Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and
Unregulated Fishing is a positive step. That Agreement
will provide an important new tool to tackle the
problem of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
globally, and we hope for its early entry into force.
In the area of maritime navigation, we would like
to express our serious concern over piracy and armed
robbery at sea, particularly off the coast of Somalia. As
this meeting is taking place, Somali pirates continue to
hold 23 Tunisian hostages and other crew members of
MV Hannibal II, a vessel captured on 11 November
this year. Piracy not only threatens freedom of the seas,
maritime trade and maritime shipping security, but also
endangers the lives of seafarers and hampers the
economic development of countries in the region.
Tunisia strongly supports international efforts to
find long-lasting solutions to that issue. While
welcoming actions taken in that regard by the Security
Council and commending the activities of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, as well as
the work of the International Maritime Organization
and other international organizations engaged in
combating such illicit acts, we believe that much
remains to be done in that area. We take the view that a
multifaceted approach that includes assistance for
maritime security enforcement, capacity-building and
other medium- to long-term efforts in addition to
operations by naval vessels must be pursued in order to
effectively suppress piracy. It is equally important to
enact anti-piracy measures law to enable domestic
implementation of the provisions on piracy stipulated
in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea.

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

Ocean and sea affairs are sensitive, complex and
closely
interrelated.
Only
through
increased
coordination and concerted cooperation among States
and international organizations will it be possible to
ensure an effective and judicious governance of the
oceans and seas that strikes a reasonable balance
among the interests of all parties and meets the various
challenges related to the sustainable use of marine
resources and protection of ocean and sea habitats.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): With
technological progress and social development, the link
between mankind and the oceans is becoming ever
closer. How to ensure the sustainable use and effective
protection of marine resources and how to achieve
harmonious coexistence between mankind and the
oceans is high on the current agenda of the
international community.
The Chinese delegation maintains that States
should, based on science and the rule of law and
through cooperation and dialogue on an equal footing,
achieve peace, security, openness and the effective
protection and sustainable use of the oceans, realize
common development and bring benefits to all
members of the international community.
I wish to take this opportunity to make the
following comments on issues related to oceans and the
law of the sea.
First, regarding the Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf, the Chinese Government
attaches great importance to the Commission’s role in
the implementation of the relevant provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, and
acknowledges the results of its work. The Chinese
delegation supports the Commission in fulfilling its
responsibilities in a manner strictly consistent with the
Convention and its rules of procedure, while ensuring
high standards and quality performance. China hopes
that the Commission’s consideration of submissions by
coastal States will not only meet the expectations of the
international community, but also stand the tests of
science, law and time.
The Chinese delegation, while appreciating the
efforts made to address the Commission’s workload,
calls for an approach balanced between speed and
quality in considering submissions relating to the
continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles. In other
words, the need to expedite consideration should not be

10-67898

allowed to compromise the serious scientific and
professional nature of the Commission’s work.
My second comment concerns the International
Seabed Authority, which the Chinese delegation wishes
to congratulate on its achievements over the past year.
At its sixteenth session, the Authority adopted the
Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for
Polymetallic Sulphides in the Area. The introduction of
the Regulations is conducive to the orderly exploitation
of new marine resources, helps to boost the vitality of
the Authority, contributes to the management of the
Area and its resources by the international community
and facilitates the sharing of the benefits of the Area
and its resources among States, particularly developing
States. China hopes that States will continue to work,
in a pragmatic and cooperative manner, towards the
early adoption of the draft regulations on prospecting
and exploration for cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts
in the Area.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea), VicePresident, took the Chair.
Thirdly, the Chinese delegation has noted that the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, as a
judicial body established under Convention for the
settlement of disputes with respect to the interpretation
and application of the Convention, is now hearing its
first case of maritime delimitation. Its Seabed Disputes
Chamber has accepted a request for an advisory
opinion on responsibilities and obligations of States
sponsoring persons and entities with respect to
activities in the International Seabed Area.
The role of the Tribunal has received broad
international attention. The Chinese Government
always attaches importance to the significant role of
the Tribunal in the peaceful settlement of maritime
disputes and in the maintenance of international
maritime order, and it supports the Tribunal in
fulfilling its responsibilities in line with the provisions
of the Convention.
Fourth is the issue of the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological biodiversity
beyond areas of national jurisdiction. The international
community has given a great deal of attention to that
topic, and the issue of marine protected areas is
considered highly controversial. The Chinese
delegation believes that oceans, especially the high
seas and the Area, involve the national interests of all
States. Thus, in addressing the issue of marine

9

A/65/PV.59

biodiversity in areas beyond the limits of national
jurisdiction, there is a need to balance its protection
and its use, and also to bear in mind the dependence of
developing countries on oceans.
The international community has yet to establish
common standards and a legal framework that are
universally acceptable and operational with regard to
marine protected areas beyond the limits of national
jurisdiction. States therefore need to be cautious in
establishing marine protected areas.
My fifth comment concerns the regular process
for global reporting and assessment of the state of the
marine environment, which has been officially
launched. The Chinese delegation is of the view that to
ensure the proper functioning of the regular process, it
must be country-led; abide by the relevant international
law, including the Convention; respect the sovereignty,
sovereign rights and jurisdiction of coastal States;
refrain from intervening in disputes between States
over sovereignty and maritime delimitation; and focus
on making recommendations on the sustainable
development of the oceans.
Sixth is the issue of sustainable fisheries. As a
responsible fishing country, China has actively
participated in the work of various international
fisheries organizations and is committed to
strengthening the conservation and management of
fishery resources. The Chinese Government will
continue to work with interested States to promote the
development and improvement of the international
fisheries regime, which will contribute to the
reasonable management of fisheries, and to make
vigorous efforts towards ensuring the sustainable use
of marine living resources, ensuring achieving marine
ecological balance, and sharing the benefits of fisheries
among all States.
Oceans are a strategic base for the development
and progress of mankind. To ensure that the oceans can
provide long-term benefits to mankind, the
international community should further strengthen its
cooperation and solidarity, jointly respond to maritime
challenges, share the opportunities and wealth provided
by the oceans and together seek their sustainable
development.
Mr. Shin Boonam (Republic of Korea): First of
all, my delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive reports on oceans and the law of the sea
(A/65/69 and Add.1 and Add.2). We also commend

10

Mr. Serguei Tarassenko, Director of the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, and his staff for
their dedicated work and their invaluable assistance to
Member States. In addition, we would like to thank
Ambassador Henrique Valle of Brazil and Ms. Holly
Koehler of the United States for their excellent work in
coordinating the two draft resolutions before us
(A/65/L.20 and A/65/L.21).
Given the centrality of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea as the global legal
framework for the governance of oceans and seas, it is
important that all activities in the oceans and seas are
carried out within that framework and that the integrity
of the Convention is maintained. While we welcome
new States parties, we also wish to call upon those
States that have not yet done so to join the Convention
and its implementation agreements.
The implementation mechanisms of the
Convention — the International Seabed Authority, the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf —
have all played important roles. Concerted efforts and
contributions by Member States are required to address
the difficulties that those implementing bodies might
encounter in carrying out their work.
We note with satisfaction the continued and
significant contribution of the Tribunal to the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means, in
accordance with Part XV of the Convention, and the
progress in the work of the Commission. We also
welcome the adoption at the sixteenth session of the
Authority of the Regulations for Prospecting and
Exploration
for
Polymetallic
Sulphides.
My
Government reaffirms its commitment to the objectives
of the Convention and its full support for the most
effective and efficient operation of those institutions.
The oceans and seas are invaluable to the welfare
of humanity, providing living and non-living marine
resources and a vital avenue for transportation.
However, the world continues to be plagued by piracy
and the degradation of marine resources. Maritime
safety and security is a serious concern for many
seafaring States. Collaborative efforts at subregional,
regional and international levels are necessary to
adequately address those problems. In that regard, my
Government hosted the seventh plenary meeting of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia on
10 November 2010. We are pleased to note that the

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

Contact Group continues to serve as an informationsharing and cooperation mechanism for States affected
by piracy off the coast of Somalia or involved in
efforts to repress it.
As the report of the Secretary-General points out,
marine science and its supporting technologies can
make a major contribution to eliminating poverty,
ensuring food security, supporting human economic
activity, conserving the world’s marine environment,
helping to predict and mitigate the effects of and
respond to natural events and disasters, and generally
promoting the use of the oceans and their resources. A
variety of cooperative scientific and technical
endeavours in ocean affairs, a healthy exchange of
information and the design of joint research activities
are needed to achieve the conservation and sustainable
development of marine resources. My Government
continues to do its part to enhance international
cooperation by transferring marine technology to
developing countries through the Korea International
Cooperation Agency’s funding and internship
programmes.
Marine biological diversity greatly contributes to
maintaining a healthy global ecosystem, including in
terms of climate, and sustaining socio-economic
development. My Government attaches great
importance to the conservation and sustainability of
marine biodiversity. We are pleased to note that the
international community had a valuable opportunity to
contemplate the importance of marine biodiversity this
year, the International Year of Biodiversity. Every State
needs to develop better ways to sustain marine
biological
diversity,
taking
into
account
recommendations adopted in various international
forums.
Human well-being, economic security and
sustainable development are heavily dependent upon
healthy oceans and seas. In that regard, we hope that
the regular process for global reporting and assessment
of the state of the marine environment, including
socio-economic aspects, will greatly contribute to
enhancing the scientific basis for policymaking. My
Government reaffirms its commitment to contributing
to the success of the regular process, whose first cycle
has begun this year.
The international community has long worked
together to ensure an orderly and stable regime with
respect to the oceans and seas. There is a great need for

10-67898

a spirit of mutual understanding and cooperation, as
enshrined in the Convention, at a time when
humankind is facing many challenging issues,
including maritime security, the protection and
preservation of the marine environment, sustainable
development and climate change. On this occasion, we
would like to renew our commitment to ensuring the
sound governance of the oceans and seas.
Mr. Al-Subaie (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my pleasure to convey to the President of the General
Assembly, in the name of the State of Kuwait, our
thanks and gratitude for the evident and effective
efforts in conducting the Assembly’s work at its
present session.
We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report, in document A/65/69 and its addenda, on
oceans and the law of the sea. The State of Kuwait
attaches great importance to the law of the oceans and
the law of the sea. It welcomes the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive report on the developments and issues
regarding those laws and the implementation of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
An indication of the importance of that
Convention at the international and regional levels is
the continued increase in the number of states acceding
to the Convention. The State of Kuwait calls upon the
States that are not party to the Convention to accede to
it, thereby contributing to the global participation in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The increase in acts of piracy and armed robbery
against ships is a threat to international commerce,
maritime navigation and the lives of crew members.
Therefore, my country’s delegation denounces all acts
of piracy and hijacking of commercial vessels, as well
as acts of terrorism committed on the oceans and seas,
including the piracy that occurs in the Gulf of Aden off
the Somali coast.
We also note the act carried out by the Israeli
authorities, who, persisting in their arrogance,
launched an attack against the Freedom Flotilla in
international waters last May. That attack defied all
international laws and norms and confirms the Israelis’
confidence in their impunity, in the absence of an
appropriate response from the international community
to such acts of piracy.
The State of Kuwait believes in the importance of
capacity-building in the areas of the laws of the oceans

11

A/65/PV.59

and of the sea, including in maritime sciences and
marine technology transfer, which would ensure that
all States, particularly developing countries, benefit
from the sustainable development of the oceans and the
seas.
Protecting the marine environment and its natural
resources is an issue of great importance, and thus we
must follow a more integrated method to continue to
examine and strengthen measures that aim to conserve
marine biodiversity from the effects of climate change,
whether caused by humans or occurring naturally.
Out of its belief in the importance of the subject,
the State of Kuwait acceded in 1986 to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and, in
2002, to the Agreement relating to the implementation
of Part XI of the United Nations Convention of the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982. It is also a party
to the Protocol concerning Marine Pollution resulting
from Exploration and Exploitation of the Continental
Shelf. The State of Kuwait houses the headquarters of
the Regional Organization for the Protection of the
Marine Environment. It was established in accordance
with the 1978 Regional Convention for Cooperation on
the Protection of the Marine Environment from
Pollution, which aims to coordinate the efforts of the
Gulf States to protect their marine environmental
resources. Furthermore, the State of Kuwait
implements programmes with the International Atomic
Energy Agency for the protection of the marine
environment.
The State of Kuwait urges all Member States to
cooperate and endeavour jointly to achieve a better life
for their peoples, and to conserve marine resources and
use them optimally, through their compliance with the
conventions and the law, so as to ensure the right of all
peoples to utilize marine resources justly and equally
and to ensure environmental sustainability for all.
Mr. Pálsson (Iceland): The United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea provides the legal
framework for all our deliberations on the oceans and
the law of the sea. Iceland welcomes recent
ratifications of the Convention, which bring the total
number of States parties to 161. By ratifying and
implementing the Convention, States sustain and
promote a number of the most cherished goals of the
United Nations. Every effort must be made to utilize
existing instruments to the fullest before other options

12

are given serious consideration, including possible new
implementation agreements under the Convention.
Turning to one of the three institutions supporting
the Convention, we note with satisfaction the progress
in the work of the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf. However, share the concern
expressed in the draft resolution on oceans and the law
of the sea (A/65/L.20) that the heavy workload of the
Commission poses additional demands and challenges
to its members and to the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea. There is a need to ensure that
the Commission can perform its functions
expeditiously, efficiently and effectively, while
maintaining its high level of quality and expertise and
respecting fully the Convention and the rules of
procedure of the Commission.
We must also safeguard the integrity of the
Convention. There has at times been an unfortunate
lack of appreciation of the nature of the rights of the
coastal State over its continental shelf. Accordingly, it
was considered appropriate to include a paragraph in
the draft resolution on oceans and the law of the sea
referring to article 77, paragraph 3, of the Convention
and spelling out that the rights of the coastal State over
the continental shelf do not depend on occupation,
effective or notional, or on any express proclamation.
The rights of the coastal State are, in other words,
inherent rights and are not dependent upon a
submission to the Commission or recommendations by
the Commission which are technical in nature and do
not address the legal entitlement of the coastal State
over its continental shelf.
Iceland attaches great importance to the
long-term conservation, management and sustainable
use of living marine resources and to the obligation of
States to cooperate to that end, in accordance with
international law, in particular the Convention on the
Law of the Sea and the Fish Stocks Agreement. We
welcome the reaffirmation of those goals in the draft
resolution on sustainable fisheries (A/65/L.21).
The Fish Stocks Agreement is of paramount
importance, as it strengthens considerably the
framework for the conservation and management of
straddling and highly migratory fish stocks by regional
fisheries management organizations. The effectiveness
of the Agreement depends on its wide ratification and
implementation. Therefore, we welcome recent
ratifications of the Agreement, bringing the number of

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

States parties to 78. We note with satisfaction the
conclusions of the Review Conference held in May this
year, which reaffirmed the recommendations adopted
by the Conference in 2006 and proposed additional
means
of
strengthening
the
substance
and
implementation methods of the provisions of the
Agreement.
The Convention on Biological Diversity is a key
instrument in the area of ocean affairs. An important
stepping stone was reached in Nagoya last October
when the States parties agreed on a protocol on access
to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing
of benefits arising from their utilization. With that
protocol in place — possibly as early as 2012 — we
hope that progress on genetic resources in areas beyond
national jurisdiction can be made.
The Convention’s Strategic Plan to 2020, in
Target 6, directly addresses the effects of fisheries on
biological diversity and the way responsible fisheries
should be managed. In connection with responsible
fisheries, Iceland has for many years called for action
to eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU)
fishing and has supported initiatives by regional
fisheries management organizations and the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) to combat it. We
welcome signatures of the FAO Agreement on Port
State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing — the first global
treaty focused specifically on the problem of IUU
fishing, and we encourage States to ratify it with a
view to its early entry into force.
In connection with biodiversity, I wish to note
that the Arctic Council, comprised of eight member
States, recently published a report entitled Arctic
Biodiversity Trends 2010, as its contribution to the
United Nations International Year of Biodiversity. The
report finds climate change to be the most far-reaching
and significant driver of change in the area of
biodiversity. Climate change is among the factors
placing growing strain on the world’s oceans. Ocean
acidification is a relatively new concern and, in a
longer-term perspective, could become a major concern
for countries that depend on the ocean for their
livelihood.
The sustainable management and utilization of all
living marine resources is essential for food security
and the alleviation of hunger, as confirmed in the
outcome document (resolution 65/1) of September’s

10-67898

High-level Plenary Meeting on the Millennium
Development Goals. The Meeting reaffirmed the need
for improving capacity-building in fisheries, especially
in developing countries, as fish is an essential source
of protein for millions of people around the world.
In that connection, let me recall that the Fisheries
Training Programme of the United Nations University
in Iceland remains open to cooperation with
developing countries in the area of sustainable
fisheries. Furthermore, Iceland’s bilateral development
cooperation is largely focused on sustainable fisheries
management.
Eight years after world leaders decided, in
Johannesburg, to launch a regular process for global
reporting and assessment of the state of the marine
environment, under the auspices of the United Nations,
we welcome the fact that the first cycle of the process
has now been initiated. The regular process, provided it
is given the high-level commitment it deserves, has the
potential to contribute significantly to improving ocean
governance. We look forward to the first meeting in
February of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole
of the General Assembly set up to oversee and guide
the process.
The United Nations Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea
is another important forum for debate that facilitates
the work of the General Assembly. The Informal
Consultative Process is a unique forum for
comprehensive discussions among stakeholders on a
host of disciplines related to oceans and the law of the
sea, consistent with the framework provided by the
Law of the Sea Convention and chapter 17 of Agenda
21. We welcome the continuation of the mandate of the
Process for the next two years and look forward to its
consideration of themes relating to the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development at its twelfth
meeting in June.
Mr. Kalinin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I wish to express our gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his reports on maritime
issues (A/65/69, A/65/69/Add.1 and A/65/69/Add.2).
As in past years, these are valuable tools in assessing
the current situation and determining priority areas for
further work in this area in the light of new challenges.
We also wish to thank the coordinators of the
informal consultations on the draft resolution on
sustainable fisheries (A/65/L.21) and on the omnibus

13

A/65/PV.59

draft resolution (A/65/L.20), namely, Ms. Holly
Koehler and Ambassador Henrique Rodrigues Valle, as
well as the Director of the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea, Mr. Serguei Tarassenko, and
his staff for the their expert assistance and work on the
draft resolutions.
The Russian Federation believes that the General
Assembly has a pivotal role to play in United Nations
discussions on issues relating to the world’s oceans.
We emphasize the fundamental role of the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in
regulating the activities of States on the world’s
oceans. The Convention creates a comprehensive legal
regime, whose integrity must be preserved at all costs.
A great deal has been said today to that end. We call
for the requisite implementation of the provisions of
the Convention in the interest of a stable future for the
oceans.
The Russian Federation supports the work of the
bodies created under the Convention. The International
Tribunal on the Law of the Sea plays an important role
in the settlement of disputes regarding the
interpretation or application of the Convention. We
note with satisfaction that steps were taken in 2010
towards making fuller use of this body’s potential.
We take particular note of the role of the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf. It
is important that coastal States fully abide by the
requirements of article 76 of the Convention, as well as
other applicable norms of international law, in making
their submissions to the Commission on the
establishment of the outer limits of their continental
shelf beyond 200 nautical miles.
The Russian Federation was one of the first States
to present its submission to the Commission for the
establishment of the outer limits of our continental
shelf in the Northern Arctic and Pacific Oceans. Work
is currently being carried out to collect additional
scientific data to support the Russian submission and
help resolve other issues. We believe that there is a
need to further expand the useful practice of allowing
States to interact closely with the Commission during
the course of the consideration of their submissions.
The significant increase in the workload of the
Commission poses a serious challenge. We support the
range of measures designed to improve its functioning
to provide for swifter and more effective consideration
of submissions — without, of course, negatively

14

affecting the quality of the Commission’s work. We
emphasize the importance that those States that have
put forward experts as members of the Commission
abide by their commitments to ensure the participation
of members of the Commission in its work.
Today, problems relating to the protection of the
marine environment, and in particular of the most
vulnerable ecosystems, are at the forefront of our
concerns. We believe that a comprehensive approach
should be taken to resolve issues in this area. We also
believe that, in order to properly evaluate priorities for
the future, we need to fully understand the current
situation with regard to the marine environment. In that
context, we welcome the first practical steps being
taken within the framework of the regular process for
global reporting and assessment of the state of the
marine
environment,
including
socio-economic
aspects. It is important to create an effective
mechanism to manage this process and, in so doing, to
preserve its international character.
The Russian Federation advocates for more
in-depth marine scientific research to be carried out to
expand knowledge of the processes taking place in the
oceans, which have an affect on all of humankind. Our
activities in this area must be based on robust
international and legal foundations. We would like to
emphasize in particular the importance of compliance
with the rights of coastal States to carry out marine
scientific research. Here I am referring to marine
scientific research in the exclusive economic zone and
on the continental shelf, in accordance with article 246
of the Convention.
We favour the strengthening of measures to
ensure maritime security. The problem of piracy,
especially off the coast of Somalia, has recently been
exacerbated. A matter of particular concern for us is the
unsatisfactory situation in terms of pirates being
brought to justice. More important, those who direct
the pirate industry are not being brought to justice. In
our view, the current efforts, which are being carried
out only at the national level, are insufficient to
guarantee a reliable solution to the problem.
The Russian Federation also approves of the
results of the eleventh session of the Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law
of the Sea. We welcome the decision to extend the
mandate of the Process for two years. This forum,
which is open to a broad range of participants, has

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

demonstrated its value. We believe that it can continue
to be useful in the future. Of course, we will continue
to participate in the discussion of the issue of marine
biodiversity in regions beyond areas of national
jurisdiction, within the framework of the Assembly’s
Working Group. Russia believes that it is of
fundamental importance that the Group’s meeting in
2011 be provided with full conference services.
As a State with a responsible approach to the
issue of ensuring sustainable fisheries, the Russian
Federation is paying increased attention to measures
designed to preserve and manage fish stocks. At the
same time, it is important to us that any limitations on
fishing on the open seas be established by the
competent regional fisheries management organizations
on the basis of comprehensive scientific data, including
the results of both past and present scientific marine
studies. We welcome the strengthening of a range of
measures aimed at combating illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing (IUU). We note with satisfaction
the consistent steps taken to strengthen control by flag
States and enhance the effectiveness of measures to
combat IUU fishing by port States.
The Russian Federation will continue to participate
actively in the formulation and implementation of
measures aimed at protecting vulnerable marine
ecosystems, both individually and within the
framework of the appropriate regional fisheries
organizations. We once again underscore the
importance of the 1995 Fish Stocks Agreement, and we
call on States that have not yet done so to consider the
possibility of becoming party to it. In addition, we
support the implementation by all States of the
recommendations of the 2006 and 2010 Review
Conferences.
Mr. Pham Vinh Quang (Viet Nam): Ocean
affairs and the law of the sea have profound effects on
the development and implementation of national
maritime policies. The 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) provides
a sound, comprehensive legal framework for all of our
deliberations on oceans and seas. The fact that
UNCLOS has been accepted by most of the
international community strengthens our hopes for
promoting legitimate and optimum uses of the world’s
oceans and seas according to the principles of justice,
equal rights and respect for the interests of sustainable
development. We continue to support efforts aimed at
ensuring the full implementation of UNCLOS, with

10-67898

due respect for the delicate balance between the rights
and obligations of States in its provisions.
The International Seabed Authority, the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf
continued to deal with heavy workloads during the past
year. We note with satisfaction the measures adopted at
the twentieth Meeting of States Parties to UNCLOS, as
well as the progress made within the framework of its
Informal Working Group to address the Commission’s
growing workload. We call on States Members of the
United Nations and UNCLOS States parties to continue
efforts to adopt measures that will allow the
Commission to perform its functions under the
Convention expeditiously, efficiently and effectively,
while maintaining its high level of quality and
expertise.
We commend the International Seabed Authority
for adopting, at its sixteenth session, the Regulations
on Prospecting and Exploration for Polymetallic
Sulphides in the International Seabed Area beyond the
limits of national jurisdiction. We are following with
interest the decision by the Authority’s Council to
submit a request to the Seabed Disputes Chamber for
an advisory opinion on the responsibility and liability
of sponsoring States for activities in the Area. Such
developments show that the institutions established by
UNCLOS are being turned to for management of the
world’s ocean affairs.
My country recognizes the pivotal role of
international cooperation and coordination in managing
and conserving the world’s oceans, as well as their
impact on national maritime economies. We therefore
continue to support and participate in the Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law
of the Sea and the regular process for global reporting
and assessment of the state of the marine environment,
including socio-economic aspects. My delegation fully
shares the views expressed by many members of the
Group of 77 and China that international cooperation
for capacity-building in ocean affairs and the law of the
sea, in particular the transfer of technologies to
developing countries, should be further strengthened.
Viet Nam is a coastal State. Much of its land is
open and adjacent to the South China Sea, which is
known to the Vietnamese people as the Eastern Sea.
Generations of Vietnamese, in particular those living in
coastal areas and on our many islands, have made their

15

A/65/PV.59

living on the sea. The Government of Viet Nam has
decided to develop a maritime economy, which it
considers an important development strategy for our
country in the twenty-first century. The Government
has adopted an overall maritime economic plan to
2020, under which all policies and plans must hew to
the principle of an ecosystem-based economy. The
overall plan includes four concrete targets: acquiring
modern marine scientific knowledge and technologies;
creating an efficient and sustainable maritime economy
that is integrated into the world economy; applying
multidisciplinary management of the sea; and ensuring
possession of the capacity to safeguard our national
security, sovereignty and interests.
As
part
of
achieving
the
successful
implementation of the maritime economic plan, the
Government of Viet Nam recognizes the importance of
maintaining an environment in the South China Sea
that is conducive to the promotion of legitimate and
sustainable uses of the Sea and the resources therein, in
accordance with UNCLOS. To that end, Viet Nam,
other members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations and China have signed the Declaration of the
Conduct of the Parties in the South China Sea.
The Declaration underlines the need to maintain
peace, stability and cooperation, calls for the peaceful
resolution of disputes in accordance with universally
agreed principles of international law, including the
1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea and other
relevant international maritime laws, and promotes
confidence-building measures through cooperative
projects in marine environmental protection, marine
scientific research, the safety of navigation and
communication at sea, search and rescue operations
and combating transnational crime, including, but not
limited to, trafficking in illicit drugs, piracy and armed
robbery at sea and illegal trafficking in arms.
At the thirteenth ASEAN-China Summit, held on
29 October in Hanoi, ASEAN and Chinese leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to fully and effectively
implement the Declaration and to work towards the
eventual consensus adoption of a code of conduct in
the South China Sea to further contribute to peace,
stability and cooperation in the region.
Within the framework of the Regional
Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and
Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia, Viet Nam is
joining efforts with the other States parties to contain

16

this scourge in the South China Sea through
information-sharing and law enforcement cooperation.
We look forward to continuing our efforts to strengthen
initial cooperation in that connection.
Mr. Tladi (South Africa): I thank you, Sir, for
giving us the floor on the very important topic of
oceans and the law of the sea. We wish to thank the
Secretary-General
for
his
reports
(A/65/69,
A/65/69/Add.1 and A/65/69/Add.2). We also thank the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea and
wish to express our appreciation to the coordinators of
the two draft resolutions (A/65/L.20 and A/65/L.21)
before us today, Ambassador Henrique Valles and
Ms. Holly Koehler. This debate gives us an opportunity
to reflect on our activities over the sixty-fourth session
and to look forward to forthcoming activities during
the sixty-fifth session.
As always, our consideration of all issues
pertaining to oceans and the law of the sea should be
constantly guided by the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) which, as the General
Assembly has asserted and continues to reassert,
constitutes the legal framework within which all ocean
issues are to be governed. My delegation remains
steadfast in its view of the Convention as the
constitution of the oceans.
My delegation is unwavering in its belief in the
qualitative and universal character of UNCLOS and
that large parts of it constitute customary international
law, which is binding on all States, whether a State
party or not. We continue to hold on to the hope that, in
the near future, all Members of the United Nations will
accede to the Convention so as to achieve the
quantitative universality of this, the constitution of the
oceans.
We also hope that those States parties that are not
as yet party to the two implementing agreements of the
Convention, namely, the Agreement relating to the
implementation of Part XI of the Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 and the
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, will accede to those agreements
sooner rather than later.
We welcome the outcome of the negotiations on
the omnibus draft resolution on oceans and the law of

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

the sea (A/65/L.20). We also welcome the fruitful
deliberations on the fisheries draft resolution
(A/65/L.21). We are also pleased to welcome the
conclusion of the outcome of the resumed Review
Conference on the Fish Stocks Agreement, held here in
New York from 24 to 28 May. We were particularly
pleased with the recommendations for the conservation
and management of sharks, as contained in paragraph 6
(g) of the outcome of the Review Conference (see
A/CONF.210/2010/7, annex). We therefore wish to
emphasize the importance of enforcing the prohibition
on shark finning.
We are pleased with the deliberations of the
United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea under the
theme “Capacity-building in ocean affairs and the law
of the sea, including marine science”. I think that this
is a topic on which we can all agree; yet, for one
reason or another, we struggle to implement the
outcomes that we agree upon. We hope that some of
the laudable plans and visions that we expressed in the
course of that meeting will be made real in the coming
year and beyond.
It should come as no surprise that my delegation
is pleased that the mandate of the Process has been
extended, although we would add that we would have
wished for the mandate to be extended for a longer
period. In the context of the topics to be discussed,
allow me to remind the Assembly that in the course of
our deliberations last year, we agreed on a process to
identify the best possible topics. We also agreed that, in
the course of both the Informal Consultative Process
and the consultations on the omnibus draft resolution,
we would set aside sufficient time for the consideration
of the selection of topics to ensure that the topics
chosen provided for meaningful discourse to contribute
significantly to the mandate of the General Assembly
in oceans issues. Unfortunately, this did not happen
this year. We hope that more time will be allocated for
this purpose in the future.
Having expressed our concern about the Process,
let us nonetheless express our full support for the
topics selected for the next session of the Process,
namely, “Contributing to the assessment, in the context
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, of progress to date and the remaining
gaps in the implementation of the outcomes of the
major summits on sustainable development and
addressing new and emerging challenges”.

10-67898

One of the major areas of contention in respect of
the Process is the outcomes. Many delegations have
expressed concern about the fact that, in recent years,
the Consultative Process has turned into a negotiating
forum, sometimes usurping the responsibility of the
General Assembly and often concluding its work at
very late hours. While my delegation shares those
concerns, particularly in respect of the often-late
conclusions of the deliberations, we remain
unconvinced that these concerns justify the conclusion
that agreed consensual elements should necessarily
never be adopted by the meeting. We believe that,
where possible and without forcing the issue, the
Informal Consultative Process should be able to adopt
agreed consensus elements with a view to assisting the
General Assembly in its consultations on the omnibus
draft resolution.
Because my delegation attaches great importance
to the principle of the common heritage of humankind,
we continue to push for the early implementation and
operationalization of this principle, as reflected in Part
XI of the Convention. For that reason, my delegation is
an active participant in the deliberations of the
International Seabed Authority. We are pleased that,
last year, the Authority was able to finalize its
consideration of the regulations on polymetallic
sulphides. During the Authority’s last session, in 2009,
members of the Council were able to agree on the last
outstanding issues, namely, the anti-monopoly clause
and the overlapping claims question. We are hopeful
that the spirit illustrated by the members of the Council
at the last session will be continued as we begin
consideration of the regulations for prospecting and
exploration for cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts.
My delegation has noted with pleasure the
decision of the Council to request an advisory opinion
from the Seabed Disputes Chamber of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea regarding the rights
and responsibilities of sponsor States with respect to
activities in the Area. That is important not only for the
promotion of certainty but also to facilitate the
effective protection of the marine environment during
the conduct of activities in the Area.
Moreover, on a number of occasions my
delegation has stressed the importance of advisory
opinions for the promotion of the rule of law at the
international level. In our statement to the General
Assembly on the report of the International Court of
Justice in 2009, we said that given the lack of a

17

A/65/PV.59

compulsory system for the judicial settlement of
disputes, States interpret their international law
obligations in different, often conflicting, ways. This
also has a negative impact on the advancement of the
rule of law at the international level and may even lead
to, in addition to the obvious uncertainty, the creation
of conflict situations. The particular ills caused by
auto-interpretation would be remedied, or at least
greatly reduced, by regular recourse to international
mechanisms for the pacific settlement of disputes,
including requests for advisory opinions.
Another factor that has a negative impact on the
full implementation of Part XI of the Convention has to
do with the difficulties encountered in the
establishment of the outer limits of the continental
shelf as provided for in article 76 of the Convention.
We are all aware of those difficulties. We recognize
that, as we endeavour to resolve them, there will be
interests and countervailing interests pushing and
pulling us towards different solutions. While balancing
all of them, we hope that the meeting of States parties
will reach a decision to facilitate the timely
consideration by the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf of the submissions of States for
extended continental shelves.

however, continue with the meaningless restatement of
position that characterizes the consideration of this
particular issue.
Allow me, however, to restate that our position is
rooted in the call for solidarity that is embodied in
sustainable development. That position is consistent
with modern international law and is concerned with
the greater good, not only the bilateral rights and
obligations
approach
embodied
in
classical
international law, on which the Grotian insistence on
blind adherence to the freedom of the seas is based. It
is that insistence on the freedom of the seas that, in our
view, is responsible for the degradation of the marine
environment that so threatens our oceans.
In that context, I wish to remind the General
Assembly of what my delegation has said, again on
more than one occasion, namely, that
“the common heritage of mankind principle is not
solely about benefit sharing. It is just as much
about conservation and preservation. The
principle is about solidarity; solidarity in the
preservation and conservation of a good we all
share and therefore should all protect. Solidarity
also implies joint efforts to ensure that this good,
which we all share, is for all our benefit.”
(A/64/PV.56, p.23)

The Ad Hoc Open-Ended Working Group to study
issues relating to the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national
jurisdiction remains an important forum for the
consideration of the principle of the common heritage
of humankind. My delegation is concerned at the slow
progress in dealing with the question of the legal
regime applicable to marine genetic resources in the
deep seabed beyond areas of national jurisdiction. We
are in no doubt that the principle of the common
heritage of humankind is applicable to marine genetic
resources in the deep seabed beyond areas of national
jurisdiction. As we have observed on many different
occasions, the logic of the Convention is based on a
zonal approach to regulation. It is therefore not the
nature of the resources that determines the applicable
regime, but rather the maritime zone in which the
resources are found.

Ms. Leal Perdomo (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Aware of the very
important role that oceans and seas play in meeting the
food requirements of human beings and of the fact that
they constitute “a central component in the world
system for sustaining life and a valuable resource that
contributes to achieving sustainable development”
(A/64/PV.57, p.19), the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reaffirms the importance we attach to the
subject of oceans and the law of the sea. My country’s
public policy therefore pays the greatest attention to
this issue, as is widely and clearly reflected in our
national legislation and the plans and programmes
drawn up and implemented in accordance with criteria
and principles on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine resources.

Nonetheless, we recognize that others hold a
somewhat different position. For that reason, my
delegation has called for, and continues to call for, the
institutionalization of the Ad Hoc Working Group with
a view to elaborating an instrument to deal with the
question of the legal regime with finality. We cannot,

In that connection, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela has been particularly attentive to
developments and events at the international level
regarding the subject of oceans and seas, in particular
the meetings of the United Nations Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law

18

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

of the Sea held here at United Nations Headquarters in
September and November. We believe that the
Consultative Process is a forum for political and
technical consultation open to States and interested
bodies in order to assess the development of the marine
environment worldwide. From that standpoint, we
believe that it is essential to maintain the Process as a
forum within the United Nations, as we think that it
provides the necessary framework for synergy among
the major international instruments related to the
environment that will make it possible to achieve
consistency in matters related to oceans and seas, and
thus remedy the legal gaps in the law of the sea.
In our view, the consideration of this issue must
be closely linked to the concept of sustainable
development. In that regard, we must, among other
things, further develop the role of oceans in matters
relating to the eradication of poverty, food security and
the interrelationship between oceans and climate
change.
With regard to climate change, we share the
concern about and the interest expressed in gaining
further
knowledge
of
the
scope
of
that
interrelationship, in particular in connection with
promoting worldwide awareness of the impact of
climate change on marine ecosystems, especially on
low-lying coastal areas and island States, with full
respect for the standards and principles laid down in
the United Nations Framework Convention of Climate
Change and the Kyoto Protocol, which are currently
the subject of the sixteenth Conference and sixth
Meeting of the Parties, respectively, in Cancún.
We would also like to take the opportunity
afforded by this debate on oceans and the law of the
sea to underscore our concern at what, in our view, is
the inadequate implementation of the international
legal framework on the management and conservation
of genetic resources beyond national jurisdiction. The
delegation of Venezuela believes that this forum should
address all United Nations conventions on biological
diversity. It is therefore unacceptable to my delegation
that the management of such resources should be
decided through a legal regime that excludes some
parties. Meanwhile, we firmly support the need for
further research seeking to reach the scientific certainty
needed to guide the international community in
adopting the best decisions to protect and preserve the
marine environment and its living resources against

10-67898

such factors as pollution, degradation or any other
element that could threaten its existence.
From the viewpoint of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, the changing reality and dynamic of the
current world view demonstrate that the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10
December 1982 does not cover, either in its text or in
its additional agreements, the treatment of all aspects
that the international community must address with
regard to issues pertaining to oceans and seas. My
delegation would therefore like to assert the key role of
such international instruments in dealing with marine
and coastal biological diversity beyond national
jurisdiction, as reflected in decision IX/20 of the ninth
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on Biological Diversity, which was held in
Bonn, Germany, in 2008.
With regard to the draft resolution (A/65/L.21) on
sustainable fisheries and the Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and the Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks and associated instruments, Venezuela would
like to underscore that this is a highly sensitive matter
and constitutes an area of priority importance for our
country. We have therefore undertaken significant
initiatives to promote and implement programmes for
the conservation, protection and management of marine
biological resources.
Our national law on fisheries and aquaculture sets
out penalties to be imposed on vessels flying national
flags that illegally extract resources without due State
authorization, as well as for those that enter into
jurisdictional waters without submitting the obligatory
authorizing documents. Such situations are reported to
the vessel’s flag State. With respect to highly migratory
fish stocks, we also maintain a register of vessels that
is regularly transmitted to regional fisheries
management organizations (RFMOs) for approval and
follow-up in accordance with their regulations, as well
as to enhance transparency. In addition, Venezuelan
legislation prohibits bottom trawling, as a measure to
promote sustainable development, in particular the
development of fish stocks.
At the international level, Venezuela has
implemented principles of the Code of Conduct for
Responsible Fisheries under chapter 18 of Agenda 21,

19

A/65/PV.59

adopted at the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, which was held in Rio
de Janeiro in 1992. Venezuela also participates actively
in the Committee on Fisheries of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and its
subsidiary bodies, as well as in RFMOs, including the
Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission, the
Latin American Fisheries Development Organization,
the Commission for Inland Fisheries of Latin America,
the International Commission for the Conservation of
Atlantic Tunas, and the Inter-American Tropical Tuna
Commission.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela attributes
the greatest importance to its participation in joint
initiatives to combat illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing. In that regard, our Government
has adopted the measures necessary to tackle that issue
through ongoing reporting of the position and legal
status of flag vessels on the high seas to the regional
fisheries management organizations to which it
belongs. Furthermore, Venezuelan law provides for the
installation of satellite geopositioning equipment and
devices in fishing vessels larger than 10 units of gross
tonnage
Our
delegation
reaffirms
Venezuela’s
commitment to cooperate with multilateral efforts and
initiatives seeking to promote the sustainable
development of oceans and seas. We therefore advocate
implementing an international legal framework that
incorporates all regional and international agreements
that regulate the conservation and sustainable use of
marine resources.
The Venezuelan State wishes to reiterate before
the General Assembly its historic position, maintained
in various international forums, namely, that the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is not the
sole source of the law of the sea, and we object to it
being considered as such. Moreover, it is worth
underscoring that the Convention also does not enjoy
universal participation, inasmuch as a significant
number of States are not party to that Convention.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to express my
appreciation for this opportunity to pay tribute to the
Consultative Process on the law of the sea this year. It
is a useful forum to exchange experiences, in particular
regarding the sustainable development of the seas, the
management of marine resources and the preservation

20

of the marine environment. Here, I would like also to
pay tribute to the Co-Chairs who have led this
Consultative Process.
My country has participated effectively in the
three United Nations Conferences on the Law of the
Sea. Libya contributed to the discussions and
negotiations that ultimately led to the drawing up of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Libya will always look forward to participating with
other States in all activities that contribute to the
proper management of the oceans and seas in such a
way as to serve humanity and to preserve maritime
resources.
My country was among the first to sign that
Convention. However, some of its provisions are likely
to deprive us of our historic rights with regard to
waters over which we have exercised sovereignty for
hundreds of years. That has not allowed us yet to ratify
the Convention. Thus, we support the appeals for an
overall review of the Convention in order to meet the
concerns of those countries that have not yet ratified it
and to ensure its universality, since the Convention is
the result of huge efforts on the part of the
international community over the years.
The international community, both States and
institutions, in particular the United Nations General
Assembly, must work more rapidly and with greater
cooperation to take appropriate measures and agree on
arrangements to protect the marine environment, halt
pollution at sea and preserve all endangered marine
species. Action is needed to improve fishing practices
and to preserve fish stocks. Libya supports all efforts to
preserve the wealth of the oceans as the common
heritage of humanity, including the commitment to the
guiding principles of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations with regard to the
management of fisheries on the high seas, in order to
strengthen the monitoring and assessment of the effects
of fishing activities. Moreover, Libya appeals for
further exchanges of scientific experiences relating to
the exploration of polymetallic nodules, manganese
nodules, sulphides and cobalt-rich crusts in order to
ensure a fair and equitable distribution of such
resources, free of any monopoly in terms of research
and experience.
The President returned to the Chair.
Illegal and chaotic exploration and use of
resources has been harmful to developing countries, in

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

particular African countries. That continues to be a
source of concern, in particular when they involve
activities taking place virtually openly near the shores
of African countries in zones that fall under the
sovereignty of those States under recognized rules of
international law. Unfortunately, such acts of
aggression against African marine resources are
exacerbated by the fact that most African countries
lack the necessary resources and capacity to monitor
their shores effectively, which has given rise to many
problems, in particular piracy off the coast of Somalia,
the exploitation and exhaustion of Somalia’s resources
and the unscrupulous dumping of toxic wastes off the
coast of Somalia, which has exacerbated the problems
caused by piracy, making it uncontrollable over the
past few years.
Migration and drug trafficking at sea are other
difficulties facing the international community. Over
the past few years, Libya, with one of the longest
Mediterranean coastlines, has assumed a heavy burden
in combating illegal immigration across the
Mediterranean. Despite our considerable appreciation
for certain aspects of cooperation with our regional
partners, the material and human costs of such
migration continue to rise. Naturally, Libya cannot
continue to bear that burden alone. Recently, Libya set
up a monitoring system, including the establishment of
15 monitoring checkpoints along the Libyan coast to
control illegal immigration by boat towards Europe, as
well as two major crossing points in Tripoli and
Benghazi. Libya, in so doing, is attempting to counter
smuggling of persons and drugs, as these are serious
crimes that endanger international peace and security.
That is a costly objective for us, but all those who are
affected must shoulder their part of the burden and
participate in capacity-building and the relevant
technology transfer, since that is a problem shared by
all of the developing countries.
My country encourages all regional arrangements
concerning fisheries, the sustainability of fisheries, and
combating maritime pollution. Libya is a party to all of
the bilateral, regional and international arrangements
and conventions in this area. We expect the optimal
implementation of maritime security standards and to
preserve seas and oceans from pollution. After all,
Libya has one of the longest coast lines of the
Mediterranean.
Libya also encourages cooperation between the
countries of the South, in particular between Africa and

10-67898

South America, regarding oceans and sees,
management of maritime resources and the use of the
resources of the continental shelf.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with General Assembly resolution 51/6 of 24 October
1996, I now call on His Excellency Mr. Nii Allotey
Odunton, Secretary-General of the International
Seabed Authority.
Mr. Odunton (International Seabed Authority):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your election to the presidency of the
General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session. I have
every confidence in your ability to guide the Assembly
to a successful conclusion.
I wish to refer to the two draft resolutions before
the General Assembly (A/65/L.20 and A/65/L.21) and
express my appreciation to Member States for their
positive references to the work of the International
Seabed Authority.
I also express appreciation for the very
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General, which,
as always, provides detailed background material for
our consideration (A/65/69).
I would like to take this opportunity to comment
on paragraph 42 of draft resolution A/65/L.20, in
which the Assembly welcomes the adoption at the
sixteenth session of the Authority of the regulations for
prospecting and exploration for polymetallic sulphides.
That was indeed an important achievement for the
Authority. It was made possible by the positive
commitment shown by Member States to conclude the
negotiations on the draft regulations, and I wish to
thank all members of the Authority for their
cooperation.
I mentioned last year that one of the reasons why
it was so important to establish a regulatory framework
for sulphide exploration was because of the possibility
that one or more States would wish to apply for
exploration licences in the near future. I am pleased to
inform the Assembly that, since the adoption of the
regulations, two States have submitted applications for
exploration licences. Information regarding one of
those applications has already been circulated among
Member States. Information on the other, which was
submitted only recently, will be circulated in due
course.

21

A/65/PV.59

Both applications will be considered in
accordance with the procedures laid down in the new
regulations at the next session of the Authority in 2011.
I wish to note, however, that both applicants have
expressed in their applications the intention to take up
the option provided for in the regulations, namely,
equity participation in a joint-venture operation with
the Enterprise once commercial exploitation begins.
The adoption of the new regulations and the
submission of the new applications is an extremely
important development in the life of the Authority and
in the development of the regime for the Area as a
whole.
Throughout the process of negotiating the regime,
from the work of the Seabed Committee in the 1960s to
the Preparatory Conference in the 1990s, the focus was
on only one seabed mineral resource, namely,
polymetallic nodules. The huge technological and
financial challenges involved in recovering nodules
from great depths have led to long delays in making
possible the exploitation of those resources on a
commercial scale.
That, in turn, led many to question whether
seabed mining would ever take place at all. The fact is,
however, that not only are active research and
development
programmes for nodule mining
continuing, but, in addition, geologists and engineers
have been actively seeking out new resources and new
areas of interest as potential sources of seabed
minerals.
One of the key drivers of that activity is the fact
that a robust legal and jurisdictional framework exists
for the regulation of activities in the Area. The new set
of regulations for exploration for polymetallic
sulphides is a further development of that framework
and sends an important signal to the mining community
that the Authority is able to carry out its functions
under the Convention effectively and efficiently and in
such a way as to provide legal certainty and security of
tenure for those wishing to play a part in developing
the common heritage of humankind.
The next step for the Authority, if seabed mining
is to become a commercial reality, is to begin to
progressively examine the issues relating to the nature
of the regulatory framework that would apply beyond
the exploration phase. Many of those issues were left
pending, as a result of the 1994 Agreement relating to
the implementation of Part XI of the Convention. How

22

some of the critical legal and financial questions are
addressed will be an important factor in eventually
determining whether investment in the seabed mining
industry will take place or not.
Another milestone for the Authority in 2010, also
referred to in paragraph 43 of draft resolution
A/65/L.20, was the decision by the Council of the
International Seabed Authority to request an advisory
opinion from the Seabed Disputes Chamber.
That was a highly significant development for the
Convention regime as a whole. The making of the
request and the manner in which it was dealt with by
the Council and the Chamber demonstrate that the
system set out in the Convention works. The fact that
the Authority and its political organs are willing and
able to respond to difficulties in the interpretation of
provisions of the Convention in a responsible and
constructive manner should give great comfort to
individual States parties, as well as to the future seabed
mining industry. The Chamber itself acted
expeditiously in dealing with the request, and I wish to
place on record my appreciation to Judge Tullio
Treves, the President of the Seabed Disputes Chamber,
and his colleagues for their diligent and judicious
consideration of the request.
The making of the request shows that, while there
are provisions in the Convention that are difficult to
understand and apply in the light of changing
circumstances, there is a strong willingness on the part
of States parties and others to do what is necessary to
make the provisions work in practice.
A total of 15 States parties and four
intergovernmental organizations made extensive
written and or oral submissions to the Chamber. The
strong interest and commitment of States parties to
ensuring the integrity of the legal regime contained in
the Convention is one of the most remarkable features
of the Convention, compared to many other global
rule-making treaties, and, again, should provide
important reassurance, not only to the future seabed
mining industry but also to the many other global
ocean-related industries.
Draft resolution A/65/L.20 places particular
emphasis on measures for the protection and
preservation of the marine environment, including
marine biological diversity, in areas beyond national
jurisdiction. That is a matter that has always been of
particular concern of the Authority, which is has a legal

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

duty to elaborate rules, regulations and procedures to
ensure the effective protection of the marine
environment from the potential harmful effects of
seabed mining.
In that regard, I take particular note of
paragraph 153 (c) of the draft resolution, which recalls
the need to be guided not only by the Convention and
its implementing Agreements but also by other
commitments made by States, such as those contained
in the Convention on Biological Diversity and the
declarations of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development.
That is an important reminder that, while the
Authority has a very specific and exclusive mandate
under Part XI of the Convention and the 1994
Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of
the Convention, it cannot act in isolation from other
parts of the legal regime concerned with marine areas
beyond national jurisdiction. Similarly, those bodies
concerned with the implementation of the legal regime
for areas beyond national jurisdiction must abide by
the measures developed by the Authority with respect
to the Area.
During the past year, the Authority has
cooperated extensively with other bodies and
organizations concerned with marine areas beyond
national jurisdiction, including the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the Regional Seas
Programmes, and I look forward to continuing and
enhancing that cooperation in the future.
One illustration of the way in which the Authority
is beginning to implement the global commitments that
have been made by Member States for the protection
and preservation of marine biodiversity is the current
effort to formulate a regional environmental
management plan for the Clarion-Clipperton Zone in
the Central Pacific Ocean. That is a vast area extending
over 4,000 kilometres from east to west and 1,500
kilometres from north to south and is considered the
prime area of interest for nodule mining.
Over the past four years, the Authority has been
developing a geological model of the Zone. That
project, which was completed this year, is the most
comprehensive and detailed scientific study of the
geology and environment of the seafloor to have been
carried out to date. It significantly enhances our
understanding of the way in which mineral deposits
form on the seafloor and how geochemical and

10-67898

geophysical conditions affect the marine environment
at great depth.
The next step is to formulate a regional
environmental management plan for the area. Last
month, the Authority convened an international
workshop, whose participants included representatives
of Member States, contractors with the Authority, and
other scientists and experts, to advise on such a plan.
The workshop identified a number of critical issues
that need to be addressed in order to achieve the
objective of maintaining the biodiversity, ecosystem
structure and ecosystem function in that region.
That includes strategies for the establishment of
comprehensive
environmental
databases
and
standardized taxonomies and the calibration of various
data sets in order to enable the Authority to issue
reliable environmental quality status reports and
impact assessments before commercial mining begins.
Concern for the marine environment is fully
reflected in the Authority’s regulations, which require
exploration contractors to collect environmental data
and share them with the Authority, to carry out
environmental studies of the conditions at the ocean
floor and to progressively conduct assessments of the
impact of the contractors’ activities on the marine
environment.
However, one of the major difficulties for the
Authority, and for any other institution dealing with the
problems of managing biodiversity in the deep ocean,
is the lack of adequate data on which to base decisions.
In that regard, the major contribution of the Authority
has been its work in collecting and standardizing
available data relating to the deep sea environment.
That work has been carried out in collaboration
not only with contractors, but also with leading
scientists
and
relevant
international
research
programmes, including the Census of Marine Life. As a
global institution, the Authority is well placed to
promote standardization in data collection methods and
taxonomy. It is equally well placed to act as a
repository for those data, and, in accordance with its
mandate under the Convention, to promote and
encourage research programmes using those data and
to disseminate the results for the benefit of all States.
In that regard, the Authority has recently begun to
develop a new initiative in cooperation with the
Government of Brazil. The objective of that project is

23

A/65/PV.59

to work with Brazil and other countries bordering the
Equatorial and South Atlantic Oceans to collect,
analyse and integrate geological information on seabed
mineral resources in that area and to make it broadly
available to Member States and others interested in
those resources.
I wish to briefly mention the Authority’s
Endowment Fund for Marine Scientific Research in the
Area. In the two years of its operation, the Fund has
already provided training and research opportunities
for some 20 individuals from developing countries.
One of the remarkable aspects of the Fund has been the
strong interest expressed by leading scientific and
technical institutions around the world in collaborating
with the Authority to provide training opportunities of
that nature.
That clearly indicates that there is a great
willingness on the part of the scientific community
worldwide to share its knowledge and experience for
the benefit of the developing world. At this time, the
Fund is supporting three research fellowships at the
National Oceanographic Institute of India, and we have
been pleased to provide support to the Rhodes
Academy of Oceans Law and Policy for the past two
years.
At the same time, there is much more that can be
done, and I wish to encourage Member States to make
further financial and other contributions in order to
further enhance the use and effectiveness of the Fund,
including through co-funding initiatives.
Finally, I wish to say that I look forward to the
widest possible participation by all members in the
seventeenth session of the Authority from 11 to 22 July
2011. It will be an important session, with a crowded
and substantial agenda, including consideration of the
outcome of the advisory opinion of the Seabed
Disputes Chamber, as well as consideration of the two
new applications for exploration licences.
If the decisions of the Assembly and Council are
to command support in the long term, it is the duty of
all members to attend and participate in the work of the
Authority.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with General Assembly resolution 54/195 of
17 December 1999, I now call on the Observer for the
International Union for the Conservation of Nature.

24

Mr. Cohen (International Union for the
Conservation of Nature): The International Union for
the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) welcomes the draft
resolutions put forward this year for consideration by
the General Assembly.
The General Assembly proclaimed 2010 as the
International Year of Biodiversity. The SecretaryGeneral noted, in a message early in the Year, that over
the past half century human activity has caused an
unprecedented decline in biological diversity. Species
are becoming extinct at a rate a thousand times faster
than the natural rate, a loss now being further
compounded by climate change. A wide variety of
environmental goods and services that we take for
granted is under threat, with profound and damaging
consequences for ecosystems, economies and
livelihoods. In 2002, world leaders agreed to
substantially reduce the rate of biodiversity loss by
2010. The 2010 biodiversity target was subsequently
integrated into the Millennium Development Goals. It
will, however, not be met.
With respect to the oceans, the Secretary-General
has reminded us that climate change and ocean
acidification are destroying coral reefs. Fisheries are
increasingly overexploited, condemning millions of the
world’s poorest people to unemployment and
malnutrition. We must conserve coral reefs, so that
they can continue to protect coasts from storms and
support livelihoods for hundreds of millions of people.
We must ensure the long-term viability of our seas and
oceans.
We welcome the draft resolutions (A/65/L.20 and
A/65/L.21) that have been put forward this year, and
we specifically welcome the language in them on the
need to protect marine biodiversity, including
references to the programme of work of the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). In Nagoya,
the parties adopted a Strategic Plan with 20 headline
targets. With regard to marine and coastal areas, the
parties at Nagoya committed to ensure the conservation
by 2020 of at least 10 per cent of such areas through
effectively and equitably managed, ecologically
representative and well-connected systems of protected
areas and other effective area-based conservation
measures. That target also reflects the commitment
made at the World Summit on Sustainable
Development in 2002 to establish representative
networks by 2012.

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

Draft resolution A/65/L.20 encourages States to
make further progress towards the 2012 target,
including the establishment of representative networks,
and calls on States to further consider options to
identify and protect ecologically or biologically
significant areas, consistent with international law and
on the basis of the best available scientific information.
My delegation urges effective and meaningful
measures to attain the 2012 target. The draft resolution
reiterates the General Assembly’s central role in the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction. We would
welcome explicit language in 2011 that calls on States
to work together to establish marine protected areas on
the high seas, together with management plans for
those areas. Progress towards the target could also be
made by calling on States to cooperate with each other
to ensure that their vessels and nationals respect the
management plans and boundaries of protected areas
established on the high seas through intergovernmental
organizations, even where States may not themselves
be members of those organizations. All States would
benefit from such a cooperative arrangement, because
we all depend on healthy and vibrant seas.
This year’s draft resolution notes the work of a
CBD Expert Workshop on scientific and technical
aspects relevant to environmental impact assessment in
marine areas beyond national jurisdiction, which was
held in Manila in 2009. At the fourth World
Conservation Congress, held in Barcelona in 2008,
IUCN members, composed of States, Government
agencies and non-governmental organizations, adopted
language urging the General Assembly to call on States
to develop assessment processes, including the
assessment of the cumulative impacts of human
activities with a potential for significant adverse
impacts on the marine environment, living marine
resources and biodiversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction; and to ensure that assessed activities with
the potential for such significant adverse impacts are
subject to prior authorization by the States responsible
for nationals and vessels engaged in those activities,
consistent with international law, and that such
activities are managed to prevent such significant
adverse impacts, or not authorized to proceed.
The resumed Review Conference of the 1995
United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement, which took
place in May, recommended, inter alia, that parties give
effect to article 5(d) of the Agreement to assess the

10-67898

impacts of fishing, other human activities and
environmental factors on target stocks and species
belonging to the same ecosystem or associated with or
dependent on the target stocks.
My delegation looks forward to progress in the
coming year on the application of environmental
impact assessment and strategic environmental
assessments to ensure that all activities likely to be
harmful to marine biodiversity will be assessed in
advance and managed to prevent significant adverse
impacts. Such work should build on the outcomes of
the CBD Expert Workshop, as well as on the
experience that parties to the Antarctic Treaty have
developed in the application of environmental impact
assessment procedures for areas beyond national
jurisdiction. That would benefit all.
The Strategic Plan adopted by the parties to the
CBD also included as a 2020 target that all fish and
aquatic plants be managed and harvested sustainably,
including by applying ecosystem-based approaches,
with recovery plans and measures in place for all
depleted species. The impact of fishing on stocks,
species and ecosystems should be within safe
ecological limits. That mirrors the commitment made
at the World Summit on Sustainable Development in
2002 to maintaining or restoring fish stocks by 2015 to
levels that could produce maximum sustainable yield.
That 2015 target cannot be met, as there is not
enough time now to restore stocks in four years. But
we should commit, in keeping with the duty to
cooperate that is incorporated into the Convention on
the Law of the Sea, to ensuring that future management
decisions made in regional fisheries management
organizations and by individual States take fully into
account the 2020 target that all fisheries impacts
should be within safe ecological limits. In that regard,
we note with concern a recent decision at the
International Commission for the Conservation of
Atlantic Tuna that does not provide for rapid progress
to rebuild Atlantic bluefin tuna stocks to within safe
ecological limits by 2020.
With regard to fishing, we note that it is now
likely that there are no areas of the high seas where
nationals of more than one State do not exploit
identical or different living resources. There should
thus be an obligation for States to cooperate to
conserve and manage such living resources in all areas
of the high seas. We therefore urge consideration of the

25

A/65/PV.59

possibility of banning fishing in high-seas areas where
there are no cooperative conservation and management
arrangements. To that end, States should prohibit their
vessels and nationals from fishing in the high seas in
areas or for stocks for which no conservation and
management measures are currently in force, until such
time as cooperative arrangements are established and
operational.
A further CBD target is the reduction, by 2015, of
anthropogenic pressures on coral reefs and other
vulnerable marine ecosystems that would be harmed by
the effects of climate change or ocean acidification. As
my delegation noted last year, the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change identified coral reefs as a key
example of an ecosystem vulnerable to climate change.
Ocean acidification will accelerate the destruction of
coral reefs. In 2010, coral bleaching has been found to
have been severe in many areas. Through the Global
Coral Reef Monitoring Network regular reports on the
state of the world’s coral reefs are available. A
database on bleaching is maintained at reefbase.org.
Natural coastal carbon sinks, including mangroves, sea
grasses and salt marshes, must be protected, even as
emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
gases are reduced.
The coming year will be important because of the
opportunities that it will provide to prepare for the
United
Nations
Conference
on
Sustainable
Development or Rio+20, to be held in Rio de Janeiro in
May 2012. We look forward to working constructively
with other delegations to ensure progress towards the
conservation
and
equitable
and
sustainable
development of marine biodiversity. We welcome the
decision to focus the twelfth Meeting of the Openended Informal Consultative Process on the assessment
of progress to date and on the remaining gaps in the
implementation of the outcomes of the major summits
on sustainable development, together with new and
emerging challenges.
We also welcome the meeting in 2011 of the Ad
Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to study
issues related to the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biodiversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction, which we hope will make progress in
finding ways forward to ensuring the conservation and
sustainable and equitable use of that biodiversity.
In closing, we welcome the meeting of the
General Assembly Ad Hoc Working Group of the

26

Whole to recommend a course of action on the Regular
Process for global reporting and assessment of the state
of the marine environment, including socio-economic
aspects. The Regular Process and its assessments will
help to build capacity and strengthen the science-policy
interface for the conservation, management and
sustainable use of the marine environment and help us
to understand the ocean and its role in supporting all
life on Earth.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on agenda item 74 and its
sub-items (a) and (b).
We shall now proceed to
resolutions A/65/L.20 and A/65/L.21.

consider

draft

Before giving the floor to the speakers in
explanation of vote before the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats. I now give the floor for explanation of vote to
the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.
Ms. Leal Perdomo (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela wishes to make its
explanation of vote regarding A/65/L.20, entitled
“Oceans and the law of the sea”.
Speaking before this global forum, Venezuela
reaffirms its commitment to cooperating with the
initiatives and endeavours aimed at enabling
coordination on matters pertaining to the ocean and
law of the sea in accordance with international law. In
addition, within that legal framework, Venezuela
certifies its obligation and firm commitment to support
all efforts to strengthen the management of the
conservation, integrated organization and sustainable
use of the oceans and seas, in particular the marine
ecosystem, because of its importance for the
development and welfare of people.
However, the Venezuelan State emphasizes the
position that it has taken in various international
forums, where it has stated that the Convention on the
Law of the Sea should not be deemed to be the sole
source of law of the sea, in that there are other legal
instruments regulating that area. Consequently, with
regard to paragraph 65 of the draft resolution, we wish
to emphasize that, pursuant to resolution 2749 (XXV),
the principle of the common heritage of humankind is

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

the legal system applicable to marine diversity in the
seabed and the oceans in areas beyond national
jurisdictions. Nor should it be thought that the
Convention enjoys universal participation, given that a
significant number of States are not a party to it.
We believe that the reasons that have prevented
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela from becoming
party to the Convention on the Law of the Sea in the
past are still valid. My delegation states that it will not
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
Because we are not a party to the Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982, my country is
therefore, not obliged to observe the Convention’s
provisions nor those of customary law other than those
recognized or to be expressly recognized in the future
by the Venezuela State by incorporating such
provisions into its national legislation.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela therefore
wishes to state, once again, its historical position
regarding the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, believing that aspects of the text being put
to the General Assembly for approval today require my
delegation to abstain from the vote.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/65/L.20 and A/65/L.21. We turn first to
draft resolution A/65/L.20, entitled “Oceans and the
law of the sea”. A recorded vote has been requested.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement is
being made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
In connection with draft resolution A/65/L.20,
entitled “Oceans and the law of the sea”, I wish to put
on the record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General.
By paragraphs 36, 67, 163, 203, 210, 211, 213,
215 and 228 of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would request the Secretary-General to
convene the twenty-first Meeting of States Parties to
the Convention in New York from 13 to 17 June 2011,
and to provide the services required; approve the
convening by the Secretary-General of the twenty-

10-67898

seventh and twenty-eighth sessions of the Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf in New York
from 7 March to 21 April 2011 and from 1 August to
2 September 2011, respectively, with full conference
services for the plenary parts of those sessions, and
request the Secretary-General to make every effort to
meet those requirements within overall existing
resources, on the understanding that the following
periods will be used for the technical examination of
submissions at the Geographic Information System
laboratories and other technical facilities of the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea:
from 7 to 25 March 2011, from 11 to 21 April 2011;
request the Secretary-General to convene, in
accordance with paragraph 73 of resolution 59/24 and
paragraphs 79 and 80 of resolution 60/30, a meeting of
the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to
take place from 31 May to 3 June 2011 in order to
provide recommendations to the General Assembly,
with full conference services, and request the
Secretary-General to make every effort to meet that
requirement within overall existing resources; decide
that the regular process will be overseen and guided by
an Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole of the General
Assembly composed of Member States and request the
Secretary-General to convene the first meeting of the
Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole from 14 to 18
February 2011; request the Secretary-General to
designate the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea, Office of Legal Affairs, to provide
Secretariat support for the regular process, including
its established institutions; also request the SecretaryGeneral to invite the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the International
Maritime Organization and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, and other
competent United Nations specialized agencies, as
appropriate, to provide technical and scientific support
to the regular process; request the secretariat of the
regular process to convene a meeting of the Group of
Experts, as appropriate and subject to the availability
of the resources, prior to the first meeting of the Ad
Hoc Working Group of the Whole; request the
Secretary-General to promptly take appropriate
measures, by mobilizing all available extrabudgetary
and existing resources, including through the
redeployment of staff, to further strengthen the
capacity of the Division, in particular its human

27

A/65/PV.59

resources serving as the secretariat of the regular
process, including in the context of the programme
budget for the current biennium and the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013; and
request the Secretary-General to convene, in
accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution
54/33, the twelfth meeting of the Consultative Process
in New York from 20 to 24 June 2011, to provide it
with the necessary facilities for the performance of its
work and to arrange for support to be provided by the
Division, in cooperation with other relevant parts of
the Secretariat, as appropriate.
Pursuant to paragraph 36, 163 and 228 of the
draft resolution, the twenty-first Meeting of States
Parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working
Group and the twelfth meeting of the Consultative
Process on Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea have
already been included in the 2011 calendar of meetings
and conferences and therefore do not constitute an
addition.
Pursuant to paragraph 67 of the draft resolution,
it is envisaged that the Commission will require
20 meetings with interpretation services, from
28 March to 1 April 2011 and from 15 to 19 August
2011, which have already been included in 2011
calendar of meetings and conferences. However, the
draft resolution calls for 10 additional days, for a total
of 20 meetings from 4 to 8 April 2011 and from 22 to
26 August 2011, with interpretation in all six languages
without documentation.
It should be noted that the 2011 calendar of
meetings and conferences already includes 10 days of
meetings for the twenty-first Meeting of the States
Parties. However, paragraph 36 of the draft resolution
envisions only five days of meetings. The resources
from the remaining five days, for a total of 10 meetings
planned for the States Parties, will be reallocated to the
five days for a total of 10 additional meetings of the
twenty-seventh session of the Commission from 4 to 8
April 2011. Therefore, for the five days of the
Commission from 22 to 26 August 2011, 10 meetings
with interpretation in the six official languages will be
considered an addition, which would give rise to
additional requirements of $155,000 in the programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011, including
requirements of $122,500 under Section 2, General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and conference management, and $32,500 under

28

Section 28D, Office of Central Support Services, for
other support services related to the additional
10 meetings.
Although the modalities contained in draft
resolution A/65/L.20 exceed those planned by the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management in its draft calendar of conferences and
meetings for 2010-2011, the Secretariat will seek to
identify resources that could be redeployed from the
provisions to be made under Section 2, General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and conference management, and Section 28D, Office
of Central Support Services, of the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 in
order to fully service the conferences.
As regards paragraph 203, it has been agreed
between the Office of Legal Affairs and the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management that interpretation services from and into
all six official languages for 10 meetings of the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Whole from 14 to 18 February
2011 would be provided on an as available basis.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/65/L.20, no financial implications
would arise under the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2010-2011.
In accordance with paragraphs 210, 211, 213 and
215, the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the
Sea, Office of Legal Affairs, is to provide secretariat
support to the Regular Process for global reporting and
assessment of the state of the marine environment,
including socio-economic aspects. Furthermore, the
draft resolution requested the Secretary-General to
mobilize all available extrabudgetary and existing
resources to strengthen the capacity of the Division,
serving as the secretariat of the regular process, in the
context of the programme budget for the programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011 and the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013.
It should be emphasized that specific
requirements relating to the servicing of some of the
institutions under the regular process, such as the
Group of Experts and the management review
mechanism, are not addressed in the draft resolution.
The Division is of the view that it would be able to
provide from within the overall resources available
under Section 8, Office of Legal Affairs, of the
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 basic

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

services to the regular process in 2011, including the
servicing of the General Assembly Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Regular Process in February 2011.
However, specific needs for the strengthening of
the Division’s capacity, including in the context of the
programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011, as
well as the proposed programme budget for 2012-2013,
would need to be reassessed following the first meeting
of the Working Group on the Regular Process in
February 2011, which is expected to further consider
modalities for the implementation of the Process,
including arrangements for the Group of Experts and
the management review mechanism.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/65/L.20, no financial implications
would arise under the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2010-2011.
The attention of delegations is drawn to the
provisions of Section VI of General Assembly
resolution 45/248 B of 21 December 1990, in which
the Assembly reaffirmed that the Fifth Committee was
the appropriate Main Committee of the Assembly
entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and
budgetary matters; and reaffirmed also the role of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.
The attention of delegations is also drawn to
paragraph 67 of the first report of the Advisory
Committee on the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2000-2001, document A/54/7, which
indicates that the use of the phrase “within existing
resources” or similar language in resolutions has a
negative impact on the implementation of activities.
Therefore, efforts should be made to avoid the use of
that phrase in resolutions and decisions.
I would like to announce that, since the issuance
of draft resolution A/65/L.20, the following countries
have also become sponsors of the draft resolution:
Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cyprus, Fiji,
Honduras, Indonesia, Jamaica, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Micronesia, Papua New Guinea, Romania, Seychelles,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine and the United
States of America.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,

10-67898

Belgium, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, China,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia
Against:
Turkey
Abstaining:
Colombia, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Draft resolution A/65/L.20 was adopted by 123
votes to 1, with 2 abstentions (resolution 65/37).
The President (spoke in French): We turn next to
draft resolution A/65/L.21, “Sustainable fisheries,
including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementations of the Provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

29

A/65/PV.59

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement is
made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
I would like to inform members in connection
with draft resolution A/65/L.21, “Sustainable fisheries,
including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementations of the Provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, and related instruments”, that I
wish to put on record the following statement of
financial implications on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral.
By paragraph 122 of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would request the SecretaryGeneral, in cooperation with the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, to report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session on the
actions taken by States and regional fisheries
management organizations and arrangements in
response to paragraphs 80 and 83 to 87 of resolution
61/105 and paragraphs 113 to 117 and 119 to 127 of
resolution 64/72, in order to facilitate the further
review of the actions taken, referred to in paragraph
129 of resolution 64/72. In accordance with paragraph
122 of the draft resolution, the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea, Office of Legal Affairs,
plans to hire an expert consultant to assist in the
preparation of the requested report, and the related
costs would be absorbed from within the overall
resources available under Section 8 of the programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/65/L.21, no financial implications
would arise under the programme budget for the
biennium 2010-2011.
I would also like to announce that, since the
issuance of draft resolution A/65/L.21, the following
countries have also become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Australia, Belgium, Belize, Cyprus, Fiji,
Greece, Honduras, Malta, Micronesia, the Netherlands,
Papua New Guinea, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia,
Tonga and Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the General Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/65/L.21?

30

Draft resolution
(resolution 65/38).

A/65/L.21

was

adopted

The President (spoke in French): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote following
the voting, may I remind delegations that explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Şahinol (Turkey): Turkey voted against
resolution 65/37 entitled “Oceans and the law of the
sea” under sub-item (a) of agenda item 74. I would like
to recall that the reasons that have prevented Turkey
from becoming a party to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea in the past remain
valid. Turkey supports international efforts to establish
a regime of the sea that is based on the principle of
equity and is acceptable to all States. However, the
Convention does not, in our opinion, provide sufficient
safeguards for special geographical situations and, as a
consequence, does not take into consideration
conflicting interests and sensitivities stemming from
special circumstances. Furthermore, the Convention
does not allow States to register reservations to its
articles.
Although we agree with the Convention in its
general intent and with most of its provisions, we are
unable to become a party to it owing to those
prominent shortcomings. That being the case, we
cannot support a resolution that calls upon States to
become parties to the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea and harmonize their national
legislation with its provisions.
As to resolution on sustainable fisheries, which
was adopted under sub-item (b) of agenda item 74, I
would like to state that Turkey is fully committed to
the conservation, management and sustainable use of
marine living resources and attaches great importance
to regional cooperation to that end. In that context,
Turkey supported resolution 65/38. However, Turkey
disassociates itself from references made in that
resolution to international instruments to which it is
not a party. Those references should therefore not be
interpreted as a change in the legal position of Turkey
with regard to those instruments.
Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina joined in the consensus to adopt resolution
65/38. However, we wish to indicate once again that
none of the recommendations in that resolution can be
interpreted as meaning that the provisions of the

10-67898

A/65/PV.59

Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, adopted in New York in 1995,
can be considered as binding on those States that have
not expressly indicated their consent to fulfil
obligations under that Agreement.
The resolution we have just adopted contains
paragraphs relating to the implementation of the
recommendations of the Review Conference on that
Agreement. Argentina is of the view that those
recommendations cannot be considered applicable,
even as recommendations, to States that are not parties
to the Agreement. Furthermore, this is particularly
relevant in the case of States that disassociated
themselves from those recommendations, as did
Argentina.
Therefore, Argentina disassociates itself from the
consensus reached by this Assembly with regard to the
paragraphs of the resolution that refer to the
recommendations of the Review Conference on the
1995 Agreement.
At the same time, Argentina wishes to point out
that, under current international law, neither regional
fisheries management organizations or arrangements,
nor their member States, may adopt any type of
measure with respect to vessels whose flag States are
not members of such organizations or arrangements or
have not expressly consented that such measures can
be applied to the vessels flying their flag. Nothing in
the resolutions of the General Assembly, including the
one just adopted, can be interpreted in a manner
contrary to this conclusion.
In addition, the implementation of conservation
measures and the conduct of scientific research or any
other activity recommended in the resolutions of the
General Assembly, in particular resolution 61/105 and
concordant resolutions, have as their unavoidable legal
framework the international law of the sea in force, as
reflected in the Convention, including its article 77 and
Part XIII. Thus, the implementation of such resolutions
does not constitute justification for denying or ignoring
the rights established under the Convention. Nothing in
that resolution or in others of the General Assembly is
of such a nature as to affect the sovereign rights of
coastal States over their continental shelf or the
exercise of jurisdiction by coastal States with regard to
their continental shelf under international law.
Paragraph 119 of the resolution just adopted contains

10-67898

an extremely relevant reminder of this concept, which
is already reflected in resolution 64/72.
Finally, the growing disagreements relating to the
contents of the resolution on sustainable fisheries
seriously compromise the possibility of its being
adopted by consensus in future sessions of the
Assembly.
Ms. Leal-Perdomo (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela wishes to provide the
General Assembly its explanation of position on
resolution 65/38, on sustainable fisheries, including
through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of
the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments.
Venezuela
reaffirms
its
commitment
to
cooperating in initiatives and efforts intended to foster
coordination on issues related to sustainable fisheries.
However, as we have previously stated, and
maintaining the reasons that have prevented the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela from becoming a
party to the 1995 Agreement, we confirm the historic
position of Venezuela as having reservations with
respect to the Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments, in the context of the resolution just
adopted by the General Assembly.
Mr. Berguño (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): For my
delegation, among the most significant points of
resolution 65/38, which we have just adopted, are the
reference to the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea and its relationship to the 1995 Fish Stocks
Agreement; the emphasis on the obligations of flag
States to ensure that vessels flying their flag comply
with the conservation and management measures
adopted with respect to fisheries resources on the high
seas; the call for the application of precautionary and
ecosystem approaches; the emphasis on the serious
nature of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing,
including the sovereignty of States over ports; the need
for a genuine link between flag States and fishing
vessels flying their flag; and the call for States to
become parties to the Agreement on Port State
Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,

31

A/65/PV.59

Unreported and Unregulated Fishing of the Food and
Agriculture Organization.
In addition, operative paragraph 95 reflects the
proposal made by Chile regarding the need to take into
account the recommendations of the Science Working
Group of South Pacific Regional Fisheries
Management Organization regarding the adoption of
future interim measures for pelagic resources. It is
directly linked to the critical situation affecting the
stock of jack mackerel and the related report prepared
by the Science Working Group.
Regarding the recommendations of the Review
Conference on the Fish Stocks Agreement, Chile
wishes to emphasize the positive results contained in
the outcome of the resumed Review Conference
(A/CONF.210/2010/7, annex). I refer in particular its
first two preambular paragraphs, which reaffirm that
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
and the Fish Stocks Agreement provide the legal
framework for the conservation and management of
straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks,
and that all the provisions of the Agreement shall be
interpreted and applied in the context of, and in a
manner consistent with, the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea.
The Review Conference thus emphasized that full
implementation and compliance with the conservation
measures adopted in accordance with international law
and based on precautionary criteria, and reliance on the
best available scientific knowledge are necessary in
order to ensure the long-term conservation and
sustainable use of such fish stocks.
As far as the recommendations of the Conference
are concerned, some are particularly relevant, such as
the commitment to take urgent action to improve the
situation of straddling and highly migratory fish stocks
that are overfished or exhausted. Effective
conservation and management measures must be taken,
and efforts must be increased to improve cooperation
between flag States fishing in the high seas and coastal
States in order to ensure the compatibility of measures
concerning the high seas in areas within national
jurisdiction.
Mr. Schuldt (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Republic of Ecuador, I wish to refer to an
aspect of draft resolution 65/37, which we have just
adopted, regarding biodiversity in areas beyond
national jurisdiction.

32

The importance of marine biodiversity in areas
beyond national jurisdiction is clear, and it is of
significant environmental, social and economic
importance. It can contribute to the development of
science and improve health and food security. Ecuador
firmly believes that all genetic resources in the seas
and oceans and under the seabed in areas beyond the
limits of national jurisdiction are the common heritage
of mankind, as stated in General Assembly resolution
2749 (XXV), and must therefore be used for the benefit
of all humanity. Thus, the exclusive exploitation of
such resources by a few Powers has serious global
socio-economic consequences and contradicts the
aforementioned principle.
In that regard, Ecuador wishes to indicate that the
Working Group established pursuant to resolution
59/24 on the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity resources beyond areas of
national jurisdiction must continue its work in
accordance with the applicable legal framework based
on implementation of the principle of the common
heritage of mankind, as reflected in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. Ecuador thus
supports the final text of resolution 65/37, it being
understood that future discussion of the matters
referred to in paragraph 165 of the resolution should be
dealt with in the Ad Hoc Working Group, and in
compliance with the aforementioned principle.
Lastly, regarding resolution 65/38, my delegation
wishes to reiterate that, given the recommendations
made by the resumed Review Conference this year, the
resolution contains a contradiction. That is because in
2006, and in May this year, there was no examination
or assessment of the suitability of the provisions of the
New York Agreement, particularly since many States
clearly indicated that those provisions constituted an
obstacle to ratification. As long as that obtains, the
provisions of that agreement are not binding on States
non-parties to the 1995 Agreement.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote after the vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
74 and its sub-items (a) and (b)?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

10-67898
