S/PV.8839

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8839th meeting

Thursday, 19 August 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jaishankar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Prince
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Thirteenth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2021/682)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-23024 (E)
*2123024*

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Thirteenth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2021/682)
The President: In accordance with rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral, United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism;
Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director, CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate; and
Mr. Davood Moradian, Director General, Afghan
Institute for Strategic Studies.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/682, which contains the thirteenth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: I would like to start by expressing
my sincere condolences to the Governments and the
people of all Member States that have recently suffered
from any form or manifestation of terrorism. My
heartfelt thoughts and sympathies go to the survivors
and the families of the victims.
Tomorrow, we will commemorate the fourth
International Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to
the Victims of Terrorism, with the participation of the
Secretary-General. Let us work every day to prevent
and alleviate the pain and suffering that terrorism
causes. I thank the Security Council for the opportunity
to present the thirteenth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international
peace and security and the range of United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering the
2/24

19/08/2021

threat (S/2021/682), as mandated by resolution 2368
(2017). I am pleased that Assistant Secretary-General
Michèle Coninsx is joining me today, unfortunately
only on the screen, to present the report, which our
Offices prepared jointly with the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, led by Mr. Edmund
Fitton-Brown. I take this opportunity to salute the
excellent work of the Monitoring Team, which recently
produced its own twenty-eighth report on the threat
posed by Da’esh and Al-Qaida (see S/2021/655).
We all are witnessing the rapidly evolving situation
in Afghanistan, which could have far-reaching
implications for peace and security around the world.
It is therefore welcome that Mr. Davood Moradian will
also brief the Security Council today. I would like to
echo the Secretary-General’s appeal to the Security
Council earlier this week to use all the tools at its
disposal to prevent Afghanistan from being used as a
platform or a safe haven for terrorism. In that regard,
let us remember that several members of the Taliban
remain designated terrorists, according to the sanctions
regime under resolution 1988 (2011). I also note the
concerns expressed by some Security Council members
with regard to the release of prisoners affiliated to
Al-Qaida and Da’esh.
Despite the most recent developments in
Afghanistan, the Secretary-General’s thirteenth report
on Da’esh remains valid. Its emphasis on the interplay
between armed conflict, State fragility and terrorism
and Afghanistan is no exception. The report also notes
that Da’esh has expanded its presence in Afghanistan.
We will need to ensure that Afghanistan is never again
used as a launching pad for global terrorism. Globally,
the threat posed by Da’esh to international peace and
security during the period under consideration has
remained significant and steady over the past six
months, raising serious international concerns. Da’esh
has continued to exploit the disruption, grievances
and development setbacks caused by the pandemic
to regroup, recruit new followers and intensify its
activities, both online and on the ground. Its core in
Iraq and Syria still has access to significant hidden
financial reserves, estimated at between $25 million
and $50 million. Da’esh has further decentralized its
governance and the additional autonomy, capacity
and confidence gained by its regional affiliates could
provide the group with new options, including the
orchestration of international attacks and shaping the
future global impact of Da’esh.
21-23024

19/08/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Coronavirus disease-related lockdowns in many
areas were more comprehensive in early 2021 than in
2020, but it is conceivable that attacks have been planned
for when restrictions ease. There is an increased threat
of attacks by lone actors or small groups inspired and
possibly directed remotely by Da’esh, including online.
Only through cooperative measures between and
within countries, including civil society and the private
sector, can we counter the terrorist threat online.
I welcome, in that regard, the first ever high-level
debate held on 29 June by the Council on cybersecurity
(see S/2021/621), as well as initiatives taken at the
regional level.
Da’esh remains focused on reconstituting its
capabilities in Iraq and Syria, organized in small
cells hiding in deserts and rural areas that wage an
insurgency against security forces while they move
across the border between two countries to avoid
capture. However, it is the lack of a comprehensive
solution to the situation of thousands of individuals
with alleged links to Da’esh who remained stranded
in Iraq and Syria that could shape the future terrorist
threat landscape over the medium to long term, not just
locally but globally.
The conditions in detention facilities and
displacement camps in north-eastern Syria have
further deteriorated, especially in Al-Hol camp.
Several instances of escapes, terrorist radicalization,
fundraising, arms smuggling, training and incitement
continue to be reported, as well as killings and enforced
disappearances. Thousands of children caught in that
limbo, through no fault of their own, continue to have
their rights abused and violated on a daily basis.
I welcome the efforts of Member States that
have repatriated their citizens since my most recent
briefing to the Council in February (see S/2021/140).
However, the pace is too slow considering the scale of
the humanitarian, human rights and strategic security
priority, which only grows more complex as time
passes. I think that developments in Afghanistan could
create an even more dangerous environment in those
camps, with unpredictable consequences. I reiterate the
Secretary-General’s call upon Member States for the
voluntary repatriation of all concerned individuals, with
particular focus on children, in line with international
law and with the consent of relevant Governments.
Next month, we will formally launch the global
framework that my Office coordinates with UNICEF

S/PV. 8839

to facilitate whole-of-United Nations support
to requesting Member States on the protection,
voluntary repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of individuals with suspected links to
United Nations-designated terrorist groups returning
from Iraq and Syria. We have already begun employing
that framework mechanism in support of Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan and a scoping
exercise has been undertaken to support Iraq.
The report of the Secretary-General describes
that the most alarming development over the past six
months has been the spread of Da’esh in Africa, with
spillover from Mali into Burkina Faso and the Niger
and incursions from Nigeria into the Niger, Chad and
Cameroon and from Mozambique into Tanzania. A
global response is urgently needed to support the efforts
of African countries and regional organizations to
counter terrorism and address its interplay with conflict,
organized crime and governance and development
gaps, as underscored by a wide range of Member States
during the second United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Week, which was held from 28-30 June in New York.
Da’esh affiliates in the Greater Sahara have killed
several hundred civilians since the beginning of the
year in large-scale attacks in Mali, Burkina Faso and the
Niger. The so-called Islamic State West Africa Province
will likely gain from the weakening of Boko Haram.
The situation in the wider region could be aggravated
by the relocation of terrorists and other foreign fighters
from Libya. The expansion of Da’esh in Central Africa,
especially in northern Mozambique, could have farreaching implications for peace and security in the
region and needs to be addressed through a coherent
regional approach as a matter of priority, as the group’s
affiliates may seek to exploit intercommunal disputes
and illicit trafficking activities.
In Europe, the threat from Da’esh has continued
to be suppressed by pandemic-related restrictions. The
threat of terrorist attacks by lone actors radicalized and
incited online, especially vulnerable youth, remains the
primary concern, along with terrorist radicalization
in prisons.
Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx will brief
the Council shortly on the support provided in recent
months by the United Nations system to Member States
in addressing the threat posed by Da’esh. My Office
has continued to work closely with all our partners to
ensure business continuity during the pandemic and to

21-230243/24

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

advance the implementation of our global programmes
and projects tailored to address the needs of Member
States. Those efforts are supported through our
presence in the field, as requested by Member States,
including our Programme Office for Counter-Terrorism
and Training in Africa in Rabat and the Programme
Office on Parliamentary Engagement in Doha, which
were launched in June in partnership with Morocco and
Qatar respectively.
Our Global Programme on Detecting, Preventing
and Countering the Financing of Terrorism, in response
to resolution 2462 (2019), leads on a joint initiative
with the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum to identify
and disseminate good practices to effectively counter
terrorist financing while safeguarding civic space.
The United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel
programme, led by my Office to help Member States
establish advanced passenger information and
passenger name record systems, in line with resolutions
2178 (2014), 2396 (2017) and 2482 (2019), now counts
43 beneficiaries. The programme held three virtual
assessments for Djibouti, Mongolia and South Africa
and interactive online trainings for Sierra Leone, The
Gambia and States members of the Southern African
Development Community. We also completed a series
of virtual study visits to Belgium, Colombia, Norway,
the Russian Federation and Spain for the beneficiaries
of our global programme on national-level interagency
coordination mechanisms or fusion cells and launched,
in January, a new global programme on countering
terrorist threats against vulnerable targets.

19/08/2021

the Security Council remain as critical today as they
were in 2001 in confronting terrorism in a sustained,
collective, effective and principled manner that upholds
the rule of law, human rights and gender equality and
safeguards humanitarian action.
This year also marks the fifteenth anniversary
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the tenth anniversary of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre within my Office.
I was highly encouraged, therefore, by the success of
our second Counter-Terrorism Week in June, during
which Member States actively engaged at the second
High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism
Agencies of Member States, convened by the SecretaryGeneral, and the consensus adoption by the General
Assembly of the comprehensive and forward-looking
resolution 75/291, on the seventh review of the United
Nations Global Terrorism Strategy.
That bodes well for our collective efforts and
badly for Da’esh and other terrorists. The United
Nations system, through the Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact, stands ready to support the
Security Council and all Member States. I look forward
to the Council’s guidance as we transition into a new
decade of counter-terrorism.
The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Coninsx.

The year 2021 is one of milestones in the
international fight against terrorism. There is no better
time for Member States to recommit themselves to
multilateral action against terrorism under the auspices
of the United Nations. Twenty years ago, in the wake of
the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks by Al-Qaida,
the Security Council provided momentous leadership
and guidance with the adoption of its landmark
resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

Ms. Coninsx: I am grateful for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the thirteenth report
of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh)
(S/2021/682) and the continued efforts of the United
Nations and Member States to counter the threat. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for
his briefing and commend both the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
led by Mr. Edmund Fitton-Brown, for their invaluable
contributions to the report.

Today, we face transnational terrorist threats, like
those of Da’esh and Al-Qaida, which are enduring and
able to adapt to new technologies, as well as expanding
to include individuals and groups that commit terrorist
attacks connected to xenophobia, racism and other
forms of intolerance. The unity and leadership of

As Under-Secretary-General Voronkov rightly said,
we all are witnessing the rapidly evolving situation in
Afghanistan. I also echo the Secretary-General’s appeal
to the Security Council to take all possible steps to
ensure that the situation in Afghanistan does not result
in the country being used as a safe haven for terrorism.

4/24

21-23024

19/08/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Despite the welcome progress on the roll-out
of vaccines, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has continued to have negative impacts
across most hotspot areas for the past months. However,
as we outlined in the most recently updated analytical
paper by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), published in June 2021, the impact
of COVID-19 on terrorism and counter-terrorism has
been more mixed.
In many non-conflict zones, pandemic-related
restrictions have continued to help suppress terrorist
activity. In conflict zones, however, where the impact of
pandemic-related restrictions is limited, the increasing
interplay among terrorism, fragility and conflict has
caused the terrorist threat to grow. Indeed, Da’esh and
its affiliates continue to pose a significant threat in
West, East and Central Africa and Afghanistan, while
simultaneously prioritizing their efforts to regroup and
resurge in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. CTED’s
analytical paper also emphasizes the pandemic’s
growing impact on humanitarian programming across
the world, including in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic. We continue to be concerned about the dire
situation faced by those individuals, mainly women and
children, with presumed links to Da’esh.
Through the virtual component of the CounterTerrorism Committee’s recent hybrid assessment visits
to both Iraq and Member States from which foreign
terrorist fighters have travelled to the conflict zones,
CTED has continued to monitor compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Although United
Nations entities continue to promote the safe, voluntary
and human-rights compliant return of foreign nationals
from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, many remain
stranded in crowded camps, with limited access to
essential services, due process and a fair trial.
Those concerns have only been exacerbated by the
pandemic. The Secretary-General’s report highlights
violence in the camps, forced disappearances and other
human rights abuses as serious concerns, in addition
to the forced returns, the prevention of return and the
discriminatory treatment of families with a perceived
link to Da’esh. Further efforts are needed to create the
conditions under which social cohesion can be promoted
and further Da’esh violence prevented, while ensuring
respect for human rights and the rule of law.
Those challenges remind us yet again of the
critical need for us to strengthen national, regional and

S/PV. 8839

international counter-terrorism efforts. In that regard,
I welcomed the discussions held during recent hybrid
assessment visits conducted for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Security Council during this year’s
Counter-Terrorism Week and its side events on new
threats and challenges and how best to marshal our
collective efforts to address them.
I
also
welcomed
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s approval of the revised overview
of implementation assessment and the electronic
detailed implementation survey in March, which were
developed by CTED in accordance with resolution 2395
(2017). Those new and local tools will help CTED to
improve monitoring the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions by Member States in a
timely manner and will enhance CTED’s quantitative
and qualitative critical capacities and capabilities.
They are also expected to support Members States in
their efforts to adopt comprehensive and integrated
counter-terrorism approaches.
It is also important to reflect on other examples
of progress made over the past six months. Criminal
justice responses, international judicial cooperation
and the development of comprehensive and tailored
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies
have continued to be significant priorities for CTED and
many of our United Nations partners. In cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) and UNOCT, CTED has supported efforts to
increase cooperation in investigations and prosecutions
at the national and local levels in Nigeria and the Lake
Chad basin.
In March, CTED, UNOCT and UNODC jointly
held a regional workshop that promoted genderresponsive approaches to prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration in the Lack Chad basin. There has
also been welcome progress in the development of
good practices in international and regional counterterrorism operations, including in relation to judicial
cooperation, mutual legal assistance and extradition in
terrorism cases.
CTED and its partners further supported Maldives
and the Philippines in the use of the internet and social
media in counter-terrorism investigations. CTED,
together with UNODC, continued to tailor their South
Asia Regional Toolkit for Judges to the national contexts
of Maldives and Pakistan.

21-230245/24

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

19/08/2021

CTED’s analysis suggests that terrorists and
terrorist groups, including Da’esh, are exploring
alternative methods of moving funds, owing to the
impact of pandemic-related measures on money-transfer
networks. The use of social media crowdfunding
campaigns for Da’esh fighters and their relatives in
camps in the Syrian Arab Republic also remains an
ongoing challenge.

1373 (2001) — a landmark resolution, as described
by Mr. Voronkov — will serve as a forum for further
enhancing and strengthening our multilateral counterterrorism efforts.

To address those challenges, CTED, in cooperation
with other United Nations entities, continues to
work together with the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), FATF-style regional bodies and the Global
Counterterrorism Forum. Due to the terrorism
financing risk associated with the illicit trade in
natural resources, CTED, together with the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, supported the
Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering
Group in implementing its regional operational plan for
combating the financing of terrorism. CTED continued
to play a key role in facilitating technical assistance,
including by leading virtual consultation missions,
which fall under the all-of-United Nations approach,
the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre global programmes and by
supporting activities on topics, including the terrorismarms-crime nexus, the protection of vulnerable targets,
fusion cells and countering terrorist travel. CTED
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
also held a workshop to promote the relevant Security
Council resolutions and offer expertise to Nigerian law
enforcement officers in the application of international
best practices, regarding intelligence collection.

Mr. Moradian: It is a great honour for me to have
the opportunity to share my perspective on the threat
of Da’esh to international security in this forum. In the
light of the unfolding catastrophe and humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan, I will also bring in the Afghan
tragedy and factors given the context of today’s briefing.

Da’esh and its affiliates remain a significant
concern and threat to international peace and security.
The upcoming joint open briefing on the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and Africa, on 18 October, will
allow us to further explore the recent evolution of such
affiliates on the African continent. A comprehensive,
coordinated One United Nations approach remains
crucial to developing and implementing effective
counter-terrorism measures, while also addressing the
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism and
violent extremism. Of course, we must do so while
ensuring that our multilateral counter-terrorism efforts
do no harm.
In closing, I would like to express my hope that
the forthcoming Counter-Terrorism Committee special
meeting, to be held on 13 September, marking the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
6/24

The President: I thank Ms. Coninsx for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Moradian, who, I
believe, was in Kabul until a few days ago.

In fewer than three weeks, the world will witness
and commemorate the tragic and painful twentieth
anniversary of the 11 September terrorist attacks, which
gave birth to our collective struggle against terrorism.
The fact that the Security Council is holding a regular
session on Da’esh in August is testimony to the fact
that the world has collectively failed to deal with the
threat of terrorism after 20 years, despite allocating
abundant resources in blood and treasure. I would like
to offer my own reflections and analysis on some of the
reasons for our collective failure. I will begin in my
own field — the academic world.
There is hardly any reasonable consensus and
intellectual agreement on the very definition and
understanding of terrorism. The diversity of names and
labels to describe militant Islamist movements indicate
that conceptual confusion. Names and labels include
jihadist, Salafi, fundamentalist, Islamic terrorist,
extremist, violent extremist, Islamo-fascist, insurgent,
barbarian, terrorist, foreign terrorist and international
terrorism, as well as others.
The failure of the Islamic world to own its share
of responsibility is the other important reason for
our collective failure. While the bulk of terrorist
perpetrators and victims have been Muslims, sadly,
those in the Islamic world have remained passive
observers in articulating a consistent, credible and
constructive narrative about an existential threat to
Muslims’ well-being and security. The intellectual
and political stagnation of our religious, cultural and
educational institutions have immensely contributed
to the rise of extremism and the failure of defensive
measures against the threat in the Islamic world.
21-23024

19/08/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Let me bring in the role of the most privileged
members of international system — referred to as
member States — in our collective failure. The
overwhelming approach to terrorism has been to treat
it as a non-State phenomenon and independent from a
State-centric international system. However, in reality,
terrorism is a product of the State system and one or
other State tends to be behind or above a given terrorist
group. In some cases, there is a group of like-minded
States that supports militant groups, as was the case
with the Mujahideen during the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan. Da’esh would not have survived and
flourished, had it not been for the support that it
receives from some member States.
Sadly, the United Nations system protects its
guilty members that engage in proxy wars against their
regional and global adversaries by utilizing terrorism
as a State policy. The disconnect between United
Nations analytical reports and United Nations political
statements and actions show the inability of the United
Nations to confront the State sponsorship of terrorism.
Our global struggle against terrorism can also
be compared and contrasted with our other global
struggle against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. In our recent struggle, we have witnessed
the phenomenon of vaccine nationalism, in which rich
nations choose self-interest over collective interests.
Despite the rhetoric of fighting all forms of terrorism,
sadly, many Governments have chosen to focus on their
own terrorists, rather than on the integrated nature of
global terrorism. The case of Afghanistan is a prime
example of the contradictory approach to dealing
with terrorism. Many have recommended political
means to deal with the Taliban, while advocating
military solutions for other like-minded groups such as
Al-Qaida, Da’esh, the Pakistani Taliban and the Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement.

S/PV. 8839

terrorism. The take-over of Kabul by the Taliban,
on the eve of twentieth anniversary of 9/11, will be
remembered as a historic benchmark and turning point.
It is natural to be fascinated by the symbolic coincidence
of the two anniversaries or intellectual discussion about
the definition of terrorism or to engage in political
debate about the blame game. But what we must focus
on is the humanitarian dimension and the unfolding
catastrophe. As the President stated earlier, I was at
Kabul airport when desperate passengers held back
departing airplanes belonging to the United States,
including my own airplane, which was due to leave
that airport. It was a scene of sheer human desperation,
helplessness and fear. One of the passengers who fell
to the ground from a flying airplane was reportedly
a member of Afghanistan’s national football team.
These passengers were not alone in their desperation
and fear; they represent millions of Afghans from
diverse backgrounds, from women rights activists to
destitute farmers.
The world must step in to avert and mitigate an
apocalyptic humanitarian tragedy. To this end, the
United Nations must go beyond its usual approach
and declare the situation an urgent humanitarian crisis
under the provisions of Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter and undertake serious and urgent
deliberation with a view to declaring Kabul a safe zone
protected by a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
That would allow the opposing factions to come to an
inclusive political settlement, while working to mitigate
the unfolding catastrophe.
I use the word “catastrophe” very intentionally
because I was in a very catastrophic situation in Kabul
just 48 hours ago. It is therefore not an exaggeration
when I use the word “catastrophe”. The word has also
been used by the Secretary-General in recent remarks
to the Council.

If there is utility and wisdom in a political approach
to the Taliban, why should it not be extended to other
groups or the other way around? All those groups share
fundamental characteristics with one another, despite
differences in the scope of their activities. Again, using
the COVID-19 analogy, there are variants of the same
original phenomenon, which have mutated to different
degrees of lethality and versions, as with the Alpha,
Beta and Delta variants.

The crisis of Afghanistan during the last four
decades has shown that a military solution is just
a brief pause before the next phase of the war. The
Taliban and their regional partners, particularly the
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, should reflect on the
principal role they are playing either in mitigating or
in accelerating a catastrophic situation in Afghanistan,
which is an outcome that will determine our decadesold struggle against terrorism.

Terrorism, 11 September and Afghanistan have
become defining names in global conversation about

The President: I thank Mr. Moradian for
his briefing.

21-230247/24

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for External Affairs of India.
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michèle Coninsx,
Assistant Secretary-General and Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, for their briefings on the thirteenth report
of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) to
international peace and security (S/2021/682). I wish to
reiterate my thanks to Mr. Moradian, Director General
of the Afghan Institute for Strategic Studies, for joining
us remotely today.
On the day after tomorrow, the world will be
commemorating the fourth International Day of
Remembrance and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism.
Next month, it will be 20 years since the horrific
11 September tragedy in New York. We in India have
had more than our fair share of both challenges and
casualties. The 2008 Mumbai terror attack is imprinted
on our memories. The 2016 Pathankot air base attack
and the 2019 suicide bombing of our policemen at
Pulwama are even more recent. Let me therefore
express my solidarity with victims and their families
all over the world who have suffered and continue to
suffer from the scourge of terrorism. We must never
compromise with this evil.
The international community holds a collective
view that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
must be condemned. There cannot be any exception or
any justification for any act of terrorism, regardless of
the motivations behind such acts. We also recognize
that the menace of terrorism cannot be and should not
be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group. However, in spite of the progress we
have made to tighten the legal, security, financing and
other frameworks to combat terrorism, terrorists are
constantly finding newer ways to motivate, resource
and execute acts of terror. Unfortunately, there are also
some countries that seek to undermine or subvert our
collective resolve to fight terrorism. This cannot be
allowed to pass.
The latest report of the Secretary-General has
provided another stark reminder to all of us that
ISIL (Da’esh) continues to pose a critical threat to
international peace and security. ISIL (Da’esh) remains
active in Syria and Iraq, and its affiliates are growing
8/24

19/08/2021

in strength, particularly, as we heard from the briefers,
in Africa. The financial resource mobilization of ISIL
(Da’esh) has become more robust. The flow of funds
has continued, and rewards for killings, I believe, are
now being paid even in bitcoin. The radicalization of
vulnerable youth by systematic online propaganda
campaigns remains a serious concern.
In our own immediate neighbourhood, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan has become
more energetic and is constantly seeking to expand its
footprint. This should be taken seriously.
Events unfolding in Afghanistan have naturally
enhanced global concerns about their implications for
both regional and international security. The heightened
activities of the proscribed Haqqani Network justify
this growing anxiety. Whether it is in Afghanistan or
against India, such groups as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and
Jaish-e-Mohammed continue to operate with both
impunity and encouragement. It is therefore vital that
the Security Council does not take a selective, tactical
or even a complacent view of the problems we face.
We must never countenance sanctuaries for terrorists
or overlook their raising of resources, and when we
see State hospitality being extended to those with
innocents’ blood on their hands, we should never lack
the courage to call out this double-speak.
We heard from the briefers about the aggravating
impact of the pandemic. What is true of the coronavirus
disease is even more true of terrorism: none of us are
safe until all of us are safe.
Insofar as ISIL is concerned, its modus operandi has
changed, with the core focusing on regaining ground in
Syria and Iraq and affiliates functioning independently.
This evolving phenomenon is extremely dangerous and
poses a new set of challenges to our collective efforts in
our fight against ISIL and terrorism.
In January 2021, when I had an opportunity to
address the Council — virtually, at that time — I
proposed an eight-point action plan for consideration
(see S/2021/48). Let me reiterate some of its cardinal
principles : first, to summon the political will — we
must not justify terrorism or glorify terrorists; second,
to prohibit double standards — terrorists are terrorists,
and distinctions can only be made at our own peril;
third, to refrain from placing blocks and holds on listing
requests without any reason; fourth, to discourage
exclusivist thinking and be on guard against new
terminologies and false priorities; fifth, to enlist and
21-23024

19/08/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

delist objectively, not based on political or religious
considerations; sixth, to recognize the linkage to
organized crime; seventh, to support and strengthen
the Financial Action Task Force; and, eighth, to
provide greater funding to the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism.
I call on the Council to collectively build on these
principles. It is also therefore important to end the
stalemate preventing the adoption of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, which India has
championed for so long. India has been at the forefront
of global counter-terrorism efforts, taken part in all
major global initiatives against international terrorism
and is party to all United Nations sectoral conventions
relating to terrorism. We were pleased to play our
role in strengthening the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy adopted last month (General Assembly
resolution 75/291). We reiterate our full support for
counter-terrorism cooperation under the auspices of the
United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Today’s meeting is an important opportunity
to discuss the threat posed by the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) and the actions that we are all
taking to prevent and counter terrorism. Our thanks
go to Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Assistant
Secretary-General Coninsx and Mr. Moradian for
their informative briefings today. I would also like to
thank the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and the other United Nations entities that
contributed to the report (S/2021/682).
Today I would like to discuss the current state of
the threat posed by ISIS and everything that we can
do to counter that threat, especially by undercutting
its finances. To start, we are deeply worried by the
Secretary-General’s assessment that ISIS continues to
expand throughout Africa, especially in various parts
of West Africa and the Sahel, in addition to Central and
East Africa. To neutralize that expansion, the United
States is providing critical counter-terrorism assistance
to disrupt, degrade and respond to terrorist activity
perpetrated by ISIS. Our tactical training, mentorship
and equipment strengthens the capacity of the law

S/PV. 8839

enforcement, the judicial sector and communities in
our partner nations to respond to that growing threat.
In June, ISIS-Khorasan attacked a HALO Trust
camp in northern Afghanistan, killing 10 people and
injuring 16. That attack on a humanitarian group,
working to rid the country of landmines, shows the
barbarity of ISIS-Khorasan and its efforts to undermine
the Afghan people’s security. Given the ongoing events
in Afghanistan, we are monitoring this situation very
carefully. As President Biden has stressed, we will
hold the Taliban accountable for its commitments not
to allow any terrorists to threaten the United States or
its allies from Afghan soil. As I said earlier this week,
we must all work together to ensure that Afghanistan
cannot ever again be a base for terrorism.
While such threats are real, there is good news. The
Secretary-General’s report notes that ISIS financial
reserves are on a downward trajectory. That is, in
part, thanks to the hard and valiant work of the United
Nations, in cooperation with other multilateral bodies.
We must continue those efforts. Undercutting the
financing of ISIS and other terrorist organizations is
one of the most effective ways to defeat them. Let us
therefore sharpen our focus and strengthen our efforts
to go after terrorist financiers and financial facilitators,
including virtual currencies and new payment methods.
To that end, the United States continues to believe in
the strength of sanctions and the unique role of the ISIS
and Al-Qaida sanctions regime under resolution 1267
(1999). It is the most effective global tool to proscribe
specific ISIS branches, members and support entities.
As it has since its creation in 1999, the 1267 sanctions
regime must continue to evolve to ensure that it remains
a credible counter-terrorism tool. But that evolution can
never come at the expense of dulling its ability to apply
effective pressure on ISIS and Al-Qaida.
As we apply that financial pressure, we must
remember that the most successful counter-terrorism
approaches incorporate perspectives and voices
beyond those in the national Governments and local
administrations. We need to listen to the people
affected by terrorism on the ground. That includes
women, young people, civil society, religious leaders,
educators, the private sector, victims of terrorism
and affected communities. Some of the people and
organizations closest to the threat understand it better
than anyone.

21-230249/24

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

To bolster that kind of civil society engagement,
the United States provides funding to the Strong Cities
Networks, the Global Community and Engagement
Resilience Fund, mother schools and many other
civil society organizations that work to strengthen
community resilience against violent extremism.
Finally, let us address the difficult issue of the
approximately 2,000 foreign terrorist fighters in
detention centres. About 60,000 of their associated
family members, mostly women and children, are
stranded in displaced persons camps. That includes
tens of thousands of innocent children. No child
should suffer for their parents’ crimes. That situation
is untenable. It is a humanitarian crisis, a human rights
crisis and a security crisis.
The United States believes that the repatriation and
prosecution, as appropriate, of those foreign terrorist
fighters is the best way to hold individuals accountable
for their crimes and to prevent their uncontrolled return
to countries of origin or elsewhere. To be clear, we do
not exclude ourselves in that call; we are repatriating
our own, as well.
The Secretary-General’s report provides a stark
outline of the shifting ISIS threat, but it offers hope and
a way forward, too. Together, we can stop the spread
of ISIS in Africa, counter its presence elsewhere and
undercut its finances. We can listen closely to civil
society. We can address the humanitarian crises caused
by foreign terrorist fighters. Together, we can work
towards stamping out the ISIS threat once and for all.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov,
Under-Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; Ms. Michèle
Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; and Mr. Davood
Moradian, Director General of the Afghan Institute for
Strategic Studies, for their valuable briefings.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/682)
before us is the thirteenth such report since the adoption
of resolution 2253 (2015). However, the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Sham (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and other
terrorist organizations remain a serious threat to
peace and security throughout the world. In addition,
countries afflicted by conflict and instability are still
the most vulnerable to the growing terrorist threat.
10/24

19/08/2021

In that context, Tunisia expresses its deep concern
about the increased terrorist threats, especially in the
Sahel region and in West, East and Central Africa, where
groups affiliated with Da’esh and Al-Qaida continue to
extend their control on the ground, including over ports
and border areas, in addition to their ability to mobilize
financial resources, weapons and advanced equipment,
such as drones.
As the Secretary-General’s report indicates, the
increase in such threats is largely due to the attempts
by Da’esh to decentralize its power, whose core has
become fragile. Da’esh therefore relies more on regional
branches in an attempt to reorganize its ranks, following
its military defeat in Iraq and Syria, without completely
abandoning the main aim of the organization, which is
to restore its central control on the ground.
We are also following with concern the security
situation in Afghanistan, especially in the light of
reports that state that a significant number of terrorists
affiliated with Da’esh and Al-Qaida have been released
from Afghan prisons.
Terrorist financing remains one of the most serious
threats to all nations. In addition to the significant
financial resources available to both Da’esh and
Al-Qaida, new technologies are now increasingly
being used, as stated in the report, to finance
terrorist activities, including cryptocurrencies, digital
currencies and virtual banks, as well as the ongoing
reliance on organized crime, particularly through the
illicit antiquities trade and trafficking in drugs and
precious metals.
In this context, Tunisia reiterates its call for the
necessary attention to continue to be paid to the issue
of addressing the financing of terrorism, particularly
through the exchange of expertise in the field of
monitoring and tracking terrorist crimes associated
with the use of digital currencies and cryptocurrencies.
While terrorist groups affiliated with Da’esh and
Al-Qaida have not yet been able to establish within their
goals clear strategies to harness the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, it is nevertheless necessary to
continue to take into consideration the repercussions
of this pandemic in the short, medium and long terms
when monitoring and tackling these threats. We note
in this regard that some terrorist groups may be able
to exploit the effects of the pandemic and carry out
terrorist attacks with the gradual lifting of health21-23024

19/08/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8839

care restrictions, as well as polarization and online
recruitment through social media.

and other terrorist groups still pose a serious threat to
international peace and security.

It is worth noting the rise of transnational terrorist
groups today based on xenophobia and intolerance.
They also take advantage of the pandemic to spread
extremist propaganda. That is why Tunisia calls on
the international community to step up its efforts
following the pandemic to enable quick recovery and
reconstruction and to prevent political, social and
economic effects that might become factors that lead
to terrorism.

Norway shares the Secretary-General’s concerns
regarding the expansion of ISIL affiliates into Africa.
We have witnessed numerous attacks in the Sahel, the
Lake Chad region and in East and Central Africa, as
well as in Mozambique. We therefore express our full
support for the Global Coalition against Da’esh and,
together with our international coalition partners, we
will maintain our highly prioritized contributions.

The first line of defence against terrorism is tackling
its root causes and the factors that fuel it. That is why
there is a need to step up international efforts to resolve
all conflicts that offer a breeding ground for terrorism,
as well as to limit the movement of terrorist fighters
and mercenaries towards conflict zones, because
that prolongs conflicts and thwarts efforts to achieve
peace. We must also step up our efforts to achieve
sustainable development and address all factors that
create vulnerability by strengthening good governance,
the rule of law and human rights and tackling the root
causes of violence.
In conclusion, fighting terrorism is at the top of
Tunisia’s priorities. We reiterate our commitment at
the national and international levels to strengthening
the means necessary to fight terrorism while fully
respecting our commitments related to international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Tunisia welcomes the General Assembly’s adoption
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy by consensus (resolution 75/291). We hope that
this consensus will be maintained within the Security
Council when renewing the mandate of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
sanctions regime against Da’esh and Al-Qaida.
We are committed to working with all Member
States, United Nations bodies and various actors
to strengthen multilateral cooperation and achieve
our common goal, which is eradicating the scourge
of terrorism.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): Let me start by thanking
the briefers for their comprehensive presentations, as
well as the Secretary-General for his thorough biannual
report (S/2021/682). The report is a harsh reminder of
the fact that Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)

The fight against ISIL and other terrorist groups
must continue on all levels. Experience shows that ISIL
and other terrorist groups exploit existing conflicts and
vulnerabilities in States and populations, including
gender inequalities and sexual and gender-based
violence. We must apply a gender perspective in our
response to address the impact of those threats.
We would like to emphasize three principles from
our national counter-terrorism strategy, which takes a
whole-of-society approach to terrorism. We believe that
the principles of prevention, protection and aversion are
globally applicable.
First, on prevention, it is clear that preventing violent
extremism is the most effective counter-terrorism
strategy. For every terror attack prevented, we will
save human lives and avoid suffering. We also avoid
the economic cost of an attack, as well as the largest
societal impact that results from the fear of terrorism.
Prevention encompasses a wide range of measures,
including education, the provision of basic services and
proactive and cross-cutting outreach from Government
institutions, civil society and the private sector.
Secondly, on protection, it is critical to impede
terrorist attacks through the development of proper
infrastructure, such as physical barriers and other
obstructions. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
the importance of implementing existing Security
Council resolutions.
Thirdly, on aversion, we must disrupt terrorist plots
through effective investigation and surveillance by
police and security institutions, as well as information
from the public. National authorities should make use
of effective international tools, such as INTERPOL
databases and border protection programmes. Those
tools must be kept up to date and supported by
relevant actors while being applied proportionately

21-2302411/24

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and in compliance with international law and human
rights law.
Here in the Security Council, it is particularly
important that we identify and prioritize areas of
cooperation. We believe that the financing of terrorism
is one of those areas. The increased use of encryption
technology and cryptocurrency linked to organized
crime underscores the importance of coordination.
Because financial instruments have no regard for
borders, we too must work across them like we do
in forums such as the Financial Action Task Force.
We must continue our dialogue to ensure effective
counter-terrorism frameworks while protecting
humanitarian spaces.
Principled humanitarian action, with a focus on
avoiding the negative unintended consequences of
sanctions and promoting humanitarian exemptions and
efficient exemptions procedures, must be facilitated.
Moreover, the pandemic is an underlying factor
contributing to increased recruitment among terror
organizations and incitement to violent extremism,
which is well described in the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate trend reports.
Preventing violent extremists’ misuse of cyberspace
and Internet platforms must be a high priority.
A few months ago, we heard the former Special
Advisor and Head of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Mr. Karim Khan, brief the Council on the investigation
into ISIL atrocities in Iraq (see S/2020/1193, annex I).
Let us keep that in mind as a reminder of what is at
stake in our international fight against terror, especially
as current events unfold in Afghanistan, where we are
deeply concerned by the expansion of ISIL-Khorasan in
several provinces, as well as the continued presence of
Al-Qaida. We reaffirm the responsibility of all parties
to ensure that the country does not become a safe haven
for terrorists.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of accountability and the continued need
for action against terrorism. The adoption of this year’s
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy by consensus sends a strong message that we
must all stand together against hate speech, violent
extremism and terrorism.
12/24

19/08/2021

Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico is grateful to India convening this
open debate as well to the briefers for the valuable
information that they have shared with us this morning.
In light of the current situation in Afghanistan, my
country wishes to stress the importance of uniting our
efforts to firmly condemn any action that threatens
international peace and security, as well as international
humanitarian and human rights law.
Moreover, and in line with the press statement
issued by the Council on 16 August, Mexico reiterates
the need to ensure that the territory of Afghanistan does
not become a safe haven for the training of terrorists,
nor for planning or perpetrating terrorist acts, as set out
in resolution 1267 (1996).
Mexico has closely studied the thirteenth report
of the Secretary-General (S/2021/682) on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) (Da’esh), which brings us together at this debate.
Accordingly, I would like to highlight several points.
First, Mexico expresses its concern about what
the report identifies as the most striking development
during the reporting period, which is the expansion of
Da’esh in Africa, where the largest number of victims
has been recorded. As the Secretary-General points out
in his report, we must focus our attention on the crossborder activities of terrorist groups in West, East and
Central Africa.
With regard to the challenges presented by the
coronavirus disease pandemic, we are concerned that
restrictions have made the delivery of humanitarian
assistance more difficult in many regions of the world,
impacting communities most in need. That has created a
situation in which terrorist organizations have sought to
become providers of food, charity, monetary resources
and other forms of support, while at the same time
seeking to use disinformation concerning the pandemic
to promote their violent narratives and consolidate and
expand their operations and recruitment activities.
Furthermore, we are concerned about ISIL’s access
to funding sources, as was mentioned earlier, as well as
the group’s access to weapons. The increase in the use of
cryptocurrencies must be urgently addressed, with the
support of the private sector. Cooperation must also be
strengthened between the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate to cut the links between terrorism and
21-23024

19/08/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

illicit arms trafficking, as mentioned in the report. To
that end, we must work even more diligently towards
the full implementation of the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
the regime established by the Arms Trade Treaty. We
take this opportunity to call on States that have not yet
done so to join that important legal instrument.
Moreover, we agree with the Secretary-General
that, in order to confront the impact of ISIL on women
and girls, a truly cross-cutting gender agenda is needed.
In that regard, we recall the convening of last month’s
Arria Formula meeting on the topic of preventing
terrorism and violent extremism by addressing gender
stereotypes, masculinities and gender inequality.
As a result of that discussion, it was clear that there
is a consensus on the need to incorporate the notion
of masculinities in determining the root causes of
terrorism and violent extremism and prevention
strategies. We would request the Secretary-General
to include this dimension in his next report in order to
bolster a comprehensive gender agenda in analysing
threats posed by ISIL and other terrorist groups, such
as Al-Qaida.
In the light of the fact that we will commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001) this September, Mexico reiterates the need
to carry out an in-depth assessment of the lessons
learned and good practices that the international
community has used to address the structural and
underlying causes of terrorism. Twenty years later,
reality — including recent events — has shown us that
any so-called war on terror that fundamentally relies on
military action is not the way to tackle the root causes of
terrorism and violent extremism. Therefore, now is the
time to invest our resources and efforts in prevention
and sustainable development.
Lastly, I take this opportunity to reaffirm Mexico’s
commitment to multilateral initiatives that seek to
comprehensively meet this challenge to peace and
international peace and security, including with respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law,
and a gender perspective.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation): (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx
for their detailed analyses of the situation in the
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). We express our support for the activities of the

S/PV. 8839

agencies they head. We thank Mr. Moradian, our longtime friend, for his comprehensive and emotional, yet
sobering and extremely pertinent briefing.
Today, the attention of the international community
is riveted on the situation in Afghanistan. Undeniably,
in the context of a discussion of counter-terrorism, we
cannot ignore the situation in that country. It would
appear that, in the aftermath of the tragic events of
11 September 2001, for 20 years Afghanistan was full
of American and NATO troops, trainers and advisers,
whose officially proclaimed purpose was the fight
against terrorism and the training of the Afghan
national security forces to prepare them for this fight.
To that end, enormous human and financial resources
were mobilized.
What are the results of that assistance and presence?
As soon as foreign support was withdrawn, 20 years of
efforts were erased in an instant. Everything went to
waste. No one was either willing or able to fight for the
values and interests inculcated by the foreign Powers.
Has Afghanistan ceased to be a source of terrorist
and narcotic threats? Of course not, but the new
Afghan authorities and Afghanistan’s neighbours will
have to deal with that. Following the exit of Western
contingents, Afghan citizens are facing an even greater
number of problems.
We would like to underscore that the Russian
Federation will cooperate only with those political forces
in Afghanistan that have no ties to terrorists, above all
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and
their affiliated groups. We trust that all Afghan parties
will refrain from violence and contribute to resolving
the situation peacefully.
In recent years, thanks to the consistent efforts
of the Russian and Syrian militaries, we have been
able to significantly weaken the potential of terrorist
organizations operating in Syria, in particular ISIL.
However, certain terrorist cells remain active and
continue to pose a serious threat. The largest group
remains the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which emerged
from Jabhat Al-Nusra. According to various estimates,
its members number from 10,000 to 15,000. The fight
against that terrorist organization is complicated by
attempts to present it as some kind of political opposition.
Another terrorist organization that continues to
pose a threat in the region is Huras Al-Din, a branch
of Al-Qaida in Syria. According to various estimates,
its members number from 3,500 to 5,000, half of whom

21-2302413/24

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

are foreign terrorist fighters. For our part, we continue
to provide needed assistance to the Syrian authorities
to counter terrorism. The situation evolving in other
regions of the world also raises our concern. ISIL is
spreading its influence in Africa. The autonomy of
their regional affiliates, especially in West, Central and
East Africa and the Sahel, is growing stronger.
I once again underscore the Russian position on the
return of foreign terrorist fighters. We support ensuring
their unavoidable punishment for terrorist crimes and
pooling the efforts of the entire international community
to that end. In accordance with international obligations,
foreign terrorist fighters involved in terrorist activities
must be repatriated to their countries of origin, where
they should be prosecuted in accordance with the
gravity of their crimes. Otherwise, they should be
tried in the place where the crime was committed, in
accordance with the national law of the State concerned.
Such cooperation with the legitimate authorities of the
countries where the fighters are located will be key to
resolving many of the problems associated with foreign
terrorist fighters and their family members.
Recently, there has been an active spread of ISIL
terrorist ideology among children in cyberspace. We
call on Member States to conduct the relevant work
on prevention and deradicalization in that extremely
vulnerable segment of the population.
We cannot ignore the human rights aspects of
the fight against terrorism. Speaking out in support
of human rights and gender aspects is insufficient;
the international community must see results. We
must again raise the question of the operation of the
Guantanamo Bay prison. On many occasions, we have
heard high-ranking American officials state that they
intend to close that facility, notorious for detaining
people without trial or investigation, as well as for
the torture and inhumane and degrading treatment of
prisoners. We expect our Western colleagues to fulfil
their international legal obligations under, inter alia,
the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees,
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and
other essential international treaties. Those obligations
are particularly relevant in the context of the growing
mass exodus of people from conflict zones. The fight
against terrorism is a common effort and we call for
full cooperation in it.
14/24

19/08/2021

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important debate.
Two years on from its territorial defeat, Da’esh
remains a significant global threat. The recent attacks
in Baghdad and the continuing violence in Syria provide
further tragic evidence of that fact. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s report on the threat
posed by Da’esh (S/2021/682). I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive
Director Coninsx for their briefings, and Mr. Moradian,
in particular, for his moving presentation.
We are also indebted to the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) for their
important work in analysing the threat.
The position of the United Kingdom in countering
Da’esh is very clear. We remain an active and committed
member of the Global Coalition against Da’esh. We
are a co-leader of the Coalition’s counter-propaganda
effort and we host the Counter-Da’esh Coalition
Communications Cell in the United Kingdom. We
continue to provide significant humanitarian and
stabilization support to those liberated areas of Iraq
and Syria. We also continue to facilitate the return of
unaccompanied or orphaned children, on a case-bycase basis and subject to national security concerns.
However, we remain clear that those who have fought
or supported Da’esh should face justice for their crimes
in the most appropriate jurisdiction. Often that will be
the region where those crimes were committed.
While it is vital that we focus on the immediate
threats Da’esh poses, we must also work together to
tackle the long-term drivers of terrorism. That is why
the United Kingdom recently announced an additional
£2.6 million of funding to support stabilization in northeastern Syria. We must also remain alert to the rising
threat in other geographies. What is happening now in
Afghanistan is a tragedy. We will remain vigilant to the
return of the terrorist threat. We all share an interest
in making sure Afghanistan does not again become a
safe haven for terrorists. The threat continues to grow
in Sub-Saharan Africa. We are providing security,
stabilization and humanitarian assistance in many
countries to help them tackle the threat, build stability
and support communities that are affected.
Meanwhile, Da’esh continues its attempts to incite
and recruit supporters around the world, particularly
21-23024

19/08/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

using social media and encrypted online platforms.
Terrorism is global and requires a global response.
Multilateral cooperation lies at the heart of that global
response. At the United Nations level, we welcome the
continued efforts of the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
CTED and other United Nations agencies in supporting
States to tackle it. At the same time, we must be agile
in recognizing the other new and emerging threats,
including the use and misuse of new technologies. We
should continue efforts to counter terrorist financing
and extreme right-wing terrorism and to prevent
terrorists’ misuse of the internet.
Finally, we believe it is important to bring our
values to that effort. When countering terrorism, we
must all ensure that we protect and promote human
rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law.
We must integrate the gender-sensitive and whole-ofsociety approach into those efforts. In that way, we will
uphold the very principles on which the United Nations
was founded.
The United Kingdom will remain steadfast in the
global fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
We will continue to stand up for our shared values and
interests. We will continue to work with our partners
and through the multilateral system to that end.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
His Excellency Mr. Jaishankar, Minister for External
Affairs of India, for presiding over today’s meeting.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Coninsx for their briefings. I also
listened carefully to the statement by Mr. Moradian,
civil society representative for Afghanistan.
In a few days, we will mark the twentieth anniversary
of the 11 September 2001 attacks. Although important
progress has been made in the area of international
counter-terrorism cooperation, the current global
situation remains complex and dire, with terrorism and
violent extremism intertwined. As the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/682) indicates, in the first
half of the year, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
has regrouped in places, including Iraq and Syria,
and has expanded in Africa. It has provided financial
support to terrorist organizations in various regions
and terrorist attacks have occurred from time to time.
The coronavirus disease has aggravated economic and
social challenges, which could bring about a new wave
of terrorism. The international community must attach

S/PV. 8839

great importance to the matter and adopt comprehensive
measures to jointly respond to the threat of terrorism.
Terrorism is the common enemy of our societies
and combating it is a responsibility shared by the
international community. Countries should strengthen
cooperation at the national, regional and global levels
by stepping up counter-terrorism efforts in areas, such
as early warning, counter-terrorism financing, travel
restrictions, border control and intelligence-sharing.
In the first half of the year, terrorist organizations,
so designated by the Security Council, have caused
more casualties in Africa than in any other continent.
China supports greater coordination between the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Office of
Counter-Terrorism, so as to help African countries
strengthen their counter-terrorism capacity-building.
There should be no double standards in the fight
against terrorism. There is no such thing as a good
terrorist or bad terrorist. Terrorism, regardless of
when and where it occurs, its motives or perpetrators,
should be condemned and eliminated. Determining
terrorists based on political self-interest essentially
condones terrorist activities and seriously undermines
international counter-terrorism cooperation. The fight
against terrorism cannot be based on ideology. We
firmly oppose linking terrorism to specific countries,
Governments, ethnic groups or religions. We are also
opposed to allowing terrorist organizations to grow
and perpetrate violent attacks under the pretext of
protecting ethnic minorities and religious freedoms.
In combating terrorism, emphasis should be placed
on the prevention and elimination of its root causes.
Counter-terrorism measures should focus on longterm solutions, by addressing its symptoms and root
causes alike. It is important to adopt comprehensive
political, economic, judicial and social measures, and
ensure the peaceful solution of hotspot issues through
political means. It is important to assist Member
States in eradicating poverty, strengthening capacitybuilding, promoting sustainable economic and social
development and advocating mutual respect and
harmonious coexistence among civilizations, religions
and ethnic groups.
Young people are vulnerable to extreme ideologies.
Therefore, special attention should be paid to strengthen
education and employment opportunities for young
people, so as to provide a favourable environment for

21-2302415/24

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

their growth. Countries should carry out exchanges
and engage in cooperation on counter-terrorism and
deradicalization measures, such as vocational training,
education and community correction measures, to help
vulnerable countries strengthen their counter-terrorism
capacity-building.
In combating terrorism, it is important to focus
on key issues, while taking into consideration new
developments. We must be highly vigilant to terrorist
forces using the coronavirus disease to instigate terrorist
activities and strive to solve outstanding problems, such
as the abuse of the Internet and emerging technologies
by terrorists, the diversification of terrorist-financing
channels and their connection with organized crime.
For a long time now, a great number of foreign terrorist
fighters have been stranded in Syria, Iraq and other
countries, which is increasingly becoming a major
security hazard. Solutions should be developed as soon
as possible, and repatriation of these fighters must be
properly facilitated.
In his briefing just now, Mr. Moradian focused
on the counter-terrorism situation in Afghanistan. In
the 20 years since the war on terrorism in the country
began, the threat of terrorism has not been eliminated.
Instead, the number of terrorist organizations in
Afghanistan has gone from being in the single digits
to more than 20, with close to 10,000 foreign terrorist
fighters now present in the country. The monitoring
teams of the Security Council Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1988 (2011)
have repeatedly issued reports this year pointing out
that such terrorist organizations as the Islamic State,
Al-Qaida, the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement
and the Pakistani Taliban have multiplied and gathered
in Afghanistan.
The current situation in Afghanistan has undergone
major changes, and terrorist organizations are likely to
take advantage of this chaos. Afghanistan must never
become a terrorist paradise again.
We hope the Taliban will completely cut off ties
with all terrorist organizations. All countries should
cooperate with each other in combating all forms of
terrorism in accordance with international law and
Security Council resolutions, so as to bring hope for
peace to Afghanistan.
China will continue to actively work with the United
Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum to strengthen
16/24

19/08/2021

exchanges and cooperation in such areas as counterterrorism, intelligence exchanges, combating the
financing of terrorism, transnational organized crime
and cyber terrorism in a joint effort to respond to
terrorist threats and maintain world peace and stability.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
the Indian presidency for ensuring a continued focus
on the critical issue of counter-terrorism. I also want
to thank our three briefers this morning for their
excellent briefings.
It may sound like a truism, but it is indeed a fact: the
scourge of terrorism remains one of the gravest threats
to international peace and security despite significant
progress made by the Security Council and its CounterTerrorism Committee.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/682)
is clear. In the first half of this year, the threat posed
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
continued to increase, with ISIL activities expanding
in Africa, notwithstanding the restrictions imposed by
coronavirus disease.
The report also highlights the significant threat
posed by ISIL-Khorasan to the people of Afghanistan,
evidenced by the horrific attack on HALO Trust staff
in Baghlan province on 8 June. The Council spoke with
one united voice in condemning that heinous attack.
While the circumstances in Afghanistan have changed
very significantly since then, we cannot forget that
aspect of the conflict environment.
The pandemic has accelerated the digital transition
across so many aspects of our societies. Unfortunately,
this is also true for terrorists and for terrorism. Ireland
supports the Secretary-General’s call for States
Members of the United Nations to rise to the challenge
of digitally enabled terrorism through international
cooperation and effective government in line with
international law. Civil society and the private sector
play a crucial role in this regard. However, the challenge,
as always, is to move from rhetoric to implementation.
We were particularly interested to learn of the
important work carried out by the United Nations
Development Programme, Burkina Faso, Kenya and
other partners to address the differential impact of the
threat of ISIL and its affiliates on women and girls.
Specifically, we welcome the development of a toolkit
to generate gender-disaggregated data and inform a
gender-sensitive response to those threats. Greater
21-23024

19/08/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

detail in future reports on the outcome of this work
would be useful, including on how it could be applied
more broadly. Put simply, including gender-sensitive
disaggregated data in our analysis will strengthen our
capacity to address terrorism.
Ireland is a small, open economy with a thriving
financial services industry. We know that both
terrorism and organized crime are fuelled by complex
systems of money-laundering and terrorist-financing.
We also recognize that countering such financing is a
central part of our global counter-terrorism response.
At the domestic level, we have a robust, institutional
framework for countering terrorist financing. This
is kept under review to reflect new and emerging
trends, as well as European Union requirements and
Financial Action Task Force recommendations. We
have also recently introduced legislation that extends
the countering of terrorist-financing obligations to
virtual-asset service providers.
Just last week, at the Arria Formula meeting
organized by Kenya, members of the Security Council
heard about the negative impact on humanitarian
actors and their provision of humanitarian aid of
some regulations designed to counter the financing
of terrorism and their resultant de-risking practices.
The Secretary-General has also raised concerns
that tightening counter-terrorism measures by some
Member States during the pandemic could negatively
affect non-profit organizations and emergency
humanitarian aid. We reiterate once more that such
measures must not impede the delivery of principled
humanitarian assistance, nor should they infringe
upon the legitimate activities of humanitarian and civil
society organizations carrying out vital work, often in
fragile or conflict-affected contexts. We will remain
vigilant on that issue right across our agenda in the
Security Council. The Council has a responsibility to
ensure that measures to counter terrorist funding are
applied based on risk and that they fully comply with
international law, including international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and international
refugee law.
Independent oversight of counter-terrorism
legislation has been effective in mitigating some of
these risks and challenges. Domestically, Ireland is
undertaking an independent review of its main body of
counter-terrorism legislation and has recently published
proposals for the establishment of an independent
examiner of security legislation. Such an entity will

S/PV. 8839

ensure that legislation is necessary, fit for purpose and
contains appropriate human rights safeguards.
Finally, we know that victims and survivors of
terrorism continue to struggle to have their voices
heard. We believe that they need support, that this
support should be reflected in this regard and that their
rights are upheld. We firmly believe that a holistic
approach to transitional justice is essential to upholding
those rights. We will work to that end in our role at the
Security Council.
Tomorrow, we will mark the fourth International
Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to Victims of
Terrorism, so let everyone of us around this table
recommit to supporting their gender-specific needs, to
upholding their rights, and most importantly, to hearing
and heeding their voices. This is surely the least that we
owe to the countless victims and survivors of terrorism.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
the President for organizing today’s debate. I thank
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Ms. Michèle Coninsx and
Mr. Davood Moradian for their substantive and
clear briefings.
Six months ago, when we were debating the
twelfth report of the Secretary-General assessing the
international terrorist threat (S/2021/98), my delegation
expressed its satisfaction with the positive developments
in the global fight against terrorism in 2020, which
had resulted in the neutralization of several senior
commanders of terrorist organizations in Iraq, Syria as
well as in Africa (see S/2021/140).
Today, unfortunately, the situation is alarming.
My country is concerned about the resilience and
adaptability shown by the terrorist organization, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh),
which, having lost all territorial control in Iraq and
Syria, has managed to export its atrocities to several
other regions of the world, including Africa. Indeed, the
continent has become the epicentre of global terrorist
activities, as the thirteenth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the subject (S/2021/682) so clearly indicates.
Statistics show that since the end of 2019, more than two
thirds of terrorist attacks committed by Da’esh fighters
worldwide have taken place on the African continent,
mostly in the Sahel and Lake Chad basin regions. That
rapid expansion of the Da’esh threat in Africa has been
accomplished through several local groups affiliated
with the terrorist organization.

21-2302417/24

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

My country, the Niger, which has been facing
terrorist threats for several years on at least three of
its borders, to the west, south and north, has been
experiencing an increase in atrocities committed by
terrorist groups mainly affiliated to Da’esh, and, to a
lesser extent, Al-Qaida, since the beginning of 2021.
A dozen armed attacks recorded during the first half
of the year resulted in nearly 500 deaths, most of
them civilians. Most of those attacks were carried out
in the west of the country in the so-called tri-border
area — Mali-Niger-Burkina Faso. The most recent
attack on Monday targeted the village of DareyDaye near the Malian border, killing 37 people. Just
yesterday, 47 civilians and soldiers died in Burkina
Faso as a result of a terrorist attack. The perpetrators
of those wanton attacks against defenceless populations
must be held accountable for their crimes.
Such an upsurge in terrorist attacks in African
countries comes at a time when almost all the
international community’s attention is focused on
the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. One disaster should not hide another. Our
efforts to eradicate the spread of the coronavirus
disease should not blind us to the threat of international
terrorism. That is all the more true given the fact that
the many challenges always faced by Governments and
people in the regions of Africa affected by that scourge
make them even more vulnerable. Such challenges are
poverty, famine, insecurity, lack of knowledge, youth
unemployment, porous borders and intercommunal
conflicts. All those challenges have facilitated the rapid
expansion of the terrorist threat that I mentioned earlier.
The weakness of the defence systems of those countries,
as well as political instability, are aggravating factors.
Given such a tragic situation, the international
community has a duty to take urgent measures to help
the Governments of the affected African countries
before it is too late, for it must be emphasized that
Da’esh has never concealed its ambition to regain the
capacity to plan and foment international attacks, even
through one of its now powerful regional affiliates.
My delegation believes that the fight against
terrorism is not won by military forces alone. It is
also won by implementing development programmes
and measures to eradicate the underlying behaviours
that enable the spread of terrorism, which include
corruption, the illicit trade in natural resources and
money laundering, to name but a few. To that end, States
must strive to comply with the recommendations made
18/24

19/08/2021

in resolution 2462 (2019), as well as all relevant Council
resolutions aimed at preventing and combating violent
extremism and the emergence and online dissemination
of terrorist ideas and rhetoric.
In that regard, I would like to commend the
remarkable efforts of all the relevant United Nations
entities, particularly the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, which, despite the constraints of the
COVID-19 pandemic, have found alternative ways to
ensure the continuity of capacity-building in Member
States through innovative distance assessment,
e-learning and virtual events.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
country’s conviction that the fight against terrorism
requires the commitment of all. For that fight to be
effective, our approach must be comprehensive, taking
into account the social, economic and political reasons
for radicalization. Military actions must necessarily
be accompanied by soft development and good
governance activities.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I would like to start by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Coninsx for their comprehensive
briefings, introducing their fresh findings on threats
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and its affiliates. As one of the penholders on
Afghanistan, we also highly appreciate the insights
provided by Mr. Davood Moradian.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/682) notes
that the pandemic has had a substantive impact on the
threat of terrorism. The measures taken to tackle the
spread of the virus have complicated terrorist planning
and operations. Transportation, recruitment and fundraising have become more difficult in many parts of
the globe.
However, we must remain vigilant. United Nations
reporting emphasizes that the threat has persisted and
increased in conflict zones, such as Afghanistan and
the Sahel. We remain concerned about those and other
areas, where ISIL and Al-Qaida continue to undermine
regional security.
The deteriorating situation in Afghanistan remains
of substantial concern. The number of civilians killed
and injured has reached the highest on record. Half the
population in Afghanistan is in need of humanitarian
21-23024

19/08/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

aid. Estonia calls for those in power to adhere to
international law, respect human rights and ensure that
terrorism finds no support or shelter there.
Estonia further recognizes the threat posed by the
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara. The organization
continues to mount attacks on international security
forces, as well as local communities in the tri-border
area of Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger.
In those areas, terrorism is closely interlinked with
other forms of communal violence. Therefore, in order
to address extremism and terrorism, more attention
must be given to lowering intercommunal tensions and
nurturing political reconciliation.
We are facing new complex security challenges,
such as cyberthreats and hybrid ones, as well as
capabilities such as drones, which increase the real-time
threat from terrorists to civilian populations and our
men and women on operations and peacekeeping
missions across the world.
In the light of the constantly evolving nature of the
threat, we appreciate the role played by the European
Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation and
the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation in combating all forms of terrorism in the
European Union and beyond. We welcome the increased
cooperation of those agencies with the United Nations.
Coordinated efforts must be made to tackle the
challenges posed by foreign terrorist fighters. Estonia
commends the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism for the coordination of the Global Framework
to provide “all-of-United Nations” support to Member
States on the protection, voluntary repatriation,
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of
individuals with suspected links to terrorist groups
returning from Iraq and Syria.
Finally, States must ensure that all counterterrorism measures comply with their obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian
law. Ignoring those principles can undermine counterterrorism activities and lead to increased radicalization,
fed by violence and a sense of impunity.
We condemn all attempts to misuse the counterterrorism agenda as a pretext for human rights violations
or for silencing political opponents and members of
religious or ethnic minorities.

S/PV. 8839

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in French):
I would also like to start by thanking Mr. Voronkov,
Ms. Coninsx and Mr. Moradian for their briefings and
their comprehensive and insightful testimony.
The fight against terrorism remains a priority now
more than ever. The latest developments in Afghanistan,
which could lead to an increase in the terrorist threat,
are a strong reminder of that.
France is playing its full part in the fight against
terrorism, particularly within the international coalition
against Da’esh, which met in Rome on 28 June. That
coalition is the cornerstone of the international fight
against Da’esh. Our collective action has also been
strengthened by the adoption, by consensus, by the
General Assembly of the seventh review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General
Assembly resolution 75/291) in June.
While Da’esh no longer controls any territory and
the populations under its rule have now been liberated
in Iraq and Syria, we know that the threat remains grave
against a backdrop of continuously spreading terrorism.
In Afghanistan, the victory of the Taliban — which,
as we know, has not severed its ties with terrorist
groups — could exacerbate the threat not only at the
local level but also across the subregion. The spread of
Da’esh into Central and Southern Africa also remains a
major source of concern.
The first pillar of our collective action against
terrorism must be to cut off terrorist groups from their
resources. In that regard, on the occasion of the highlevel United Nations Counter-Terrorism week, France
and India jointly organized an event on 25 June with
172 participants and relevant United Nations entities
on the fight against the financing of terrorism. That
meeting highlighted the risks associated with virtual
assets and new financing instruments, emphasizing in
particular the need for existing anti-money-laundering
and counter-terrorist financing obligations to apply
equally to all institutions, whether virtual or not. Those
obligations stem primarily from resolution 2462 (2019),
adopted under France’s presidency of the Council, as
well as from the recommendations of the Financial
Action Task Force. We will continue to be committed
to this fight, in particular by encouraging the holding of
a third No Money for Terror conference as soon as the
health situation allows.
The second pillar of our joint effort must be to tackle
the root causes of terrorism. Terrorist groups thrive

21-2302419/24

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

on frustration and situations of despair and conflict.
We must therefore address the root causes of conflict,
extremism and terrorism. In Syria, for example, that
requires a political solution in line with the provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015). In Iraq, it means stabilization
and reconstruction.
We must also be unrelenting in the fight
against ideological indoctrination, in particular by
combating the misuse of the Internet for terrorist
purposes, including as a vehicle for disseminating
Da’esh propaganda. France continues, in a constant
and determined manner, to strengthen the national,
European and international responses to counter the
dissemination of such propaganda in conjunction with
the private sector and Internet companies in particular.
I am pleased that the Christchurch Appeal, which we
launched together with New Zealand, has now brought
55 States on board so far, as well as the European
Commission, two international organizations and
10 companies.
Thirdly and finally, the fight against terrorism
must be conducted in accordance with our principles.
Most importantly, it must be carried out within the
framework of respect for human rights, international
law and international humanitarian law. Our collective
action must therefore ensure that counter-terrorism
measures work effectively while also allowing for
essential humanitarian action. That fight must then
lead to justice for all victims of such barbarism.
On 31 March, 18 Foreign Ministers, including
France’s Foreign Minister, issued a statement reminding
us that they would not remain silent in the face of the
crimes committed in Syria, including those perpetrated
by Da’esh. Those crimes can be considered war
crimes and crimes against humanity, and we reaffirm
our commitment to ensuring that such crimes do not
go unpunished.
Those crimes also have an unbearable impact, first
and foremost on children. Unlike their parents, children
have not chosen to join terrorist groups in a war zone
over which they have no control. With the best interests
of the child at heart, the most vulnerable orphans and
unaccompanied minors must be repatriated as soon
as conditions allow. France has done so on several
occasions and will continue to do so. Adult foreign
terrorist fighters who have joined Da’esh’s ranks must be
tried as close as possible to where they committed their
20/24

19/08/2021

crimes. Not only is it a matter of security and justice,
but also a moral obligation towards their victims.
In conclusion, France wishes to reiterate that it
will continue to play a firm and determined role in the
international fight against global terrorism in order to
put an end to that scourge.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank you the President
for organizing today’s meeting and travelling to New
York to hold it. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General
Michèle Coninsx for their briefings on the SecretaryGeneral’s thirteenth strategic report (S/2021/682), as
well as the Secretary-General for producing it.
As all other delegations that have spoken before me
have reflected, the threat posed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates remains real
and dangerously potent. As the findings of the report
have noted, the group continues to maintain operational
capability and could likely undertake a surge in its
activities in a post-coronavirus disease landscape.
I want to point to Kenya’s experience as a possible
illustration of some of the responses in different
countries and theatres that the Council could utilize
and from which it can learn. We are a front-line State in
the fight against international terrorism, and ever since
the attack by Al-Qaida on the United States Embassy
in 1998, which treated Kenyans as acceptable collateral
damage to their evil actions, we have sought to engage
fully in that fight.
We have joined up our capabilities within
Government, and today terrorism is faced by a true
multi-agency approach that holds from the national level
to the local level and is driven by intelligence-sharing
and joint local action. We have also built up what we
believe is a robust — but still growing — prevention
capability that includes disengagement from very early
on in the radicalization and recruitment cycle all the
way to the disengagement of hardened fighters who do
not fit in our judicial system.
We have worked within the prison sector and our
judiciary to ensure that our magistrates and the legal
profession are better aware of the laws on the books
and of the kind of threat that we face. We have worked
on building programmes aimed at countering violent
extremism and have now extended those to the security
sector in a way that allows us to directly and operationally
21-23024

19/08/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8839

deliver messages to sites where Al-Shabaab and similar
groups have tried to drive their message.

perhaps, sufficiently robust support for those countries
in Africa.

We are committed to the public being involved
and aware of that challenge, and we are committed
to working together with our partners regionally and
globally. We have initiated what we call county action
plans that bring together civil society, local government
administration, different ministries and security
agencies at the county level to diagnose a problem within
a certain template and take action together. We are very
grateful to some of the countries here in the Council
that have been robust partners in that endeavour.

Secondly, it can create a sense of hopelessness in
the international community by giving the impression
to policymakers that the whole continent is suffering
from terrorism, and therefore, if it is such a large
problem, then maybe nothing can be done about it.
Consequently, I believe that we need to be very aware
of that possibility, as we comment on the challenge.

I point to this experience only to say something
simple, which is that, in the coming years, we are going
to need to build counter-terrorism capabilities within
the State — not merely as temporary mechanisms to
address temporary episodes or temporary challenges,
but rather as standing and permanent capabilities.
I want to point to a specific issue of concern that
was reflected in the report in relation to the victims of
sexual violence by ISIL and the children born of such
abuse, many of whom continue to be confined in camps
in Iraq and Syria. What is unfortunate is that such
confinement centres are becoming not only breeding
grounds for recruitment and radicalization, but also
incubators of ardent terrorist elements. Decisive action
is necessary to dismantle this vicious cycle, and we
highly recommend that the Council, in its engagement
with the mandates that are relevant to those camps, take
this matter into account and take action accordingly.
We are alarmed by ISIL’s expansion in many
regions, especially in countries in Africa. Its so-called
Provinces and offshoots are entrenching themselves
in conflict situations with far-reaching implications.
We very much appreciate the awareness of this threat
in countries in Africa, which has been reflected by
delegations that have spoken before me. However, we
would like to add a note of caution, namely, to perhaps
not associate Africa with ISIL or Africa with terrorism,
because the overwhelming majority of African countries
do not, in fact, have an ISIL challenge. Making that
association not only mischaracterizes the reality, but
can wrongly shape our response to the challenge as
it exists.
First, it creates a two-track counter-terrorism
comprising counter-terrorism for ISIL in Africa and
counter-terrorism elsewhere. Usually, twin tracks
are filled with double standards and do not provide,

That having been said, as the ongoing developments
that have led to the takeover of Afghanistan by the
Taliban show, the Council should be concerned about
the possibility that extremist groups or groups within
the African region or internationally and which hold
an extremist worldview may find inspiration in these
developments, with dire long-term consequences. I
listened very carefully to Davood Moradian and truly
believe that he has a lot to contribute in terms of his
ideas and directness.
We all continue to be concerned that the terrorismfinancing activities by such groups as Al-Shabaab
have surged, with their revenue collection sometimes
rivalling, and even surpassing, that of the Federal
Government of Somalia, as well as other Governments
elsewhere. We do not believe that we are taking sufficient
action to strangle these groups’ terrorist financing, and
we must face up to this fact and make our actions at the
regional and global levels much tougher.
Mr. President, I would like to commend to the
Council your comments on the predictability and
transparency of the listing regime. I believe that we
need to take this matter very seriously. When countries
bring a terrorist group before the Council, they need
to be able to find the pre-established clear criteria
that apply. When Kenya tried to bring a certain group
before the Council, the request was refused, although
we all know that the group concerned is an affiliate of
Al-Qaida and clearly comes under the purview of the
sanctions regime of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities. That
has weakened the credibility of the 1267 regime, as it
appears to apply different rules to different situations.
We very much appreciate the limits set in considering
how counter-terrorism can affect humanitarian aid,
but we would like the Council to better consider that
terrorism itself is leading, and has led, to humanitarian
crises. The fact that terrorist groups are looking to

21-2302421/24

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

destroy States to control populations is in and of itself
one of the major drivers of humanitarian catastrophes.
Counter-terrorism is therefore not in opposition to
humanitarian action. Counter-terrorism is one of the
tools to prevent humanitarian disaster.
Rather than continue to repeat statements on the
principles we all hold, we highly advocate serious
discussion about what carve-outs we should build, how
we should implement them and how we should actually
continue to strengthen the counter-terrorism regime.
We are open to that discussion. That was the point of
our Arria Formula meeting, and we hope that we will
have such a discussion rather than the same discussions
and arguments among one another, while terrorists
continue to use humanitarian supply chains to gain
resources and recruits.
We also want to urge the protection of democratic
processes and a united global call denouncing any
attempt of the takeover of the legitimate political
aspirations of citizenries by ISIL or Al-Qaida elements.
In particular, we believe that the elections in our region
in countries with Al-Qaida or ISIL groups should have
specific protections to prevent a takeover of State
structures by terrorist organizations.
To that end, the full effect of resolution 1267 (1999)
must be felt, and we want to recommend to the Council
to list Al-Shabaab as an affiliate of Al-Qaida. We
believe that that will reflect the Council’s seriousness
about terrorism, holding terrorists to account and
the architecture that the Council established after
11 September 2001. In our view, failure to do so will
reflect a Security Council that is backing away from its
own commitments against terrorism.
I am sorry to speak for so long. I will now conclude
by saying that we notice that one of the missing pieces
in our discussions and deliberations in dealing with this
problem is perhaps what the representative of Mexico
was alluding to earlier with regard to the issue of
masculinity — that is, how identity and State-building
interact to actually produce terrorist thinking,
worldviews and radicalization. We believe that we
must deal with the issue of how identity is utilized and
mediated in the process of State-building, when we
undertake peacebuilding, when we oversee transitions
out of United Nations peacekeeping missions, and
when we promote long-term support for countries that
have been affected by terrorist groups. Let me finally
say that we support the press statement (SC/14609)
22/24

19/08/2021

circulated by the President and support the elements
and the spirit of that statement.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov,
Assistant
Secretary-General Coninsx and Mr. Moradian for their
informative briefings.
It is deeply concerning that the threats posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh)
have continued to increase and that Da’esh is trying
to regroup and resume its attack capabilities. The
African region has been debilitated by ongoing armed
conflicts, humanitarian crises, natural disasters and
deadly diseases. It is now further threatened by the
increasing terrorist presence in the region. As we
have witnessed, the socioeconomic consequences of
the coronavirus disease pandemic have intensified in
conflict situations. Those could exacerbate conditions
prone to be exploited by Da’esh and its affiliates in the
medium- and long-term.
In that context, I would like to share the following
points. First, the international community should
remain vigilant at all times and be proactive in its
readiness. Solidarity and cooperation are our most
effective response. International cooperation and
technical assistance are crucial to enhancing regional
and national capacities to ensure that the weakest links
are not left to exploitation by terrorists. Operational
cooperation enables better monitoring of terrorists’
movement, detecting and responding to imminent
attacks and countering terrorist financing and moneylaundering. We commend the efforts of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
relevant entities under the Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact in coordinating efforts to tackle
the scourge of Da’esh.
Secondly, an effective counter-terrorism strategy
must be in full compliance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, including
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law. The humanitarian and security situation
posed by thousands of ISIL fighters, including foreign
terrorist fighters and their family members remaining
in Iraq and Syria, should be addressed with urgency
and in a sustainable manner. We encourage Member
States and international organizations to enhance
their sharing of best practices in reintegration and
rehabilitation, while ensuring the best interests of the
21-23024

19/08/2021

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

child wherever children are concerned. Terrorist acts
must be prosecuted and punished in accordance with
the rule of law.
Thirdly, the Security Council must remain firmly
committed to using all tools at its disposal to detect
and avert new threats of terrorism. Terrorists’ use
of the Internet and new technologies to raise money,
recruit and propagate their agendas deserve our
heightened attention.
Recent developments in Afghanistan necessitate
enhanced vigilance and strengthened cooperation to
fight terrorism in the region. In that regard, we recall
press statement SC/14604, issued earlier this week by
the Council, in which it stressed the need ensure that
the territory of Afghanistan is not used to threaten or
attack any country. It also underscored that parties
should not support terrorists operating on the territory
of any other country.
Last but not least, terrorism can be rooted
out when dealt with holistically. Comprehensive
strategies should focus on addressing its underlying
causes, building cohesive societies that are resilient
to terrorism and radicalization and promoting
sustainable socioeconomic development, a culture
of peace and tolerance, national reconciliation and
harmony. A whole-of-society approach involving all
actors, including non-governmental organizations,
the private sector and technology companies, remains
very relevant.
Viet Nam maintains its firm position of rejecting
terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations. We will
continue to actively engage in advancing the global
fight against terrorism, on the basis of the Charter
of the United Nations, international law and our
common values.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We, too, thank the briefers for their briefings.
The threat of their terrorism and violent extremism
is among our most complex challenges. Every day
people continue to lose their lives to terrorism and
families and communities continue to suffer. Indeed,
21 August marks the fourth commemoration of the
International Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to
the Victims of Terrorism. On that day, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines will join the global community in
pausing to remember all of those affected by terrorism.
As the day approaches, we are ever mindful that we

S/PV. 8839

must directly confront the root causes of terrorism to
ensure that the pain of the victims is not in vain.
While we condemn all acts of violence and
atrocious crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates, it is important
to recognize that the traditional methods of warfare
have shifted and that the threat of terrorism is growing.
Da’esh and other terrorist groups have taken advantage
of the disruption, grievances and development setbacks
caused by the unprecedented global crisis, both online
and on the ground.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines notes with
concern the findings of the Secretary General’s report
(S/2021/682) regarding the African continent, where
regional affiliates have been further strengthened,
especially in West Africa and the Sahel, as well as
East and Central Africa. We are particularly troubled
about the spillover from Mali into Burkina Faso and the
Niger — incursions from Nigeria into the Niger, Chad
and Cameroon and from Mozambique into the United
Republic of Tanzania. We also note with concern that
ISIL-Khorasan has expanded its presence in several
provinces of Afghanistan and that Da’esh affiliates
in South-East Asia continue to disturb counterterrorism operations with a steady pace of attacks. We
cannot allow Afghanistan to become a safe haven for
terrorism again.
All counter-terrorism actions must be conducted
in accordance with international law and with the full
implementation of the provisions of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
We call on Member States to redouble efforts and
remain committed to the full protection and promotion
of human rights and fundamental freedoms across
all efforts to counter terrorism and prevent violent
extremism conducive to terrorism. We must also
effectively and efficiently share information responsibly
with our regional and international partners.
In response to the concerns about terrorism and
in an effort to enhance and guarantee a safe and free
Caribbean region, Saint Vincent and Grenadines
remains committed to the Caribbean Community
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which is aimed at reducing
the risk of terrorism and associated violent extremism
by denying terrorists the means and opportunity to
carry out their activities and improve the Caribbean
Community’s defence against terrorist attacks.

21-2302423/24

S/PV.8839

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Countering the financing of terrorism remains
an essential part of the global fight against terrorism.
Therefore, in our efforts to combat emerging terrorist
financing risks, we must fully implement resolution
2462 (2019), which requires Member States to disrupt
and criminalize the financing of terrorism for any
purpose. Moreover, all initiatives to combat terrorist
financing must be designed in such a way that they
safeguard all legitimate and well-managed financial
activities, including in offshore jurisdictions.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment
to the implementation of the relevant international

24/24

19/08/2021

instruments, resolution 1373 (2001) and all subsequent
resolutions related to combating terrorism. It is also
imperative that the Security Council continue to play
a leading role in promoting international peace and
security. We must remain dedicated to strengthening
the global alliance against terrorism.
The President: Before concluding, I would like
to thank the Security Council Affairs Division, its
Director and team for the support extended to the
Indian presidency.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

21-23024
