A /72/PV.47

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

47th plenary meeting

Friday, 10 November 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Tevi (Vanuatu),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 89 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General (A/72/221)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.6)
Mr. Carrillo Gómez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the delegation
of the Republic of Paraguay, a founding member of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We
thank Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
IAEA, for his presentation of its report (see A/72/221)
for 2016. Paraguay underscores the importance of this
presentation in the General Assembly, which represents
the highest democratic expression of the peoples who
compose it on the basis of sovereign equality among
States. The delegation of Paraguay, which was a member
of the IAEA Board of Governors until this September,
reaffirms its trust in the Agency’s ability to ensure that
atomic energy contributes to world peace, health and
prosperity, as enshrined in its Statute. We welcome
the Director General’s recent reappointment as well as
Grenada’s admission as a new member of the Agency.
Paraguay emphasizes that the development and
implementation of programmes for the peaceful use of
nuclear energy must be carried out with transparency,
under the advice and supervision of the IAEA, taking

the greatest possible precautions and limiting the
damage that the production of nuclear energy can do
to the environment and human health. States carrying
out such programmes on their territories must do so
while ensuring broad cross-border responsibility,
adhering to best practices in international cooperation,
risk prevention and due diligence and responding
appropriately to possible transboundary damage
or harm.
Paraguay’s radiological and nuclear regulatory
authority, in coordination and with the support of
the IAEA, regulates and controls the peaceful and
beneficial use of ionizing radiation and nuclear energy
with the aim of protecting the health of our people and
the environment. Throughout our national territory, we
promote a culture of technological and physical safety
where sources of ionizing radiation and radioactive
waste are concerned. Since 1968, through our national
atomic energy commission, Paraguay has also been
promoting research and technological development
regarding the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in order
to improve the people’s quality of life. Again, this is
being done with the support and oversight of the IAEA
and in a framework of regional initiatives such as the
Regional Cooperation Agreement for the Promotion of
Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America and
the Caribbean.
We would like to highlight the importance of the
IAEA’s work on nuclear security and verification. Such
efforts should not be manipulated to serve military
purposes or undermine international peace and security.
We affirm our commitment to the provisions of the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-37688 (E)

*1737688*

A/72/PV.47

10/11/2017

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We
reiterate our concern about programmes aimed at
improving existing nuclear weapons or developing new
ones. We utterly reject all nuclear tests, including those
that were conducted in September, which are a violation
of international law.

nuclear energy, supported by a solid and consistent
State policy that considers the application of the
international safeguards system extremely important.
Argentina considers it vital to ensure that safeguards
implementation activities are efficient, effective and
underpinned by a solid technical basis, guaranteeing
their non-discriminatory nature.

The delegation of Paraguay urges all Member States
to support and facilitate the IAEA’s verification and
monitoring work in the application of safeguards. We
also urge all members of the international community
to refrain from any act contrary to the objective and
purpose of these international instruments, as well as
those that are part of the international legal frameworks
on the non-proliferation and prohibition of nuclear
weapons, especially the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons, and on the use of atomic energy for
peaceful purposes.

Ensuring the effectiveness of the IAEA’s
verification system for nuclear activities is essential
it we are to prevent nuclear proliferation. However,
such verification measures must not affect States’
inalienable right to develop nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes, as established in article IV of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Both in the IAEA and other forums, my country has
consistently emphasized the importance of refraining
from infringing on or reinterpreting that right.
Argentina would like to stress the the importance of a
system of safeguards and guarantees that is conducted
in a context of cooperation and dialogue. In this regard,
we wish to highlight the quadripartite agreement that
Argentina has with Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine
Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear
Materials and the IAEA, and which has defined and
regulated our cooperative activities for implementing
nuclear safeguards since 1991. The establishment of
the Brazilian-Argentine Agency has been a milestone
not only in relation to Brazil, by providing trust and
credible guarantees on the exclusively peaceful use
of nuclear development for both countries, but also
because of the great contribution it has made at the
regional level, enabling us to consolidate the idea of a
nuclear-weapon-free Latin America.

Lastly, we would like to emphasize the role of
the IAEA’s technical assistance and international
cooperation for developing countries such as Paraguay,
especially in developing and strengthening national
capacities for the peaceful use of nuclear energy
where achieving the Sustainable Development Goals is
concerned. We would therefore like to thank the IAEA
for its help in strengthening public access to nuclear
medicine in Paraguay, particularly for the diagnosis
and treatment of cancer through the integrated missions
of its Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy,
and for monitoring variations in environmental
radiation levels through its Occupational Radiation
Protection Appraisals.
The delegation of the Republic of Paraguay
commends the work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and congratulates it on the sixtieth anniversary
of its founding.
Mrs. Martinic (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to thank Director General Yukiya
Amano for his comprehensive presentation of the report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for
2016 (see A/72/221) and to welcome Grenada as a new
member of the Agency.
The Republic of Argentina has been committed to
the work of the IAEA since its inception and, in that
spirit, we co-sponsored the draft resolution on the
report (A/72/L.6). Argentina’s nuclear sector already
has several decades of experience and has made major
progress in developing exclusively peaceful uses of
2/10

Argentina would like to express its thanks and
support for the IAEA’s work in the area of nuclear
security. In that regard, our country has consistently
supported the Agency’s central role in coordinating
and strengthening the nuclear-security architecture,
while calling for it to play a more active role in this
area. We therefore welcomed the IAEA’s convening
in December 2016 of the International Conference on
Nuclear Security: Commitments and Actions, as we
do the upcoming International Conference on Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities, to
be held in Vienna from 13 to 17 November. We believe
that such initiatives reaffirm the IAEA’s essential
responsibility and central role in strengthening
and coordinating the international nuclear physical
security architecture.
17-37688

10/11/2017

Argentina encourages the IAEA to continue playing
its role as the main coordinator of other international
organizations and initiatives in this area so that nuclear
security efforts and the fight against nuclear terrorism
can align in an orderly and sustained manner. In that
connection, Argentina also underscores the importance
of supporting the work of the IAEA, financially as well
as politically, in view of the fact that nuclear security
is a clear issue on which countries can ensure that their
actions live up to their words. The role of the IAEA
in nuclear security must be strengthened and allowed
to reach the level of maturity and development that it
has shown itself capable of achieving in technological
nuclear security, another of its fundamental pillars.
Responsibility in matters of physical nuclear security
is a sovereign power of individual States and efforts
to make progress and improvements in countering
terrorist threats must correspond to the real risk that
each country faces. In that regard, we reiterate the
importance of harmonizing binding and non-binding
measures so that progress is harmonious, gradual
and permanent.
The Republic of Argentina wishes to reiterate
that it is firmly committed to the highest standards of
nuclear technological safety, which remains one of the
main pillars of Argentina’s nuclear policy. Hence the
importance of the work done by our nuclear regulatory
authority, an independent regulatory body within the
framework of our expanding national programme.
In 2015, Argentina had the honour of presiding
over the diplomatic conference examining a proposed
amendment to article 18 of the Convention on Nuclear
Safety. That was when we adopted the Vienna
Declaration on Nuclear Safety, which reflected the
interest of many States parties in continuing to
strengthen technological security. We must continue
working to improve the implementation of the principles
of the Vienna Declaration. In that regard, Argentina is
the first and so far the only country to declare that its
new nuclear-power plants will be designed, located and
built according to principle 1 of the Declaration. We
encourage other parties to do the same.
Argentina participates actively in capacitybuilding activities in the region and aspires to be a
focal point in that area. In that regard, our country has
offered to host various human-resources training and
education activities, under the auspices of the IAEA,
related to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We
will continue working with the Agency’s Technical

A/72/PV.47

Cooperation Programme, which we are providing with
our experience and facilities for training and capacitybuilding, which technicians and professionals from
our region and other parts of the world have already
benefited from.
Mr. Kazi (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks
Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
his presentation of its report for the year 2016 (see
A/72/221), and congratulates him on his appointment
to a third four-year term.
Bangladesh has full confidence in the guiding
role of the IAEA in coordinating international
efforts to strengthen global nuclear safety, security
and safeguards in using nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. Our Prime Minister visited Vienna in May
this year to attend the International Conference on the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme, while the
Director General visited Bangladesh for the second
time in July 2017. We had a high level of participation
at the International Ministerial Conference on Nuclear
Power in the 21st Century, held recently in Abu Dhabi.
Bangladesh attaches great importance to nuclear
safety and stresses the importance of ensuring that the
Agency retains a central role in nuclear safety, owing to
its mandatory functions, broad membership and longstanding expertise. We also stress our principled position
that nuclear safety and nuclear security considerations
must not hamper the utilization of nuclear technology
for peaceful purposes. We would like to highlight
the importance of the Agency’s work in maintaining,
improving and promoting nuclear, radiation, transport
and waste safety, as well as in emergency preparedness
and response worldwide. Bangladesh appreciates the
Agency’s continuing efforts to support Member States
in sharing knowledge, expertise, technology and
information on all aspects of nuclear safety. We also
welcome its activities aimed at supporting nuclearsafety infrastructure development in Member States.
We particularly appreciate the assistance it provides
to developing countries operating, expanding or
embarking on nuclear power programmes. We stress
the importance of a sustained focus on activities aimed
at building the competency of regulatory functions and
management for safety, including a culture of safety.
Bangladesh appreciates the Agency’s efforts to assist
Member States in building and developing their nuclearsecurity capacity, including establishing effective,

17-376883/10

A/72/PV.47

sustainable and comprehensive national nuclear
security infrastructures. We note the Agency’s goals
and priorities concerning nuclear security for the period
from 2017 to 2018, which include promoting further
adherence to the Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material, with the aim of its universalization.
Bangladesh deposited its instrument of acceptance for
the amendment to the Convention earlier this year. We
acknowledge the Agency’s efforts in responding to
member States’ growing requests for its support in the
area of information and computer security.
Bangladesh considers nuclear energy to be a
safe, environmentally friendly and economically
viable source of electricity generation. We have
started construction of the Rooppur nuclear power
plant, our country’s first, under bilateral cooperation
arrangements with the Russian Federation. We are
following the IAEA guidelines for implementing our
jointly developed integrated work plan for infrastructure
development. We are grateful to India and Japan, among
others, for their contributions to our national capacitybuilding efforts.
Bangladesh counts on the IAEA as its main partner
in promoting safe and secure applications of nuclear
science and technology for peaceful purposes. Through
its Technical Cooperation Programme, the Agency has
been cooperating with and assisting Bangladesh in
human-resource development and capacity-building
for the introduction, development and peaceful use of
nuclear technology in various sectors, such as nuclear
infrastructure, livestock, agriculture, health, industry
and water management. We have completed 138 national
projects under the Technical Cooperation Programme
and participated in 111 regional projects under the
Regional Cooperative Agreement, which we consider
an important tool for promoting and coordinating
research and development activities in using nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes. Bangladesh is
confident that the Agreement will continue to promote
regional capabilities and expertise in various thematic
areas, including research-reactor and radioactive
waste management, nuclear safety and radiation and
environmental protection.
Bangladesh thanks Indonesia for facilitating
draft resolution A/72/L.6, on the report of the IAEA,
to be adopted by the Assembly. We reaffirm our own
commitment to further promoting the IAEA’s work on
advancing the Sustainable Development Goals and look
4/10

10/11/2017

forward to playing an enhanced role on its Board of
Governors, with the kind support of member States.
Mr. Ngundze (South Africa): I too would like to
express my sincere appreciation to Mr. Yukiya Amano,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), for his succinct presentation of the
IAEA’s 2016 report (see A/72/221) and for providing
valuable updates on the Agency’s 2017 activities.
South Africa has just concluded its one-year
term at the helm of the IAEA’s Board of Governors.
During our term on the Board, we were pleased that
the Board of Governors emphasized the development
role of the IAEA through its activities related to nuclear
science, technology and applications, which Director
General Amano ably outlined in great detail during
his presentation. South Africa used its leadership
of the Board to advocate a balanced approach in the
implementation of the IAEA’s mandate in line with its
motto, “Atoms for Peace and Development”. I would
like to express South Africa’s appreciation to the
membership of the IAEA generally, and the Group
of African States in particular, for entrusting us with
the task of leading the Board in the past year. We are
more than ever convinced that the IAEA has a pivotal
role to play in global efforts to promote international
peace, security and development. We would also like to
congratulate Indonesia on its appointment to chair the
Board for the period from 2017 to 2018 and to assure it
of our commitment and cooperation in that regard.
South Africa fully supports the priorities and
work of the IAEA, including the progress that the
Agency has achieved during the 2017 period. In that
regard, we have always maintained that the Agency’s
nuclear applications in areas such as agriculture,
crop production, food security, human health, waterresource management, nuclear technology and animal
health contribute to socioeconomic development in
developing countries and thereby help them in their
efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda, particularly on
the African continent.
South Africa has benefited immensely from the
IAEA’s scientific and technological support, not
least in strengthening its clinical management of
oncological, neurological and cardiovascular diseases.
The IAEA also supported South Africa in developing
the sterile-insect technique to help control malaria.
In that context, South Africa reiterates its support,
which is shared by many IAEA member States, for
17-37688

10/11/2017

ensuring that the Agency continues to assist developing
countries, particularly in Africa, in enhancing the
benefits that can be derived from the peaceful uses of
nuclear science and technology.
We also want to underscore the central role played by
the Agency in implementing its safeguards verification
system, which plays an essential role in verifying the
peaceful nature of nuclear energy programmes. As the
only country in the world to voluntarily dismantle its
nuclear programme, with the assistance and guidance of
the IAEA, South Africa can attest to the indispensable
role of the Agency’s safeguards system. In addition to
the peaceful uses of energy, South Africa’s view is that
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing processes and that progress in all
the pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons is therefore essential if its objectives
and purpose are to be realized.
In conclusion, my delegation has co-sponsored
draft resolution A/72/L.6, submitted by Indonesia in
its capacity as Chair of the Board of Governors for
the period from 2017 to 2018. Among other things, the
draft resolution reaffirms the Agency’s indispensable
role in encouraging and assisting the development and
practical application of atomic energy for peaceful
uses, in technology transfers to developing countries
and in nuclear safety, verification and security, and
we appreciate Indonesia’s role in coordinating the
draft resolution.
Mr. Hansen (Australia): Australia commends
Director General Amano for his report (see A/72/221)
on the activities of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). We were pleased to co-sponsor the
draft resolution on the report (A/72/L.6).
This has been another productive year for the
IAEA, and Australia continues to greatly appreciate the
Agency’s work across nuclear science and technology,
safety, security, safeguards and technical cooperation.
During the past year, in which we celebrated the
Agency’s sixtieth anniversary, we are particularly
pleased to see the Director General’s commitment to
championing gender equality. Australia will continue
to strongly advocate for and support efforts to increase
the representation of women in the Agency’s technical
areas and senior management, particularly through
the Group of Friends for Women in Nuclear, newly
established in Vienna.

A/72/PV.47

Australia remains a strong supporter of the transfer
of knowledge and expertise through the IAEA Technical
Cooperation Programme. In June 2017, we ratified the
new Regional Cooperative Agreement for Research,
Development and Training related to Nuclear Science
and Technology in Asia and the Pacific, which will help
embed regional technical cooperation, particularly in
developing countries, in our region.
Australia is pleased to continue highlighting
the important contribution of peaceful applications
of nuclear science and technology in many areas of
human endeavour, including development and health.
This year, we completed the construction of our new
large-scale molybdenum-99 processing plant. This
facility, which has the capacity to provide 25 per cent of
current world needs, will help secure the global supply
of this lifesaving nuclear medicine.
Australia is firmly committed to nuclear safety and
will undergo an Integrated Regulatory Review Service
mission in 2018. That demonstrates our sustained
commitment to the international peer review system
and to continued improvement in the regulation of
nuclear and radiation safety.
Australia will not accept North Korea’s illegal
development and testing of nuclear weapons and their
delivery systems, or its threats, which continue to pose
a grave and increasing threat to global security. It is
vital that all members of the international community
fully implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions and work collectively to bring Pyongyang
to the negotiating table.
Finally, Australia appreciates the work of the Director
General and his staff in monitoring and verifying the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA). Australia has been consistent and
clear. We consider the JCPOA to be the best available
option for addressing Iran’s nuclear programme, and
we believe there is no credible alternative. We continue
to urge all parties to the agreement to keep the deal in
place and implement it in full.
Mr. Peñaranda (Philippines): As a strong partner
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
the Philippines is pleased to have co-sponsored
draft resolution A/72/L.6, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”. It is consistent
with the partnership between the Philippines and the
IAEA, which has contributed to addressing outstanding
issues on nuclear safety, security and safeguards.

17-376885/10

A/72/PV.47

The Agency is the sole United Nations body that
promotes the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that
connection, the Philippines recalls that the IAEA was
founded in the aftermath of the most devastating war in
the world to harness the power of the atom for peace,
health and prosperity. For its part, the Philippines
has been active in bringing together national and
international experts in the nuclear field to share ideas
and expertise on nuclear applications in the areas of
food and agriculture, health and medicine, industry and
the environment.
The Philippines acknowledges the leadership
of Director General Yukiya Amano in maintaining
high-quality programmes and delivering concrete
results for Member States. We congratulate him on his
reappointment as Director General of the IAEA and
commend the “Atoms for Peace and Development”
initiative, which he has actively promoted during
his tenure. We also support the Agency’s efforts to
achieve gender equality and balanced geographic
representation at all levels of the organization, assuming
satisfactory qualifications.
The Philippines encourages the IAEA to maintain a
balance between the promotional and non-promotional
aspects of its work, in line with its Statute. We believe
that a balanced approach across the Agency’s six major
programmes will serve to strengthen it and help to
increase its relevance to the citizens of all its member
States. The IAEA’s relevance is becoming all the more
significant given the increased importance of its dealings
with nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament issues
from the technical and scientific perspectives.
The strong commitment of the Philippines to
the important work of the IAEA was made more
meaningful by the election of our resident representative
to international organizations in Vienna, Ms. Maria
Zeneida Angara Collinson, to the presidency of the sixtyfirst IAEA General Conference. In line with the policy
of advocacy for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, in
her acceptance statement Ambassador Collinson noted
the adoption by 122 nations on 7 July of the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, whose aim is
to minimize, if not to neutralize, the weaponization
of nuclear power. The sixty-first Conference adopted
all its resolutions by consensus, including the highly
sensitive one on the North Korean issue.
The Philippines looks forward to continued active
collaboration with the IAEA in the years ahead.
6/10

10/11/2017

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 89.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/72/L.6, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.6: Albania,
Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Egypt, Finland,
France, Greece, Hungary, Iraq, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia,
Montenegro, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Spain,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates
and the United States of America.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/72/L.6?
Draft resolution A/72/L.6 was adopted (resolution 72/5).
The Acting President: Several delegations have
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I would
like to remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and to five minutes for the second,
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): Lithuania wishes to
exercise its right of reply in the light of the statement
made by the representative of Belarus.
Each country has the right to develop nuclear power
as long as its international obligations on nuclear safety
are properly addressed and national decisions are taken
in the context of possible transboundary implications.
The newcomer countries must be especially diligent in
the implementation of international standards.
Despite the global efforts to strengthen nuclear
safety, a declarative and selective approach towards
nuclear safety still exists. The International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) brand and its review services
are being used for manipulative public communications.
That kind of practice increases the risks related to
17-37688

10/11/2017

nuclear-power development. In that regard, I have to
express our concern regarding the way the project of
the new nuclear power plant in Ostrovets, Belarus, is
being implemented on the border with Lithuania, just
40 kilometres from its capital, Vilnius. This is being
done without the proper and full implementation of
nuclear-safety measures and genuine dialogue with
neighbouring countries. The lack of transparency and
the fact that essential information on site selection,
seismic evaluation and emergency preparedness plans
is missing are deeply alarming.
IAEA specialized missions can bring the maximum
benefits if IAEA experts are engaged from the very
beginning of project development and in full scope
at all stages. Therefore, Lithuania urges all member
States, especially the newcomers, to focus on the safety
of the project rather than on its hasty implementation.
Mr. Jo Tong Hyon (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
make some remarks additional to the statement delivered
by my Ambassador this morning (see A/72/PV.46) to
help clarify the lack of understanding and to educate
some persons sitting in this Hall who are illiterate and
ignorant as to the situation on the Korean peninsula.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea rejects
resolution 72/5, based on the report (see A/72/221) of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and
all the reckless remarks made by the observer of the
European Union and the representatives of Australia,
Japan, South Korea and the Philippines, which are part
of a politicized, evil-minded and confrontational plot
aimed at defaming the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and thereby effecting change in the social system
of my country.
First, let me pose one question to the aforementioned
persons. What would they do if a burglar burst into
their house, knife in hand? Would they sit idle with
folded arms? The answer is definitely no. The same
answer applies to the issue of the Korean peninsula.
As everyone here knows, technically speaking both
parties — the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the United States of America — are still in a state
of war against each other. An armistice agreement was
signed by both parties in 1953, leading to a ceasefire.
An armistice does not mean permanent peace. That is
why my Government has insisted that the United States
abandon its hostile policy against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and sign a peace agreement

A/72/PV.47

in order to ensure complete peace on the Korean
peninsula. But this justified position of my Government
has been consistently neglected by the United States.
The nuclear weapons of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are a deterrent against war that
reliably safeguard the sovereignty and security of our
nation and contribute to regional and global peace
and security in the face of over half a century of
nuclear blackmail by the United States. Over half a
century — more than 70 years — the United States has
continued its long history of hostile politics towards
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and has
directed extreme nuclear threats and blackmail against
our people.
The resolutions adopted by the Security Council
against my country are the products of double standards,
high-handedness and anachronisms on the part of the
United States. The nuclear threat posed by the United
States has compelled the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to go nuclear. The hostile policy of the United
States against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is the cause of the nuclear problem on the Korean
peninsula. The United States armed forces stationed
in South Korea, under the cover of so-called United
Nations command, are disrupting peace and security
on the Korean peninsula.
We are all witness to the events happening now, even
at this very moment, as the head of the United States
regime wanders through several countries — Japan,
South Korea and China — uttering reckless, hostile
and belligerent words against my country. Everyone
has witnessed that. Every year, there is a large-scale
joint military exercise performed by the United States
armed forces in South Korea. These exercises occur
one after another, every year and even several times a
year. All strategic nuclear weapons assets — including
aircraft carriers, nuclear submarines, nuclear ballistic
missiles and the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense
system — were introduced by the United States into
South Korea.
If the United States really wants to fulfil its duty
and responsibility regarding peace and security on the
Korean peninsula, it should completely and irreversibly
abandon its nuclear threat and hostile policy against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, dismantle the
United States command in South Korea and withdraw
its armed forces from South Korea.

17-376887/10

A/72/PV.47

With regard to Japan, I strongly condemn
Japanese intervention, criticizing our self-defensive
nuclear-power development, as a most unpardonable
provocation against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. This morning we heard the Director General
of the IAEA (see A/72/PV.46) say that ensuring nuclear
safety and security is one of the vital roles of the
Agency. Let me raise one more question for the Japanese
delegation and the Director General of the IAEA. Who
was the victim of the first atomic bomb disaster in
humankind’s history? It was none other than Japan. If
that is historical reality, then what should the IAEA and
Japan do to respond to this inhumane tragedy? They
should definitely focus on the United States first, which
is the only nuclear war criminal and the largest nuclear
Power on the planet.
However, they turn a blind eye to the nuclear
assets of the United States, such as nuclear submarines,
nuclear aircraft carriers and strategic nuclear bombers,
which enter and leave Japan’s territory all the time, yearround, freely and without impediment. On the contrary,
they go to extremes in their fury about the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear deterrent, which
represents the absolutely rightful and justified right of
a sovereign State to defend itself.
I should raise another question for the Japanese
delegation. What is its country’s real aim on that issue?
What is its real concern regarding this issue? Is it
nuclear weapons, or simply that Japan does not like our
political system or the way in which the people of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are living?
I turn next to South Korea. I believe that the
delegation of South Korea is not representing its own
interests. Rather, it represents only the interests of the
United States, because South Korea does not have the
right to speak about itself, independently, without the
consent of the United States. South Korea is merely a
colony of the United States. It has handed over control
of its military, the symbol of its sovereignty, to the
United States and turned every corner of its territory
into a United States army base. Among the 193 States
Members of the United Nations, there is no country like
South Korea, which sits here after totally handing over
the symbol of its sovereignty, the control of its military,
to outside forces. There is no country like South Korea,
which has been involved in disgraceful pro-United
States policies and has joined conspiracy cooperation
manoeuvres against its fellow countrymen.
8/10

10/11/2017

A country without its sovereignty can never be
considered an independent Member State, and it is
both weird and ridiculous that such a regime can say
anything about the membership of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which is a dignified,
independent and sovereign State. The South Korean
authorities should abandon their reliance on foreign
Powers and give up the policies that are at the root of
the confrontation between North and South Korea.
Lastly, I would like to say one more thing about a
slightly different issue. It is the issue of the Japanese
representative calling my country “North Korea”. It is
very clear that the official name of my country is the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That is why the
United Nations Conference on the Standardization of
Geographical Names is held every year. I wonder how
that representative would feel if I called his country
“the island of Japan”.
Mr. Lozinskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): With regard to the speculation that we have
heard concerning nuclear infrastructure in Crimea,
I would like to say that the Russian position is well
known. It is set out in the International Atomic Energy
Agency information circular contained in document
INFCIRC/876 and remains unchanged. For the Russian
Federation, this question is closed.
Ms. Fedorovich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to exercise my right of reply regarding
the statement made earlier by the representative
of Lithuania.
Belarus considers that nuclear security belongs in a
factual rather than a political category. As I noted in our
general statement in today’s debate (see A/72/PV.46),
Belarus considers nuclear security to be a priority for
our national nuclear-energy programme. Apart from
our efforts to achieve the highest possible level of
nuclear safety at the national level, we do our utmost
to work with the international cooperative mechanisms
that, in our view, will make the most useful practical
contribution to our project. The International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), whose report we endorsed
today, is particularly important in that regard. Very
recently, in April, Belarus successfully defended its
seventh report under the Convention on Nuclear Safety.
As I noted briefly, before the initial launch of the
first energy-producing unit of our plant, we brought in
an almost record number of the IAEA’s major nuclear
security missions, including the Integrated Nuclear
17-37688

10/11/2017

Infrastructure Review, Integrated Regulatory Review
Service and Site and External Events Design Review
Service missions. The conclusions of all of these
missions affirmed Belarus’s steadfast commitment to
ensuring the highest possible level of nuclear security.
We have published the relevant reports, and they are
available on the Internet for anyone who wants to read
them. The conclusions of the experts of the Agency that
we consider the most competent to judge the nuclear
security levels during any assessment are open and
accessible to those wishing to familiarize themselves
with them.
We are also working with the European
Commission and with other partners to make the
greatest possible use of their expert potential. At this
point we have already conducted a so-called stress
test, a comprehensive survey of the risks and security
of the Belarusian plant. We are currently beginning
work on expert assessments of the stress-test results in
partnership with European regulators.
In our view, the accusations of our plant’s socalled lack of security are unjustified and, in a number
of cases, politically motivated. In an example of what
we see as unconstructive action, this year one of our
near neighbours enacted legislation banning imports of
electric power from Belarus’s as yet unbuilt nuclearpower plant on a pretext of a supposed lack of security.
For the past several years we have frequently invited
all interested parties to engage in dialogue on security
issues surrounding the Belarus nuclear-power plant.
While a number of our neighbours, and not only our
neighbours, have taken advantage of this opportunity,
some did not consider it advisable and have taken
a political route. Nevertheless, it is important to us
to establish normal cooperation with all interested
parties, including our near neighbour Lithuania. We
firmly believe that if we are to achieve nuclear security
on a global scale, it is absolutely critical to maintain
a dialogue.
Ms. Yoon Seong-Mee (Republic of Korea): It is
deeply regrettable that the representative of North
Korea continues to make groundless statements
impugning my country’s sovereignty. Faced with North
Korea’s constant threats, the Republic of Korea will
take every measure necessary to protect the security
of its people and territory. However much North
Korea tries to distort the facts, it will not change the
fundamental nature of its nuclear-missile problem.
The international community has made its united and

A/72/PV.47

unequivocal position on this issue clear on numerous
occasions. My delegation once again urges North Korea
to immediately cease its aggressive threats to peace and
security on the Korean peninsula and to the international
community as a whole, and to immediately dismantle
its nuclear programme in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner.
Mr. Amiya (Japan): Japan would like to exercise
the right of reply in response to the comments and
justifications made by the North Korean delegation.
North Korea’s nuclear-missile development is a clear
violation of a series of Security Council resolutions that
urge it to abandon all its nuclear-weapon and ballisticmissile programmes. North Korea should refrain from
any further provocations and fully comply with the
relevant Security Council resolutions as well as the
joint statement of the Six-Party Talks.
Mr. Jo Tong Hyon (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): I would like to comment briefly on the
qualifications of Japan. In my understanding, Japan is
in no way qualified to say anything about the nuclear
issue or about questions of humanity in this Hall. Japan
is the only country in the world that is still trying very
hard to avoid admitting to, apologizing or answering
for the inhuman war crimes it committed in the past.
Instead, it seeks to revive its old imperialist dreams
by distorting and beautifying its criminally aggressive
history. I would like to provide some very basic figures
on Japan’s historical crimes against humanity, and
specifically the Korean people.
Japan is the only nation in human history that has
shamefully committed State-sponsored and organized
military sex slavery in a number of other Asian
countries. That includes forcing more than 200,000
innocent women and girls from Korea into sex slavery
for the Japanese army during the Second World War.
Japan committed genocide against the Korean people
during over 40 years of colonial rule on the Korean
peninsula. It massacred more than 1 million Koreans
and kidnapped and forced more than 8 million into hard
labour. Let me repeat those figures once more: 200,000
women and girls for sex slavery; over 1 million were
killed; over 8 million were kidnapped and forced into
hard labour. However, Japan continues to refuse to
admit to or apologize for its crimes and avoids making
reparations to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. We have learned from those historical lessons,
and it is our conclusion that Japan has no political or

17-376889/10

A/72/PV.47

10/11/2017

moral qualification to speak on the matter in the sacred
international arena of the United Nations.

Once again, we urge North Korea to completely comply
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

I would say the following to the representative of
South Korea. There is no nation like us in this world.
We share the same territory, the same blood and the
same language. We share over 5,000 years of history.
We are divided by outside forces. That is the tragedy
of the Korean people. I really wish the South Korean
authority would learn the lessons of history with respect
to outside forces. My country’s nuclear-war deterrent
seeks to guarantee the peace, stability and prosperity
of the Korean people on the Korean peninsula. It is
the tragedy of the Korean people that we are divided
into two by outside forces. South Koreans should reject
United States foreign policy and return to the path
of collaboration with their fellow countrymen with
respect to the principles of independence, peace and
great national unity.

Ms. Yoon Seong-Mee (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me a second opportunity
to exercise the right of reply in response to the
allegations of North Korea.

Mr. Amiya (Japan): We are here to discuss the
agenda item 89, “Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency”. We do not think it is appropriate
to get into the discussion of history initiated by the
North Korean delegation. However, let us be clear
that throughout its history, Japan has upheld all the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and contributed to the peace and prosperity
of not only Asia but also the world while consistently
championing freedom, democracy and the rule of law.

10/10

I just want to recall that in his speech to the
General Assembly this year (A/72/PV.11), President
Moon once again stressed that the Korean Government
does not seek the collapse of North Korea or unification
by absorption or artificial means. The Government of
the Republic of Korea remains open to talks aimed at
the denuclearization of North Korea. We have made
it clear on many occasions that we will honour the
commitments in the joint statement of the 19 September
2005 Six-Party Talks. It is North Korea that refuses all
kinds of dialogue, raising tensions in the region and
beyond. I would like to take this opportunity to urge
North Korea to come to the dialogue and negotiation
table to talk about peace and the common prosperity of
our common people.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 89?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

17-37688
