.-a,

P
‘- ,.._.. “.._.

UNITEDNATIONS

at

MEETING: 26 OCTOBER 1973

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

..... . . . .. .. , ., ., .. . ..,.......

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010) . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l751)

S/PV.1751

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.

SEVENTEENHUNDREDANDFIFTY-FIRSTMEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 26 October 1973, at 4.30 p.m.
fiesident.’

Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia).

J’WSCIZC: The representatives of the following States:
Austraiia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l751)
1N Adoption
2.

of the agenda.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1010).
Th? msetirzg was called to order at 5.45 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
Tile agenda was adopted.

Tile situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/11010)
ta
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
take11 at the 1743rd meeting, I propose now, with the
corW2nt
of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Egypt, Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to take their
places at the Council table in order to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
(E&ypt),
Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. M. Z. Ismail
(S_vria/z Arab Republic) took places at the Council table.
2.

The PRESIDENT: In accordance with further decisions
at previous meetings, I propose also, with the consent
of tile Council, to invite the representatives of Nigeria pd
Saudi Arabia to participate in the discussion without the
rjdlt to vote. I shall ask them to take the places reserved for
tixem at the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that they will be called upon to take a place at the
Council
table when it is their turn to address the Council.

taken

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. O&u (Nigeria)
arId Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the Places reserved
for tirenz at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT: The first name inscribed on my list
of speakers is that of the representative of Egypt, on whom
I now call.
4. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): I apologize to the members
of the Council and to you, Mr. President, for requesting the
convening of the Security Council at this time, which
certainly is not the most convenient time. But since the
Council is to assert its responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security and since it has been our unwavering
stand that we believe in the Security Council, in the United
Nations and in its Charter, we felt bound to come to the
Council in order not only to speak about a breach of peace,
but also to warn of a grave danger not merely threatening
our region but certainly threatening to go beyond it.
5. A Cairo telephone communication at 1400 hours local
time tells us again that new hostilities have begun and that
air and land fighting has been going on against our soldiers
and against our cities on the Suez and Sinai fronts. It is
better to try to be very concise and to look at what has
happened until now, what is happening now and what is
going to happen in the future.
6. What has happened until now-and I speak only about
the last episode-is this. The Council was convened on
Sunday by two permanent member States, the United
States and the Soviet Union, and a draft resolution carrying
their names and their weight was put to the Council, I do
not hesitate to say that I had not seen that draft resolution
much in advance. I saw it for the first time in the hands of
our colleague, the representative of China, who had an
unofficial copy of it, a few hours before the Council met.
7. The reason we did not object to that draft resolutionand, I am sure, the reason members of the Council did not
object to it but adopted it without any member dissenting-was, first, that we and they put great faith in the two
permanent members of the Security Council, feeling that if
they were asking the Council to take action, they were
really doing so in order to be faithful to their responsibilities and to the responsibilities of the Council for the
safeguarding of world peace and security.
8. That draft resolution, which later became resolution
338 (1973), was indeed an ambitious piece Of Paper,
looking across what is happening now towards a future in
which the region could live in peace and in which the world
could live with one headache fewer, one danger fewer and
one more hope for a bettei life for all the world in Peace
and justice.

demand in resolution 340 (1973), ‘that <immediate and
complete cease-fire be observed and that the parties return
to the positions occupied by them at 1650 hours GMT oa
22 October 1973’? ” I did not expect and indekd I did not
get a reply. But at the same meeting I put a question to the
representative of the United States: “Is it the intention of
the United States Government to respect its signature of
the Charter and its sponsorship of the two draft resolutions,
and is it going to join the Council in demanding that
‘immediate and complete cease-fire be observed and that
the parties return to the positions occupied by them at
1650 hours GMT on 22 October 1973’? ” I do not expect
the Israelis to reply but I do expect a reply from the
representative of the United States, because-and here we
are looking to the future-the historic resolution adopted
by this Council, without much examination, without much
objection and without a very broad analysis of what was ia
it, was adopted on the basis of the faith that we and, I am
sure, the members of this Council had in the two sponsors.
If the first paragraph, asking for the cease-fire at a given
time-which means at a given place-is respected, then the
key to respect for the other paragraphs is there. We do not
need any prisoners of war. We do not need any territorial
gains. We do not covet an inch of any land except our own
historic land. I am sure the same is true of Syria or of any
other country. If we do not get that, if the foundatiou and
the cornerstone of our hopes for a just peace are indeed
blown up by bombardments from the air and from the
ground by Israeli tanks and airplanes,of course there will
be no basisfor any other development. There will only be
the question: who is putting these arms in the handsof
those who are shattering all hopesfor peace and securityin
the region and perhaps in a zone much larger than the
region?

9. That resolution was simple: the war and the fighting
must stop. A reasonable time was given-12 hours. After
that there was to be a cease-fire, whichliterally meant that
all firing must cease and that all troops must stop where
they were. It was the hope of the two sponsors, and indeed
the hope of the Council, that if that happened then some
machinery would be set up and talks would be held in order
to reach the basis of a just settlement, which is our hope
and the hope of the members of the Council, a settlement
which the Council has been trying to bring about in the
Middle East for the last six years and longer-to put an end
to the war which began on 5 June 1967.
10. Having adopted that resolution, the Council met again
and clearly took note of the fact that its order of 22
October 1973 was not complied with, because in its
resolutions 339 (1973) and 340 (1973) it asked that the
forces return to the places at which they should have
stopped 12 hours after the adoption of its resolution of 22
October 1973. The Council, using its diplomatic language,
did not say which forces were not in their places, but I
think there is very little to say about which forces did not
obey the Council and which forces tried to use the
cease-fire to make territorial gains. Commentators like
Mr. Middleton in The New York Times made this amply
clear. And the Secretary of State of the United States, in
his press conference, indeed admitted that it was Israel that
made territorial gains after the cease-fire. Not only were
there territorial gains, but in these tragic hours other gains
are shortsightedly sought-gains in the sense that perhaps
our soldiers in Sinai can be cut off and pressured into
surrendering, or that they may die of thirst or hunger, or
that they may behave in a completely disorderly manner
because they are cut off from their supply lines. But those
supply lines were intact at the time when the cease-fire was
to take effect 12 hours after the adoption of the first
Security Council resolution.

14. Reading today that the spokesman for the State
Departmentin Washingtonaddressedhimself to the alliesof
the United Statesin the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) and told them that they should give their facilities
for the airlift that the United States is still operatingto
Israel up to this time, one has a very clear answe_r
to the
question who is putting these weapons in the handsof
those who are shattering peace.It may be that this is not
the intention, and that the intention, as again the spokes.
man for the State Departmtnt says, is to obtain peacein
the area.But I am sure that this is the wrong method. I arn
sure that any reasonable thinking would lead to the
conclusionI have drawn.

11. I told the Council-regardless
of the replies, the
accusations and the insults-that the port of Adabiah had
fallen into the hands of the Israelis and that the town of
Suez was under attack, Two days ago I said that the gallant
soldiers and inhabitants were repelling the attacks. They are
still repelling the attacks to this hour, and Adabiah is still in
the hands of the Israelis to this hour.
12. But we have heard today from the propaganda organs
of Israel unfounded accusations, fabrications and indeed
lies about our breaking the cease-fire. The soldiers
marooned and encircled in Sinai are of course returning the
fire of those who are attacking them from the air. The
inhabitants of Suez and the soldiers in Suez are of course
returning the fire of those who are attacking by tanks and
from the air. But we expect that a few hours from now,
perhaps at dawn in the Middle East, there will be another
major offensive. We did not want to wait until the offensive
took place, because we thought the Council should be
warned of it now, as we have been warned,

15. The United Nations Emergency Force was setup by
this Council with a specificfunction and a specific purpose.
We have heard that the first contingent of that Force
arrived in Cairo today. The Commander of the Force
decidedit was better for them to stay in Cairo overnight.
We should have preferred them to proceed to the area
immediately, but that was the decision. I trust that in
future the action will be faster, but tomorrow morning they
will be in their places, I hope. I must say that our
experienceso far with other international bodies hasbeen
very disappointing, as regardsthe IsraeIi reaction andlack
of co-operation. The observershave given the Secretariat
information-and I am sure that it now has even later
reports-about the lack of co-operation of the Israeliswith
them. Leaving that aside, let us look at what the Inter-

13. In this Council I put a question to the representative
of Israel in order to dismiss these accusations of lies and all
this other language which we have heard here but which I
am not going to use now or ever, I put the question: “Do
the Israelis intend to comply with the Security Council’s
2

national Red Cross says. Mr. Boissard, the representative of
the International Red Cross, told us today that the Israeli
forces had prevented Red Cross vehicles carrying plasma,
water, food and medicine from going to our soldiers in
Sinai. Finally, after he had reported to his headquarters in
Geneva and after Geneva had got in touch with Israel, we
received very belated approval from Israel-but on two
conditions:
the first, that the Israelis must inspect the
convoy-and
this we accepted-and the second, that the
drivers must be presumed to be spies and that Israeli drivers
must take these convoys on. The second condition was
found to be completely impractical and impossible. Therefore the Red Cross convoy is now on its way back to Cairo.

21. The PRESIDENT: Since the representative of Zambia
is the next speaker, I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement,
22. Mr, LUSAKA (Zambia): Mr. President, since this is the
first opportunity I have had to participate in the discussion
on the Middle East question, I should like first of all to
congratulate you on your assumption of the high office of
President of the Council for this month.
23. The Government of the Republic of Zambia has been
following
with great concern the developments in the
Middle East since the outbreak of war on G October this
year. My Government condemns violence in all its forms
and long-drawn-out wars which cause considerable loss of
human life, thereby reducing prospects for peace.

16. This action-I am not going to describe it as inhuman
or barbaric; I am not going to use such adjectives-was
taken at the same time for purposes of useless propaganda
about transfusions of Israeli blood being given to Egyptians
who were on their feet. The Egyptians who need this blood
are not on their feet; and they need the blood from their
OWII country, and through international operations such as
the Red Cross. This Council should condemn the Israeli
authorities for these intentional obstructions.

24. My Government believes that what led to the current
crisis in the Middle East was the provocation from Israel
through its intransigence about acceding to Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). Israel has been contemptuous of the United Nations resolution calling upon it to
withdraw to the preJune 1967 borders. Zambia feels that
peace in the area will be assured only if Israel withdraws
from all Arab territories which it has occupied since the
1967 war.

17.

But all these are details, it seems. It is a detail to tell
that right now the town of Suez is being bombarded by
air and by land, that our positions west of the Canal also
are being bombarded, that we are expecting a very heavy
onslaught on Suez at any time, and especially before the
United Nations Emergency Force is allowed to reach these
areas.
YOU

25. It is the view of my Government, further, that there is
great need for others concerned to have an understanding
and appreciation of the conditions requisite for a just and
durable peace, if indeed such peace is to be effectively
brought about in the Middle East. Israel does not appear to
have this understanding and appreciation, as can be judged
by a series of violations of the cease-tire and the continuing
tension in the area, as just reported by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Egypt.

18. To me-and this is my excuse for asking the Council to
meet-it
is a question whether we are proceeding now
towards peace and hope or towards real despair and the
actions emanating from despair. We are not going to go on
our knees. Israel should have learned by now that its policy
which was described in 1967 as waiting for us to “come
crawling on our bellies”, of waiting by the telephone for
our cry-of surrender, is not going to succeed. No policy is
going to succeed that is dictated by tanks, Phantom
aircraft,
laser-guided missiles-or whatever they have or
whatever may be brought to them from the arsenal of the
United States.

26. It is against that background that my Government has
today, 26 October 1973, broken off diplomatic relations
with Israel.
27. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I now call on the representative of

28. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Since the adoption of Security
Council resolution 338 (1973) of 22 October which, inter
alia, called for an immediate cessation of fighting, Egypt
appears to have employed two stratagems in relation to the
cease-fire. The first is to violate the cease-fire by attacks
against Israeli forces while at the same time claiming that
Israel is attacking, and violating the cease-fire, and, of
course, continuing to accuse Israel of cease-fire violations
when our forces react to the Egyptian assaults. This is what
happened on 22 October when the Egyptian forces continued to fight even after the hour set for the commencement of the cease-fire, thus preventing the cease-fire from
becoming effective.

19. A glimpse of the road to peace appeared in this
Council late Sunday evening, It is up to those who gave US
that glimpse to keep it alive.
20. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative of Zambia to the United Nations containing
a request that he be allowed to participate in the Council’s
discussion of the item inscribed on the agenda, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provision of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure. As I hear no
objection, I take it that the Council agrees to invite the
representative
of Zambia to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.

29. The second stratagem is to allege that fighting has
broken out when, in fact, no fighting is going on at all, and
to accuse Israel of attacks in breach of the cease-fire when
there is calm. This stratagem seems to serve two purposes.
Firstly, it creates an atmosphere which strengthens hostility
and bloodlust, an atmosphere propitious to calumny and

At the invitation of the President, Mr. P. J. F. Lusaka
(ZamZjia) took the place reserved for him in the Council
chamber.
3

by Egyptian forces while passingthrough the Guv~~
Straits at the entrance to the Gulf of Suez. The tanker
washit.” [It waslater on ascertainedthat this was due tn
an explosion of a mine laid by the Egyptian forces.] “ln
t&s connexion I should like to refer to the letteri
addressedto you by the permanent representative P;E~
Egypt yesterday, 25 October 1973, alleging il~l hadi
attack on the Greek tanker Mimismids. NO such attack ta>
Israeli forces had taken place, and the false charge w@
evidently a propagandapreparation for today’s aggression
by Egypt.“’

acrimony; and this, after all, is a central objective of
Egyptian policy at this stage.
30. When there were opportunities to talk with Israel,
Egypt chose on 6 October to shoot. Now, when all
endeavours should have been directed towards strengthening the cease-fire and starting immediately and concurrently
peace negotiations in accordance with resolution
338 (l973), Egypt continues to undermine the Cease-fire
and to fan further the flames of belligerency. This1is what
happened the other evening when the Foreign Minister of
Egypt announced to the Security Council and to the entire
world that a whole new war has broken out in the Middle
East on 23 October, while not a shot was being fired in the
area and the cease-fire agreed upon that day by Egypt and
Israel, through the good offices of General Siilasvuo, had in
fact entered into force.

3.5. Severalhours later I addressedanother complaint BII~
the Secretary-General.It read:
“On instructions from my Government and further w
my letter to you of this morning I regret to inform yc@U
that Egyptian forces have continued today to violate tbt
cease-fire.At 1400 hours local time, Egyptian forcea
openedtire on the outskirts of the town of Suez. At I605
hours local time, Egyptian forces started an infanv
attack on Israeliforces in the areaof kilometre 152 of the
SuezCanal”.2

31. It was apparently of little concern to the Egyptian
Government that as a result of these false charges that a
new war had broken out, the world was brought to the
brink of global confrontation. Is it too much to expect of a
Government at war-even if it is a war of aggression
unleashed by it-to display an attitude of greater responsibility towards the safety and security of the entire world?

36. There is no secret about what is happening in &c
southernpart of the Suez Canal area. It is natural for an
encircled army to try to break out of encirclerncnt.
should not do it, however, if it wishes to abide by a!~
cease-fire,and when it does it surely cannot expecl the
Israeli forces not to return fire. This is what has occwlcd
today. The Egyptian attacks in violation of the ceasc.fi.Pr
have been contained, and again the front is quiet. 1 IKW~
had contact with Jerusalemat 2330 hours which confirmr
this fact. I can reiterate with full authority that the Isr&:
forces have strict orders not to open fire, and ttq- tic
observingthe cease-fire.If any shooting occurs it is an!;
when the Egyptian forces initiate it. In any event fhef~
seemsto be a marked discrepancy between the Egypri~
charges voiced here in the Security Council and &!z
statementsof Egyptian Government spokesmenin Caina.

32. The second purpose of this stratagem of claiming that
fighting is taking place while in reality tranquillity prevails
is, of course, to prepare the ground for again initiating
attacks. This is what happened yesterday. Throughout the
day all news agencies with correspondents on the front
were reporting quiet in all sectors. At the same time in
Cairo the Egyptian Government made a concerted effort
to mislead the world and to create the impression that
fighting was in progress and that Israeli forces were
attacking. Ashraf Gorbal, President Sadat’s press adviser,
called the press together for a conference and disseminated
stories of alleged attacks on the city of Suez, along the
Canal, even claiming Israeli air raids were continuing on
Port Said at the time of the press conference.
33. All this was completely unfounded-as an identical
claim which we have just heard from the Foreign Minister
of Egypt this evening is also baseless. All this was
completely fabricated. There was no corroboration of these
allegations from any’ other source. One of the more
interesting aspects of this propaganda exercise in falsehood
was that Mr. Gorbal’s claims were dispatched abroad, but
not given publicity in Egypt itself. The purpose became
clear this morning when the Egyptian forces opened fire in
several SeCtOrS. Yesterday’s propaganda acrobatics, including a baseless charge that Israeli forces had sunk a Greek
vessel,werenothing but a preparationfor today’s events.

37. A late eveningreport from Cairo reads as follows:
“From the Egyptian side there are no reports ~5
fighting today. But an Egyptian military spokcaat,z
denied Israeli reports that the encircled Third Army w
the easternside of the Suez Canal had launcl~cd atta&r
on the Israelis.”
I leave it to membersof the Security Council tt) dirza
conclusionsfrom these two brief sentences in an oftj~ca&
Egyptian statement made only a short wflilc ago in C&G,

34. Early this morning I dispatchedthe following letter to
the Secretary-General:
“On iMructiOnS
from my Government I draw your
urgentattention to the flagrant violationsof the cease-fire
perpetrated today by Egypt. On 26 October 1973 at
0830 hours local time, Egyptian forces opened tank,
artillery and small-arms
fire in the southernsectorof the
SuezCanal. On the sameday at 0900 hourslocal the
the LiberiantankerSirius, sailingfrom Edat, wasattacked
4

38. So that the membersof the Council should nor b+
tempted to accept the Egyptian exaggerationsrcgardirrg a&
developmentsof today in the area of the Third I3gyptd~
Army, I should like to read from the following tclegrc,
sentby Reuter:
“Israel today delivered 200 portions of plasma and “$3
containersof blood to Egyptian front lines on tIlr t&l
1 Subscqucntly
circulatedasdocumentS/I 1051.
2 Subsequently

Circulated

as doconwnt

s/1 1053.

Btik of the Suez Canal in compliance with an urgent
request from Cairo, a military spokesman said here
tonight. Colonel Nachman Karmi said the blood and
plasma had been flown by Israeli planes to a point near
Rusahadsudar on the Gulf of Suez, and was then taken by
Israeli vehicles, with an International Red Cross escort, to
the Egyptian lines at the southern end of the hundredmile long waterway. The handover took place at the same
time as parts of the Egyptian Third Army were trying to
break out of their lines to the West Bank of the Canal,
according to the Israelis. Btit the handover went off
smoothly. The request for the blood supplies came from
Cairo through the International Red Cross Committee
Thursday, apparently because the Egyptians found it
difficult to get them through to the beleaguered Third
Army on the narrow strip on the East Bank of the Canal.
A representative of the Red Cross in Tel Aviv confirmed
the successful transfer of the blood.”

42. It may not be surprising that the aggressor of
6 October should be able to appear here in the mask of
innocence when a State permanent member of the Council
which has for years and years stood condemned as an
aggressor and a violator of the rights of small nations should
play the role of the God of justice and wrath. True, our
world is far from being perfect; hypocrisy, mendacity,
calumny and blind hatred are not unusual in it. All this,
however, does not mean that Israel should follow this path
or be impressed by the views of those who follow it.
43. The people of Israel are fighting for their lives, the life
of the Jewish nation, the life of the Jewish State. Thank
God that for 25 years Israel has succeeded to defend its
independence, the freedom of its people, and that it has
succeeded again in repelling the blood-thirsty onslaught of
the forces which on 6 October, the Day of Atonement, set
out to destroy us and to annihiIate the people of Israel.
This success throughout the two and a half decades, this
success in the last few weeks does not change the aggressor
States of 1948, of the 195Os, of 1967, of 1969 and of 1973
into peace-loving States. This success of Esrael’s does not
make Israel defending its basic right to live like all other
nations in peace and security an attacker.

39. At this very moment I have been handed another
report-this
time from Geneva-dispatched by Reuter as
well, which reads:
“A helicopter carrying International Red Cross supplies
of blood and plasma landed today in the Sinai Desert to
help the wounded in the Egyptian Third Army, an
International rjed Cross Committee spokesman said tonight. The helicopter put at the disposition of the
International Committee of the Red Cross by the Israeli
Government
carried 440 pounds of blood and 440
pounds of plasma to the Egyptians who are cut off by
Israeli forces on the East Bank of the Suez Canal. A
convoy of 14 trucks due to leave Cairo today with Red
Cross supplies of blood plasma and medicines for the
town of Suez was delayed.”

44. But the time is not for argumentation; the time is not
for polemics; the time is for constructive contribution
towards progress, towards understanding, agreement and
peace. The time has come when we should at least make the
first steps in that direction.
45. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Saudi Arabia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

The end of the report concerns the question of prisoners
and not the problem which we are discussing right now.

46. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I wish to assure the
Council and you, Sir, as its President that I shall refrain
from using such terms as “hypocrisy”, “mendacity” and
as members heard Mr. Tekoah use them a few
“calumny”,
moments ago to malign the Arab world. The Arab people
will not gain anything by trading such expressions with
Mr. Tekoah.

40. It is in the light of these clear facts inevitable to ask:
How is it possible that Egypt should have been able to act
as it has in one meeting of the Council after another, to
make false charges, to heap unfounded slanders, to increase
tension, to create an international crisis of global danger,
without
anyone calling Egypt’s representatives to order,
without anyone remonstrating with them, without anyone
restraining them and their Government, without anyone
trying to influence them and to convince them that the
time has come for Egypt to change its destructive courseat least now, at least after all the bloodshed and tragedy
that Egypt and Syria have brought again upon the Middle
East?

47. I shall address myself precisely to this new develop
ment, namely, that the Egyptian troops in the Suez area are
encircled by Israeli troops and segregated from any aid that
might be convoyed to them by the Red Cross. It looks to
me, after checking with non-Arab sources, as if Israel is
intent on making 15,000 or 20,000 men in the Suez area
either surrender or be destroyed. I say that because it
insisted yesterday on having the convoy manned by Israeli
personnel, which is, to say the least, unfair and impractical,
and there is no tradition for this method, this approach,
being used by the Red Cross. The International Red Cross
has always asked, in similar conflicts, that the personnel
manning the convoys should not be from any of the parties
to the conflict. I am not talking now as an Arab: I am
talking objectively, since I had occasion to deal with the
International Red Cross in regard to another conflict many
years ago. But Israel insisted, at least until yesterday, that
the personnel that would man the convoy should be
Israelis, so we conclude that Israel wants to change the
practice of the International Red Cross in order to gain a

41. The fact that that has not been done is undoubtedly
rooted in the well-known inability-regrettable inability-of
the Council to address itself to matters concerning the
Middle East in an equitable manner. This has been
demonstrated over and over again when representatives of
States-among
them a member of the Security Council, the
Sudan-which
are actively participating in the Arab war of
aggression against Israel and have till this very day refrained
from accepting the Security Council cease-fire, come here
to give Israel, to give the United Nations, to give the world
lessons in respect for international peace.
5

false witnesses to what the two super-Powers do; we
demand to be told the truth, and not to have to rely en
dispatchesthat are tailored to suit one of those suPep
Powers,namely, the United States of America,

military advantage, either to compel the Egyptians who are
in that Suez area to surrender or, if not, perhaps to destroy
them if it can.
48. As, the Foreign Minister of Egypt rightly said, the
cease-fire-or
should I say the first resolution that this
Council recently adopted on a cease-fire-was initiated by
the two super-Powers; therefore, I think the two superPowers should be responsible for providing the staff for the
convoy, or they could nominate staff from neutral countries to that end. But if the negotiations on this question
are protracted, what will this meeting be but an academic
exercise of accusations and recriminations and rebuttals
which will not benefit anyone but will make the conflict
more bitter? But the United States excluded the three
other permanent members of the Council from participation in bringing about peace in the region.

53. You owe it to us. Keep silent if you want to, But
20,000 men are being besieged,and you sit and laugh and
joke. Naturally, you are not being burned; you are net
being killed in the United States. But precious blood is
being spilled,including Jewishblood. The Jewsthere have
mothersand fathers; we do not discriminate againstthemia
humanity. But you, Government of the United States,you
have a very articulate-or so it seems, when he sc
chooses-Secretaryof State, who never gives a direct answer
to the correspondents. Is that the new approach to
American diplomacy? If it is, then we have to assumewhat
your answersare. You cannot fool us any more; you cannot
fool the world any more. Even your allies are complaining
of your high-handed methods. We are not impressedby
your power: we have one life to live.

49. The Soviet Union did not express itself on that point,
merely because the United States seems to want to have a
monopoly, not only in order to help Israel but also in order
to crush the Arab people.

54. When I put a question to our colleague from the
Soviet Union, he answersas best he can; but whena
ForeignMinister, who happensto be Arab-none other than
the Foreign Minister of Egypt-or when I, who am nota
foreign minister but the representativeof a sovereignState,
and a signatory of the Charter, ask you questionsoutside
this chamber as well as inside, about the rumour of your
sendingmassivearms suppliesso that we may be ableto
adviseour Governmentson what is going on, you beginto
scurry away when you seeme from a distance. For three
days you scurried away from me. All right: that is yo~~r
privilege; we cannot force you to come and give us an
answer.

50. It is unthinkable that we should deviate from what is
clearly enunciated in the Charter on this point. Of course,
the Council, like the General Assembly, is the master of its
own procedures and the eight-Power resolution, which was
adopted, could not have been adopted if the reservation
insisted on by the United States had not been included. It
might have vetoed the resolution. Is it any wonder that the
eight-Power resolution had to be tailored to meet the
wishes of the United States, which the Arab people
consider as abetting their enemy? Has the United States
forgotten? The United States is very articulate outside this
chamber but ominously silent when anyone puts a question
to it. Of course, it is its privilege to remain silent, but it can
wax long. Yesterday Mr. Kissinger held a press conference. I
happened to be dialling my radio yesterday evening at
9 o’clock, when I heard what Mr. Kissinger had said about
the conflict, answering as best he could the American
correspondents who had put questions to him. No answer
was straightforward or clear. He always parried the question
and made it appear-made it appear; he did not say this-as
if the Soviet Union was going to pounce on the United
States, and that is why the Pentagon had alerted its armed
forces everywhere, and especially in the Middle East.

55. And then, when I corneredone of the membersof Ihe
United Statesdelegation,he said: “We still have no answer
from Washington.” For three or four days you were sending
massivemilitary aid to Israel; and, for your information,1
was adamant,and you knew it, becauseyou have all those
roomswhere, I think, having such electronic devicesasYOU
do, you wereprobably listeningto what I saidin one of the
conference rooms here: that we should maintain our
dignity, and not sendfour Arab ministersto seeMr. Nixon,
becauseyour answer had already come to us in the
newspapers:you are sendingmassiveaid.

51. In other words, he had couched warnings, not only to
the Arabs but to the other super-Power with which
Mr. Kissinger had allegedly had the euphoria of reaching a
detente by having gone to Moscow many times before that
detente was declared something of a reality. And we now
find that either it is a reality or it is not a reality. Why
should the Soviet Union bow down to the other superPower when it said, ‘LWe wish to participate in the
Emergency Force or be mere observers”? Why? I am not a
Communist, but I admit that the Soviet Union is one of the
major Powers-and super-Powers, for that matter. We want
to know the truth; they owe it to us. They cannot engage in
secret diplomacy while we are kept in the dark.

56. You probably say: “Well, you are no better than LIE
American people: we do not tell them what we do, SOwiry
should you be better? ” But we are representativesof
sovereignStates, and you called us a friendly countySaudi Arabia-as if His Majesty the King were alwaysst
your beck and call. His Majesty the King has been patient
with you since 1947; and what do you do? You leaveusia
the dark; you leave your people in the dark-until we find
out what is happening.Of course, Dr. Kissingersaysthisis
for security, that it is a security measure.Whose security:
that of the United States, or the security of a client of tlie
United States? And I do not know whether Israel is a ctient
of the United States or whether you are a client of the
Zionists.

52. Was there a real threat from the Soviet Union as in the
days of the late President Kennedy? We had to work
behind the scenes on the Cuban crisis. We are not here as

57. Keep silent if you will; but we cannot be complaccnl
about thesethings. Monopolize the United Nations to suit
6

your purposes. But you will have to account to the
American people, just as our Govermnents would have to
account to the Arab people if we remained silent and
submissive to your policies. Have you swallowed your
tongues, members of the United States delegation? I do
not think so, because once you leave that door you become
very articulate and you dish out to the correspondents what
you want the American people to believe.
58. We are accountable not only to our Governments but
to our peoples, and if we err as governments, let the young
bring us down and trample on our bodies to save their
dignity and their freedom from a major Power that created
that usurping State in order to police us.
59. Now we go to the humanitarian question. Did you not
know, Government of the United States, that between
1S-and 20,000 troops have been besieged because Israel did
not obey or observe the cease-fiie? You sit smugly here.
There are no personal differences between you as persons in
other matters pertaining to power politics and spheres of
influence and lording it over other people at a distance of
6,000 miles from your homeland.
60. Mr. President, as a friend you always advise me, not
directly but indirectly, not to take the floor so often
perhaps. Some well-meaning friends have advised me in the
same sense. But what are we here for-to be spectators and
false witnesses to what the United States is doing, to the
havoc that has been created by the United States Government in subscribing to the fiction that God gave Palestine
to Israel and that therefore they are all so religious. The
United States people are fundamentalists. They believe
every letter in the Bible, but they take out of context from
the Bible those passages that suit Israel and suit them.
61. It seems that God did not give the Red Indians this
continent; otherwise, since you support Israel, you should
by the same token return this continent to the Red Indians.
What have you done instead? You besieged them at
Wounded Knee. You almost starved them because they
were asking for one millionth of their rights. Why do you
not return this hemisphere to the Red Indians?
62. You support the usurping State of Israel because
allegedly some Jews lived there 2,000 years ago. These
Zionists-I
am not talking about our Jews-have formulated
and elaborated an ideology that has used Judaism as a
motivation
for dominating the area, for exploit,ing Africa,
Western Asia and Eastern Europe, “God gave Palestine”or, as it was called, the land of Canaan-‘%0 the Zionists.”
That is a Central and Eastern European ideology and not a
Sephardim ideology. The Sephardim Jews were Arabs who
Lived amongst us, in culture, origin and race. And you, the
torchbearers
of political Zionism, were converted to
Judaism eight centuries after Christ. I repeat this time and
again for those who do not have the benefit of knowing
that they are colonizers under a fictitious religious ideology.
63. I cited the Crusades the other day. We finished with
the Crusades, and now we have an ideology predicated on a
fiction that God parcels out land to various people. This is
why
I take the floor often. People are dying there.
Negotiations
will be fruitless, and all you have done is

laudable only to save lives, but there will be another round
and another round and another round. Innocent Jews and
innocent Arabs will be killed so that the usurping State of
Israel may prevail by the grace and might of the United
States Government.
64. Again and again and again I have asked the United
States Government: What have we done to you-from
Morocco on the Atlantic to the Gulf, the Arabian peninsula
and the whole Middle East to the whole of North Africa,
which happens to be Arab. 7 You acted for humanitarian
purposes? Why in 1945 and 1946 did you not open the
gates of immigration to the Jews, the poor Jews that were
in displaced persons camps in Europe? Why did not your
Senate pass a bill to allow them to come here and be settled
amongst you? And we would have taken Jews without a
flag.
65. And now what will happen? Nothing will happen. As
my colleagues from China rightly said, these were scraps of
paper, because in essence they will not resolve the conflict.
How do I know they will not resolve the conflict? Because
Israel wants land and more land, because Israel considers
itself as filled with people that are the chosen people of
God. What discrimination.
66. I have a map here. I will show it to you, since I got it
from the best of sources but I cannot disclose the name
because of the confidence that was placed in me. This is
why I took the floor-and it was not until I had that map
which shows how the Israelis, to say the least, rationalize,
leave aside and falsify the facts.
67. Again I want to address my colleagues from the
United States, who always seem to have a conference when
I speak. “Who is that Baroody to tell us anything? ” They
are a mighty nation. ?Vho is that Baroody? ” Baroody is a
human being like you, my dear Ambassador Scali and that
fellow who said that the American people are tired of me,
that fellow who is sitting behind you. My secretary brought
me 150 letters; 20 of them maligned me and 130 were from
Americans saying “Thank you Baroody for opening our
eyes to what our Government is doing to your people”.
And some of them said again, “See to it that the mass
media of information do not engage in static or do not
abridge what you tell us.” They arc tired of me, are they?
You stooge. You will, be torn-not physically, I hope,
because I will defend you-but your policy will be torn by
the people of the United States like I am tearing these
papers. I have forgotten how you spell your name.
68. Thank you, Mr. President. I ask you to kindly give me
permission to speak after one of the sphinxes ofthe world
opens its mouth. I thought the sphinx was in Egypt-the
enigma. I shall be all ears if the second sphinx that is now
sitting there in the seat of the United States will open his
mouth. I stand to be corrected if what I say is wrong,
namely, that it is not in the interests of the United States to
be committed to Israel, because Isrriel may push the whole
world into a suicidal war that will be the end of the human
species on the face of this planet.
69. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): The Security Council has again
been convened urgently to consider the question of yet
another act of aggression by Israel and yet another instance

of Israeli disregard of a Security Council decision-the
third-calling
for a cease-fire and the cessation of all
military operations.
70. The Egyptian Mission to the United Nations requested
an urgent meeting of the Security Council. Unfortunately,
there was considerable delay in convening the meeting. It is
true that, thanks to the efforts of a majority of the
members of the Council, it was possible to call the Council
together at least three and a half hours sooner than was
anticipated. This in itself represents a positive result. of the
Councills prompt response to an urgent appeal from the
Mission of a country which has once again become the
victim of a treacherous attack by an aggressor-in this case,
once again, by Israel. We have listened carefully to the
statement by the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. El-Zayyat. Specific, convincing facts were cited. In his
statement Mr. El-Zayyat also drew attention to the fact
that the Soviet Union and the United States of America
jointly introduced the first draft resolution calling for a
cease-fire and that they bear the responsibility for taking
action to ensure that the Council’s decision on their joint
draft resolution is implemented. He also reminded us that
Mr. Kissinger visited Tel Aviv on his way back from
Moscow. The whole world knows that. What was talked
about there? By the logic of honourable people and
honourable politicians, they should have talked about the
implementation by Madame Golda Meir and the Israeli
firebrand, General Dayan, of the Security Council resolution which will be adopted on the joint proposal of the
USSR and the United States, The United States and its
Secretary of State must fulfil their obligations In this
important matter of war and peace. But what actually
happened and is happening ? Who is tricking whom? Is
Golda Meir tricking Kissinger? If so, the United States
should bring pressure to bear on Israel. In one of my
previous statements, I asked whether it would be possible
to find in the whole world one reasonable person who
could believe that the United States is powerless to exert
influence on Israel to implement Security Council resolutions adopted by the Council on the initiative of the United
States as one of the sponsors. That is the question. History
and the deveIopment of the international situation today
pose the question in those terms. That is why, when
Mr. Baroody, who spoke before me, puts the question and
says that an answer is required, the Security Council must
be given an answer. An answer to the question: when will
measures be taken, by those who can do so in relation to
Israel, to put an end to international banditry and
gangsterism, to ensure compliance with and strict observance of Security Council decisions, to bring about a total
cease-fire and put an end to all military operations instead
of taking advantage of the situation that has been created
when the other side is fully implementing the Security
Council’s decisions? Indeed, the fact that Israel has
violated the Council’s decisions has been officially admitted
by the Secretary of State of the United States,
Mr. Kissinger. I have before me the stenographic record of
his press conference: “On the first day-that is, Tuesday
123 October] -of the implementation of the cease-fire,
there was a breakdown of the cease-fire which led to certain
Israeli territorial gains.“3 Those are not my words; they are
3 Quotedin English by the speaker.
8

Mr. Kissinger’s.And any person endowed with comlncn
sense,particularly the membersof the Security Council
who readsthis official admissionby the Secretary of St&
of the United Statesis bound to ask what the United States
has done to prevent this and to ensure that Israel
implementsthe Security Council decisions.
71. The Council has a right to be concerned with this
issue. I have quoted an official document-an official
statement by the Secretary of State of the United States,
who admitted in effect that Israel violated the Security
Council’s decision and seizedadditional territory after the
cease-fire.On what basis? This is international banditry,
aggression,gangsterism and disregard of world public
opinion. You may laugh, Mr. Tekoah, but this is no
laughing matter. The time will come when you will be
laughing with tears in your eyes becauseof the acts of
gangsterism
of your Government and your country.
72. What isbeing done insteadof bringing pressureto bear
on Israel? According to the latest official information,
there is an unending, uninterrupted flow of armsfrom Ihe
United States to replenishIsrael’smilitary stockpiles.I am
not going to quote from the papers, but I have two pages
from American newspaperson the subject.
73. I shallnow refer briefly to what was saidhere by the
Israelirepresentative.We all know his ability to distort facts
and presentthe true situation to the Security Council in a
false light. He has been telling us stories. He has been
becloudingthe issueby informing us that Israel is sokilld
that it is even giving Egyptian soldiersand officers blood.
That is what the Israeli representativesays.But here iswhat
UP1 reported at 5.17 p.m. today. The latest news from
where? From Tel Aviv. Who was speaking? A military
spokesmanin Tel Aviv. What did he say? Here is the
report:
“A military spokesmanon the Israeli side,referring to
donations of plasmaand blood to the International Red
Crossfor Egyptian soldierscaptured by Israeli forcesin
the Sinai, said: ‘The transfer took place during heaq
fighting in the area.’ By way of explanation he said,‘This
is the Middle East. This is a Jewish-Arab war.’ “3
74. That report of 5.17 this afternoon is not from a
communist newspaper, Mr. Tekoah. You are always
referring to the fact that communist newspapersare the
only ones that write about Israeli aggression.Yes, they
write that Israel is an aggressor.Your country is an
aggressorand is engagedin international gangsterism.And
the communistpressis right when it unmasksand exposes
IsraeliandZionist imperialism.
75. But look what UP1 says-your favourite United States
news agency, which you so often quote. Look what an
official spokesmansays,one who admits that a war isgoing
on after the adoption of the Security Council’s third
decision calling for a cease-fire.What do you call that?
Who is guilty? The aggressor,
who has made aggression
and
the seizureof foreign territory the cardinal principle of his
policy. No one will justify suchacts.

79. If I am mistaken, my respected colleague and friend,
the representative of France, Ambassador de Guirimgaud,
will correct me, but I think that he has agreedto participate
in resumed five-Power consultations.

76, The next report, at 6.57 this evening, reads:
“On the arrival of the United Nations Forces, Israelis
began carrying out concentrated air strikes against the
Egyptian forces in the western sector of the Suez
CZlIld.“J
NOW

80. I have not spoken about this yet to my neighbour on
the left, the representative of the United Kingdom, Sir
Donald Maitland, but his predecessorsstated that they were
prepared to resume consultations among the five permanent
members in order to assume the responsibility resting with
the permanent members of the Security Council under the
Charter.

your lies stand exposed.

77. My respected friend, Mr. Baroody, saysthat he did not
want to use strong words like “lies”, “calumny” and so
forth. I agree with him. But when you are dealing with liars
and counterfeiters, you have to call things by, their real
names. When we hear mendacious statements by the
representative of Israel, they have to be exposed. And here
we have concrete documentary evidence from a United
States news agency, UPI, which exposes the lies that the
Israeli representative has just told today at the meeting of
the Security Council. Such are the facts, such are the words
of the Israeli representative, and such is reality. The
Security Council must certainly draw the appropriate
conclusions-urgently
and without delay.

81. So we have three in favour, one against and one
refusing to participate, and the one who is against uses as
his excuse the attitude of the one who is refusing to
participate. That is the situation. I am telling you that this
is in fact the state of affairs. That is why the five permanent
members of the Security Council cannot act in concert in
this important international matter. And what is more,
experience has shown that one of them does not even take
part in the voting on these questions; it merely accuses
others without doing anything itself. The easiest thing is to
adopt that kind of position.

78. My respected friend, Mr. Baroody, has accused two
Powers of assuming the initiative and submitting a cease-fire
proposal in the Security Council. That can be interpreted
and viewed in various ways, but he knows that the world
approved of this action. It is another matter that the
aggressor remains intractable and that the Security Council
has to take steps to curb him-steps that my delegation has
insisted on, is insisting on, and will continue to insist on.
Mr. Baroody said that the five Powers must take part, that
they are excluded by decision of the Council from being
part of the armed forces of the United Nations, and so on.
But, Mr. Baraody, you are perfectly well acquainted with
the situation; either you do not know or you are not
speaking the truth here. I do not suspect you of saying
anything that is not true; it seems that you have simply
forgotten. What is the real situation? There were consultations on the Middle East among four of the permanent
members of the Security Council more than two years ago.
The United States-to be frank-wrecked those talks. That
was before the restoration of the lawful rights of China in
the United Nations, for which we had been fighting for
more than 20 years and in which we were finally successful
together with you-but no, I think you, Mr. Baroody, were
against that. We were asking all the time for the consultations to be resumed. The Americans told us, “Once China
comes in we shall be together.” So we agreed and were very
anxious to have China take part in the consultations. The
Chinese arrived, after the well-known decision by the
General Assembly, and began their activities in the United
Nations.
It is true that their activities included slandering
the Soviet Union, but that is another matter and is of little
concern to us in this case. However, when the question
arose in the Security Council, on numerous occasions, of
resuming consultations among the five permanent members
of the Council, with the participation of China, China
refused, and it is continuing to refuse. You know that,
Mr. Baroody. And the Americans say, “If the Chinese do
not want to take part, we cannot resume the consulIn other words, the Americans are using the
tations.”
Chinese attitude in this matter as an excuse.

82. In conclusion, I should like to bring to the attention
of the Security Council and its members the statement
made on the Middle East today, 26 October 1973, by
Comrade I,. I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, at
a meeting of the World Congress of Peace-Loving Forces:
“The struggle of the Arab peoples to eliminate the
consequences of Israeli aggression is at the same time a
struggle to establish a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
“The centre of tension in that region has now set off a
war for the fourth time. Military operations this month
have attained unheard-of intensity and have claimed
numerous victims on both sides, including the civilian
victims of the barbarous bombing of peaceful towns and
villages in Egypt and Syria”-and I emphasize, barbarous
bombing by the Israeli armed forces. “The most recent
events demonstrated in a particularly graphic way to the
whole world the dangerous nature of the situation that
has arisen in the Middle East and the urgent need to
change it.
“The actual course of events is, of course, well known
to you. I should therefore like to discussat this time the
basic questions of principle. What are the root causesof
the military conflicts that have occurred periodically in
that region, including the present war? The answer,from
our point of view, is clear. Those reasons are: Israel’s
seizure of Arab lands as a result of the aggressionit has
committed, the stubborn unwillingness of Tel Aviv to
take into account the lawful rights of the Arab peoples,
and the support given to Israel’s aggressivepolicy by
those forces in the capitalist world which are trying to
prevent the free and independent development of the
progressive Arab States.
“In recent years, the Soviet Union has repeatedly
warned that the situation in the Middle East is explosive.
9

aggression and will never give up their lawful rights. The
Soviet Union firmly and consistently supports the just
demands of the Arab peoples.

Our policy on this matter is clear and consistent from
beginning to end. Guided by the general principles of
socialist foreign policy and having regard to the fact that
the Middle East is just a short distance from our frontiers,
we are interested in seeing a truly just and lasting peace
established in the Middle East and in seeing the security
of all the countries and peoples of that region guaranteed
as well as their right to arrange their lives in peace as they
see fit. That is why the Soviet Union has always insisted
that the lands occupied by Israel should be returned to
the Arab States and that the Palestinian people should
receive justice. The Soviet Union has pursued this policy
and will continue to pursue it in the future.

“The collective will of those who demand the establish.
ment of peace in the Middle East must triumph over the
recklessness of those who are breaking the peace. The
experience of the last few days requires us to be vigilant.
Urgent and decisive measures are needed to ensure that
the decisions calling for a cease-fire and the withdrawal of
troops are implemented.
“President Sadat of Egypt requested the Soviet Union
and the United States of America to send their represen.
tatives to the scene of hostilities in order to supervise the
implementation of the Security Council decision concerning the cease-fire. We have expressed our readiness to
comply with Egypt’s request and have already sent such
representatives. We hope that the United States Govern.
ment will act likewise. At the same time, we are
considering other possible measures which may be made
necessary by the circumstances.

“Since the resumption of military operations in the
Middle East at the beginning of this month, the Soviet
Union has maintained close contact with friendly Arab
States and has taken all the political measures in its power
ta help bring the war to an end and establish conditions
in which peace in the Middle East will be truly lasting for
all the States in that region.
“AS you are aware, on 22 and 23 October, on a
proposal by the Soviet Union and the United States of
America, the Security Council took two decisions calling
for an immediate cease-fire. On both occasions, Israel,
while paying lip service to compliance with the Council’s
decisions, in fact treacherously violated them by continuing its aggressive acts against Egypt. In seizing more and
more of the latter’s territory, Israel was completely
disregarding the Security Council’s demands for the
withdrawal of troops to the positions occupied by them
on the evening of 22 October.

“In connexion with the continuing violations of thi:
cease-fire of 25 October, the Security Council adopted a
decision to set up immediately a United Nations Entergency Force, to be sent to the scene of hostilities. \Ve
consider that this is a useful decision, and we hope that it
will contribute to the normalization of the situation.
“The Soviet Union is prepared to co-operate with all
countries concerned with a view to the normalization of
the situation in the Middle East. However, such co-opera.
tion cannot, of course, be helped by measures such as
those taken recently in certain circles in NATO countries,
involving the artificial fomenting of passions through the
dissemination of a variety of fantastic fabrications as to
the intentions of the Soviet Union in the Middle East.

“It is difficult to understand what the rulers of Israel
are hoping for when they pursue this adventurist course,
flouting the decisions of the Security Council and defying
world public opinion. Outside protection is obviously
playing a role here. However, this policy on the part of
the Israeli Government is costing the Israeli people dearly.
That Government’s attempt to ensure peace and security
for the State of Israel by forcibly seizing and holding
foreign territory is madness and is doomed to failure.
Such a course will bring Israel neither peace nor security.
rt will merely lead to greater international isolation for
Israel and will arouse still greater hatred of it by its
neighbours.”

“In the present situation, in our view, a more respnn.
sible, honest and constructive approach would be appru.
priate.
“I should like to emphasize that the Security Council
decision of 22 October provides not only for a cease-fire,
but also for the adoption of important steps tow&s
eliminating the very causes of the war. Hercin lies its great
value, The parties concernedmust immediately beginthr
practical implementation, in full, of the Security Council
resolution on the Middle East adopted on 22 November
1967.

83. I might note-leaving the text for a moment-that my
respected colleague, the representative of Zarnbia, damonstrated to us all and underscored in his statement today
how isolated Israel is internationally as a result of its
adventurist, aggressive policy. Zambia has severed diplomatic relations with Israel. One African country after
another is severing diplomatic relations with Israel as a sign
of protest against its international gangsterism and against
its aggression and its attack on the Arab States.
84. I shall continue
Mr. Brezhnev’s statement:

with

my

quotation

“Let me recall that that resolution emphasizes‘the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war’. II
provides for the withdrawal of Israel armed forces frtrn
territories occupied during the 1967 conflict. It calls for
respect for and acknowledgement of the sovercigrrtl,
territorial integrity and political independenceof ev+
State in the area and their right to live in peace.It spe&j
also of the necessityfor achievmga just settlementof tire
refugee problem-in other words, guarantees for th;
legitimate rights of the Arab people of Palestine.

from

“The valiant struggle of the Arabs and the growing
solidarity .of the Arab States demonstrates convincingly
that they will never reconcile themselves to Israeli

“It is not difficult to see that if all these provisiilnJ
adopted in 1967 had been put into effect at that tin!?,
10

there would have been lasting peace in the Middle East
for six years by now. However, that did not happen,
because of the continued short-sighted and adventurist
policy of the ruling circles in Israel, encouraged by
outside forces.
“Following the spirit and the letter of the Security
Council decision adopted on Monday, 22 October, the
parties concerned should immediately begin negotiations
under appropriate auspices aimed at establishing a just
and durable peace in the Middle East. The significance of
such talks cannot be over-estimated. Their participants
bear historic responsibility. As far as the Soviet Union is
concerned, I can say that it is ready to make, and will
make, a constructive contribution in this regard. We
firmly advocate that all-1 repeat, all-States and peoples
in the Middle East must be guaranteed peace, security and
the inviolability of their borders. The Soviet Union is
ready to take part in the corresponding guarantees.
“In our view, one of the most urgent tasks facing all
partisans of peace, all peace-loving forces in the present
circumstances is to strive for the immediate and total
implementation
of the Security Council decision of 22
October 1973. This is essential for the free and independent development of all States and peoples in the Middle
East. This is in keeping with the interests of many States
in Europe and Asia, Africa and America, for which the
normalization
of political and economic life in that
important area of the world is of considerable significance. Finally, the urgency of the situation which has
recently arisen in the Middle East and the risk that the
conflict may spread show with great clarity how important it is to solve this problem in the interests of
strengthening universal peace.”

90. I have instructed General Siiiasvuo to move advance
elements of the Force, namely, those advance elements
which have arrived in the meantime-forward with the
maximum possible speed.
91. The situation regarding the deployment of UNTSO
observers is as follows: There are at present nine United
Nations patrols on the Egyptian side and six on Israeli-held
territory. Those patrols are now in the vicinity of the
forward positions of the respective forces.
92. The reports from those patrols are still sketchy. The
two patrols near the Suez City area observed three firing
incidents and an air attack in that area on 26 October. The
observers could not determine the nationality of the
aircraft owing to darkness,
93. That is the information which we have received from
General Siilasvuo up to now. I shall be able to report
further to the Council tomorrow after having received a
report from General Siilasvuo on the exact situation of the
Emergency Force.
94. The PRESIDENT:
Egwt.

I call on the representative of

95. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpretation from
French): I shall be very brief. This is a grave and serious
moment.
96. We have heard a series of distortions of fact from the
representative of Israel. That is usual for him and we are
sure that the Council is also accustomed to it,
97. First of all, I take the liberty of recalling that Egypt
did not commit any aggression on 6 October. Egypt only
exercised its right to legitimate defence, a right conferred
upon it by the Charter and international law, in an
endeavour to place its own feet again where they should be.

85. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the Secretary
General, who wishes to make a statement.

98. Another distortion was the contention that Israel had
sent blood plasma and medicine to civilians in Suez and to
OUI’ troops in Sinai. The representative of Israel read out a
Reuters dispatch, one that had been handed to him during
the meeting. Probably, he read it rather hastily. I have that
same dispatch before me and I shall read it out.

86. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I wish to inform the
Council briefly of the developments so far in connexion
with the interim arrangements which I proposed yesterday
to the Council.
87. General Siilasvuo has set up a provisional headquarters
in Cairo.

“A convoy of 14 trucks due to leave Cairo today with
Red Cross supplies of blood plasma and medicines for the
town of Suez was delayed because of conditions placed
by the Israelis on its passage. The spokesman said there
was still no list of prisoners of war held by the Egyptians
and the Syrians.“”

88. The first aircraft took off from Cyprus for Cairo at
1432 hours New York time, that is, 2032 hours local time,
with 30 members of the Finnish contingent, including its
Commander. Further flights are leaving at forty-five-minute
intervals, carrying 30 to 40 men and two vehicles each. All
these aircraft are Hercules transport aircraft made available
by the Government of the United Kingdom. Flights of
VC-10 aircraft, each carrying 130 men, will aho be taking
off shortly from Cyprus. That means that the first elements
of the Force have already arrived in Egypt.

99. What we can gather from this dispatch is that a convoy
of 14 trucks did in fact head towards Suez but it was
delayed because of the conditions imposed by Israeli
authorities, which are that the list of Israeli prisoners
captured by Egypt and Syria has not been submitted.
Therefore, the Israelis have imposed conditions on their
assistance to the victims and the wounded.

89. The entire group of the contingents of Austria,
Finland and Sweden should have arrived in Cairo by
tomorrow morning, 27 October. All contingents are being
dispatched with a basic scale of vehicles, personal weapons
and essential equipment, including radios, tents and rations.

100. That is the truth. Let the representative of Israel and
his country stop pretending that they are the saviours and
benefactors of mankind.
11

country of Israel that only wanted to live peacefully, safe
from the attacks of its neighbours.

101. I feel constrained to say that this war being waged by
the Israelis is contrary to all moral laws and legal tenets and
that they will pay for it dearly.

109. In 1967 the conduct of the representativeof Israelia
the Council was a sorry comedy which became a sad
tragedy leadingto the expulsion of hundredsof thousands
of Syriansfrom their territory in the Golan Heights,chased
out by Israelitroops.

102. I also wish to tell the representative of Israel that
they shall not destroy Egypt, nor the Egyptians. Egypt has
survived for thousands of years. It has overcome many
crises, even graver ones than this that is imposed upon US by
Israel. If the Israelis wish to live in that region, it is not
through slaughter and genocide that they can ensure their
place in the area.

110. This time we are watching a repetition of the 1967
Israeli comedy. But there is this variation, that today the
goal is not merely to gaina few yards of territory, but over
and above all to kill tens of thousands of people by
withholding water, food and medicine. I do not dare seek
words to describewhat is occurring, and I would not callit
a comedy. I must call it a tragedy, or a comedy intendedto
disguisethe tragedy. The comedy is taking place here
before all our eyes, acted out by the representativeof
Israel, and the tragedy is taking place there, on the Suez
Canal. Are we to allow this Israeli hypocrisy to go
uncheckedand the plan to commit unprecedentedgenocide
to succeed?

103. Before I conclude, and since I have the floor, I wish
to welcome the noble attitude of Zambia, a sister African
nation, on its decision to sever diplomatic relations with
Israel.
104. The PRESIDENT:
I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, in exercise of
his right of reply.
105. Mr. ISMAIL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
ffom French): The allegations of the representative of Israel
regarding the refusal by Syrian forces to respect the
cease-fire on the Suez front are so tenuous and so easy to
rebut that it would appear superfluous to answer them.
However, history is very rich in its many teachings, and we
must learn from it.

111. Can eachand every one of us not rise in indignation,
disdainand contempt at the efforts made by the representative of Israel to lead us to believe them and thus mock
our intelligence?
112. Of course, Israel is going to go on denying this
violation of the cease-fire as it did in 1967, until its
pre-establishedplan of the Generalshas been carried out.
But are we goingto allow them to repeattheir 1967tactics,
or does the Security Council intend to face its responsi.
bilities? We are pressedfor time, and if the Council does
not act asspeedilyas possibleit will be too late, and it will
be no good weeping over the victim. History will have no
meaningasa sourceof lessons
to man.

106. We all know what Israel’s manoeuvres were during
the 1967 war in Syria. At that time the Security Council
adopted resolution 235 (1967), ordering a cease-fire. Israel
did not respect that resolution. Its forces launched their
offensive against Syria. Then the Security Council adopted
a second resolution, 236 (1967), again ordering a cease-fire
and a return of the forces to the positions they occupied on
9 June 1967. That same resolution 236 (1967) in its
preamble stated that the two parties-that is, Syria and
Israel-had officially notified the Security Council that they
accepted the cease-fire. But despite that, Israel again failed
to respect the cease-fire and, instead of withdrawing to the
positions of 9 June, its forces continued the offensive on
Syrian soil until 12 June 1967. Those facts were confirmed
by General Blazar, the present Chief of Staff of Israel who,
in 1967, was the Commander of the Israeli forces on the
Syrian front.

113. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representativeof
Sudanin exerciseof his right of reply.

107. In an article published in the Israeli newspaper
Aharon, General Elazar relates how, on orders from General
Dayan, he launched his attack on Syria on 9 June 1967; in
other words after Israel had notified the Security Council
of its acceptance of the cease-fire.

114. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): I had not planned to take
the floor tonight after the presentation of the present
violation of the cease-fire-indeed, the aggressionof Israel
against Egyptian civilians and troops this morning-but
there are certain remarks I ought to make about the
statement of Mr. Tekoah, in which he mentioned the
Sudan.It is known that when the opportunity isgiven to a
non-memberof the Council to addressthe Council we
expect him to heed the rules of decency and respect for
membersof this augustbody. Membersof the Council are
entrustedwith a crucial task, in the performance of which
they shouldbe helped by whoever takesa seat at this table.

108. It is through the successive violations of the cease-fire
that in 1967 Israel occupied parts of the Golan Heights in
Syria, but I have told the Council of this in my statement.
However, what I did not say, and what I mustnow say for
the enlightenment of membersof the Council as well as
public opinion in the United Statesand elsewhere,is that
the representative of Israel in June of 1967 constantly
reiterated to the Security Council that the Israeli forces
were not violating the cease-fireand were not advancingin
Syria, and that the allegationsof the representativeof Syria
to this effect were false and slanderousagainstthe little

115. The performance of the representative of Israel
today, although similar to his customary manner,wasmost
exceptionally irrelevant and improper. His specialreference
to my country did not help him in the least in what he was
trying to convey to us-if he wastrying to convey anything
at all. The Sudanis not here to give lessonsto others, asthe
representativeof Israelthought we were. Our missionin the
Council-and my country is a mandated member of the
Council-is a mission of peace and a mandate to promote
the causeof justice for those to whom injustice is done: I
repeat,to thoseto whom injusticeis done.
12

II6. Egypt and Syria are but two examples of the victims
of Israeli aggression. Their case we shall always defend, and
not their case alone but also the case of the people whose
land the Israelis have taken, namely the Palestinian people.

122. What Israel is trying, and trying very hard, to do now
really approaches brutal genocide under the protection of a
cease-fire called for by this Council, so whatever sort of
pretexts or nonsense that we might hear from Mr. Tekoah is
but camouflage under which Israel can go ahead with its
cynical and disastrous plans, which have no consideration at
all for human beings.

117. But if the Sudan has to speak at all about the Israeli
aggression, it is not alone in this case. Virtually everybody
in this Council, I would say, is against Israel and against its
aggression, and they have various reasons for being so, not
least that of defending the case of Member States whose
countries have been occupied and peoples whose rights have
been denied by Israel.

123. Let us remember that what Israel is doing now is
bombarding the cities of Ismailia and Suez, which are
inhabited by civilians, in the hope that those two cities
which stand between them and the Egyptian army on the
other side will fall and they will then encircle the army and
starve it. Israel’s aim is starvation, and the example of its
stopping the Red Cross from carrying provisions and
medical supplies to the army on the other side is just one
example. So the Council must be careful about designs
which could be carried out at any time, indeed, at dawn
tomorrow.

118. There are other reasons for the Sudan to oppose
Israel. The Sudan lies on the Red Sea and is in the vicinity
of the countries which Israel plans to take, but it is not the
Sudan alone that is on the Red Sea: there are the countries
of Europe, of Africa, of Asia, whose living and welfare are
built on the Suez Canal, and it is Israel which has caused
the closing of that Canal. There are others who have
reasons, even right now, to suffer because of Israel’s
aggression and they also, I am sure, will speak and speak
loudly about the Israeli aggression. I am not going to quote
any names, regions or countries, but it is well known to
Israel that there are countries which have strong reasonsfor
opposing its policy. As for Africa, Africa has spoken. Even
to the last minute, Africa is completely against Israeli
aggression and Israeli occupation of the territory of other
countries.

124. The Council is faced with an immense responsibility
which falls not only on the Council as a whole but
principally on only two members. I do not call them the
supepPowers, but they are the two big Powers,the United
States of America and the Soviet Union, which have a
special responsibility in the present conflict. Indeed, one of
those two Powers is still providing Israel with arms,
weapons and ammunition with which Israel is continuing its
aggression, right up to the present day, in the Middle East.
We all know, even non-soldiers like myseIf, that without
ammunition and without being resupplied with military
equipment {srael could not have carried on the war-Indeed,
by its own estimation and estimates made in this countryfor six days had it not been for the resupply which has been
carried out, up to 9,000 tons in 10 days, and which is still
going on.

119. Mr. Tekoah should at least realize that if we are
fighting-and
we are fighting in the Sudan, and so is
Israel-we are fighting for two different reasons. Israel is
fighting to occupy and to deny the rights of other peoples,
but we are fighting to give peoples their rights which God
has given. I repeat, which God has given, in their own lands
and their own territories.

125. Let me say that we have admitted making a mistake
right from the beginning, in that we accepted in good faith
the draft resolution which was presented to us, but quite
rightly, too, we were under the impression that certain
discussions had taken place as a result of which the
cease-tire proposal was brought to us here in the Council in
order that we might adopt a resolution, and we did adopt
it. We reahzed from the beginning that the draft resolution
did not come with the special machinery which wasgoing
to control the cease-fne-to the advantage of whom we do
not know. But, at the same time, we must admit that we
have ourselves delayed in placing the observersand eventually the Emergency Force in place and in time, because of
the objection of Mr. Dayan and instructions by the Israeli
armed forces west of the Canal to the United Nations
observers, and through continuous bombardments of
Egyptian cities and the scaring of United Nations observers.
The idea is more delay, hence more aggression.

120. Mr, President, I beg you to excuse me for addressing
myself to Mr. Tekoah, contrary to my habit as a member of
the CounciI in addressing Council members. And I am not
piaying to the gallery, because 1 have no gallery here to
listen to me. Mr. Tekoah, as we know, is alwaysplaying to
the gallery and the Zionist-oriented information media of
this country. That is not what I am doing. I am trying to
argue a case, and a just case.
121. Leaving Mr. Tekoah alone, allow me to go into the
subject
of today, which has been presented by
Mr. El-Zayyat. However, this is not the first time we are
Iistening to reports of new violations and new aggressions
by Israel after a resolution of this Council on the cease-fire
at 1650 hours GMT on 22 October, but right here, on the
second day, when Israel committed its first breach of the
cease-fire, my delegation warned the Council fhat what
Israel had done in 1967 and was doing on the first day of
the cease-fire was bound to be repeated again, again and
again. So today is not the end of it. Israel will go on with it,
because it is part and parcel of its policy. I must say it is
taking advantage rather dishonourably of a situation where
there should not be war, where this Council is trying its
best to bring about an effective cease-fire and after that to
move towards a permanent and durable peace.

126. I would suggest to this Council that wehave reached
a situation where we are faced with two or three alternatives, and I must say that two of them are rather cynical to
think of. The best of them is that the Council should really
bring about immediately an effective cease-firein place and
the other, the Israeli one, which I do not really believe, is
that the balance of military power should be replaced.
13

134. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative af
China, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.

127. In other words, if we want these people to kill each
other, let us give them an even chance of being fairly and
squarely armed. That is sinister and disastrous, and I am
sure nobody would believe in that. But then the alternative
is that this Council, and indeed the countries which are
responsible for peace and security in that area because of
the events to which they were parties, should take an
effective part. But I know for certain that one of them is
expressing its wish deliberately in this Council. I know the
other has the power to make Israel accept a cease-fire and,
from there, to move to a consideration of peace, which is
what we are all looking for.

135. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from C’/lirme):
I did not originally intend to take the floor today, but after
hearing the statements made by the Foreign Minister of
Egypt and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Syria, we feel
that the Security Council must seriously deal with the grave
situation that has arisen, and strongly condemn Israel forits
criminal act of continuing to expand its aggression-a
criminal act which is inseparable from the two super.
Powers, for which they bear unshirkable responsibility.
136. Moreover, Mr. Malik once again has used the Council
as a forum in which to engage in unwarranted slanderand
attack against China. I am therefore compelled to saya few
more words in that connexion.

128. I have more to say, but perhaps I should not take any
more time. I wish only to finish by saying again to
Mr. Tekoah that my country is not trying to pursue a
policy of war. It is a policy of peace-but a peace which is
based on the complete withdrawal of the Israeli occupation
armies from the territories occupied since June 1967 and
restoration of the Palestinian rights, which we always have
to remember.

137. Mr. Malik mentioned consultations among tbs five
Powers-namely, the five permanent members of the
Security Council. But there never existed in the Council
any such so-called five-Power consultations. In the past there
were so-called four-Power consultations among the four
permanent members of the Security Council, but those
were outside the United Nations, not in the Security
Council; moreover, no one-neither the Security Council
nor the General Assembly-had authorized them to carry
out such consultations. Even those so-called four-Power
consultations had broken down long before China catneto
the United Nations. It was because of your failure,
Mr. Malik, to make a deal in the consultations betwcenpu
and the United States that you fell out and broke up that
partnership. That is the inglorious historical background of
the so-called five-Power consultations.

129. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
the United States of America, who wishes to exercise his
right of reply.
130. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): Let me
reaffirm once again what I have said repeatedly here before:
In word and .deed the United States stands for strict
observance of the cease-fire.
131. In the view of my delegation, the most constructive
contribution we in this chamber can make at this stage is to
proceed systematically, as quickly as possible, on our
mission of ending the fighting and beginning peace negotiations. We cannot accomplish anything by repeatedly resorting in this chamber to exchanges of unverifiable charges and
counter-charges when objective, unchallengeable facts are
needed. We do not need more reckless accusations: we need
responsible action. We can proceed to implement resolution
340 (1973), which was sponsored by eight non-aligned
members of the Security Council, and which, if carried out,
can put us on the road to real peace.

138. Mr. Malik accused China of refusing to take part in
his proposed five-Power consultations. That is indeed true.
China refuses and will refuse to take part in the so&ed
five-Power consultations. The reasons are very simple: we
have all along been opposed to a big Power striking pulilical
deals behind the backs of the Palestinians and other Arab
peoples.
139. The two super-Powers, the United States and the
Soviet Union, for their respective interests and al Ihe
expense of the interests of the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples, have recently made dirty deals behind tbc scenes
and tried to impose the so-called agreement between ti~ern
on the Security Council. That is a most recent cxaldple.
Members of the Security Council present here, will1 the
exception of you two, have all been kept in the dark.5lany
delegations have said that up to now they are not yet dear
as to the total content of the political deal made by youin
Moscow.

132. I have heard Ambassador Malik’s onesided version of
history before, and I will not reply in kind, because our two
Governments have a special responsibility to lead the way
to peace, and the moment is too grave for that kind of talk.
I must take exception, however, to Ambassador Malik’s
resort to the habit of selecting a phrase from the Secretary
of State’s press conference and reading it out of context. I
should perhaps express resentment over such a debater’s
trick, but instead 1 will thank the Ambassador for advertising Mr. Kissinger’s statements. I have sent a complete text
of Mr. Kissinger’s news conference remarks to each of the
United Nations Missions in New York, because I thought
objective readers would be impressed with the Secretary’s
fair-minded description of events and American policy at
this period of history.

140. How can you expect China to participate in such
criminal and ugly activities? China will never participate in,
and is firmly opposed to, such activities, because they
betray and sell out the interests of the Palestinian and other
Arab peoples.

133. If you have found Ambassador Malik’s sample
titillating, dear colleagues, let me suggest that you will fmd
Mr. Kissinger’s statements, taken in their entirety, even
more interesting and far more balanced than some of the
remarks that you have heard this evening.

141. Mr. Malik has always assumed the air of a benefactur,
as if the People’s Republic of China owed the restoration of
its lawful rights in the United Nations entirely to Mr. bitdk
14

and the Soviet Union. He seizes every opportunity to boast
about the “merits” of the Soviet Union in this regard.
However, many representatives in the United Nations know
how painful it was for the Soviet delegation to see the
restoration of the lawful rights of the People’s Republic of
China in the United Nations. Your own people said that it
was a “bitter victory”.
142. Mr. Malik has another bad habit. He thinks that since
it was due to the merits and benevolence of the Soviet
Union that China was able to come to the United Nations,
then after the entry of China in the United Nations China
should act according to the direction of the baton of the
Soviet Union. You are wrong again, Mr. Ma&. You are
totally wrong. You have made the wrong choice, and you
have picked the wrong place. You have forgotten that
China is a sovereign State, It will follow no one’s baton,
including yours, Mr. Malik. Perhaps you are accustomed to
bossing around in your own home, and probably also in
your so-called “community”.
However, this is neither your
own house nor your “community”.
This is the United
Nations, consisting of 135 sovereign States. Your ways
won’t work here. It is not possible for one super-Power to
order the United Nations about at will, nor is it possible for
you to do so even if you are tied up with another
super-Power. Such are the facts.
143. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Israel, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
144. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, I did not realize
when I asked to speak that I would be following the
representative
of China. By tradition I respond to his
comments regarding the Middle East situation with ancient
Chinese stories or proverbs filled with the wisdom of the
Chinese people. Today I should like, however, simply to
give him one assurance. As he has on a number of occasions
alleged that the Soviet Union is an ally of Israel, I should
Iike to dispel his apprehensions and calm his fears. Were the
Soviet Union an ally of Israel it would not have been
following
the kind of policy that it is following in the
Middle East. It would have supported peace and not
aggression and it would not have, for years, been sending
offensive
weapons which made the present hostilities
possible. I have expressed this assurance to the representative of China in the modest hope that perhaps it might
contribute
to some degree, at least, to greater understanding between the great Powers, the permanent members
of the Security Council. Much of the trouble and suffering
in the Middle East is due to the misunderstandings and the
confrontation between the great Powers.
145. As for the statement which we heard from the
representative
of the Soviet Union, it really does not
deserve another answer. We are accustomed by now to the
Stalinist lexicon from which he has not been able to free
himself despite the passage of time. But I think that
everyone who listened to me and then heard his comments
realized that he was using the customary method which he
has employed here for years, that is, to take a point, to
distort it, to set it up as a point of departure and then draw
conclusions. He has read out to us a number of cables from
UPI reporting the fighting that went on at certain times
during today, and on the basis of the claim that I said that

the entire day passed in tranquillity,
usual abuse and slander and malice.

he resorted to the

146. Now I said nothing of the kind. On the contrary, I
drew the attention of the Council to two complaints which
I submitted earlier today to the Secretary-General regarding
Egyptian violations of the cease-fire. I simply pointed out
that no one, not even the representative of the Soviet
Union, should expect the Israeli forces to remain passive
while being attacked by the Egyptian forces and to refrain
from returning fire.
147. I have been for some years in the United Nations,
and, as I listened to the representative of the Soviet Union
today again speaking of the support his country has been
giving to Arab aggression by sending arms to the Arab
States, I could not but feel that we were all witnessing a
second landmark in the Soviet Union’s contribution to the
history of the United Nations. The first one, I think-a
memorable one, an unforgettable one-happened when
Premier Khrushchev took off his shoe and beat it on the
General Assembly table as a contribution to international
friendship and comity, and the second one came at
yesterday’s meeting and at today’s meeting and at several
previous meetings in the course of this debate in the
Security Council, when the representative of a Member
State, a permanent member of the Security Council, openly
and unashamedly gloated over the bloodshed occurring
today in the Middle East as a result of the arms which have
been supplied by his Government through the years-arms
which have brought about renewed aggression instead of
making it possible to try to build jointly, calmly, constructively, peace in the region.
148. However, that was not the purpose of my intervention. I agree with those who feel that there has been all too
much acrimony, polemics and phraseology, too many
meaningless slogans thrown across this table. 1 think it is
time to look at facts, and the best way to be able to deal
with them correctly is to try to avoid distorting them.
Therefore I should like to refer very briefly to the
statements made by the representatives of three peaceloving Arab States, all three participating in the renewed
aggression that has been taking place for three weeks in the
Middle East. Peace-loving States: two of them, the Sudan
and Syria, officially, publicly, proclaiming that Israel,
another State Member of the United Nations, has no right
to exist as a sovereign independent nation and that the
Jewish people have no right to freedom and self-determination as other peoples of the world have; and the third
one, Egypt, striving year after year, action after action, by
aggression with irregular forces and by support for terror
warfare, to achieve the same objective openly proclaimed
by the other two partners, namely the destruction of the
Jewish State and the annihilation of the Jewish people.
149. As I listened to the representative of the Sudan
preaching to us-it is difficult to apply a different term to
what we heard from him-1 decided that I should not
reiterate the grave responsibility which rests with his
Government for having joined in a campaign of aggression
that is still raging today and is the direct cause of the
suffering of which he and his colleagues have been
complaining here today. I thought I should also not rccah

to the representative who spoke of human rights and even
resorted to the term “genocide” the genocide by his
Government of half a million of his own citizens in the
south of Sudan. I felt I should refer only to one thing, and
that is his claim that the Sudan brings to this Organization a
message of peace. In the Middle East the Sudan has in fact
brought a very special message, and the name of its capital,
Khartoum, will for ever remain inscribed in the annals of
peace and war. The message of Khartoum is the infamous
resolution adopted in September 1967 by the Heads of
Arab States, which declared: “No peace, no negotiations,
no agreement with Israel”. This is the message of peace
which seems to be still guiding his Government, the
Government of Syria, the Government of Egypt and all the
others that have joined them in the vicious aggressionof the
Day of Atonement.
150. The representatives of Syria in the United Nations
have only one story to tell and one argument to put
forward when it comes to discussing the history of the last
few years, and that is the allegation that in 1967 Israel
violated a United Nations cease-fireresolution. Let us recall
what happened in 1967. Have all the United Nations
records been burnt? All the verbatim records of Security
Council debates in which one complaint after another
against aggression from Syrian territory launched against
peaceful Israeli villages and towns in the Jordan Valley has
been discussed-are all these forgotten? Has history simply
erased the fact that for a number of years, reaching a
climax in the first few months of 1967, there were
continuous armed attacks perpetrated from Syrian territory
against Israel, against Israeli territory, against the Israeli
population; that it was that fact that constituted a direct
element in bringing about the outbreak of hostilities in
June of that year?

And then the Deputy Foreign Minister proceeded, as the
verbatim record will show, to say: “But Israel, despite this
was found to have been guilty of attack.” Nothing oft&
kind. He stopped at that very point in citing the resolution
and continued in his own words, baseless and completely
unfounded, because the resolution refers to both sides,
because the resolution calls on both sides to put an end to
the hostilities, hostilities that continued because Syria
continued to attack the Israeli towns and villages which it
dominated from the Golan Heights.
155. And finally, one brief word about the statement
which the representative of Egypt found it necessary,
advisable, to make before this Council. He referred to the
question of humanitarian supplies which are being trans.
ported to the encircled Egyptian forces with the assistance
of the Israeli authorities and of the Israeli forces. He quoted
from a cablegram which had arrived from Geneva. He
omitted entirely the first part, which I placed on record and
which speaks, in the words of a spokesman of the
International Red Cross Committee in Geneva, of supplies,
of medicine, of plasma, being flown to the Egyptian lines
by Israelis in an Israeli helicopter and transferred to the
Egyptians by the Red Cross. He omitted that completely
though it was part of the same cable from which he read,
And he read the following sentence-and I should like ta
repeat it and request the members of the Council to pay
attention to it and to the conclusion deduced from it:
“A convoy of 14 trucks due to leave Cairo today with
Red Cross supplies of blood plasma and medicines for the
town of Suez was delayed because of conditions placed
by the Israelis on its passage. The spokesman said there
was still no list of prisoners of war held by the Egyptians
and Syrians.”
1.56. As I brought to the attention of the Security Council
the other day, three weeks have elapsed since the opening
of the Egyptian-Syrian aggression. Up to this very day,
Egypt and Syria have not transmitted, in accordance with
the Geneva Conventions, lists of Israeli prisoners of war
held by them, with the exception of the 48 men to whom 1
referred in my letter to the Secretary-General. NOW,I m
ready to agree that one condition was placed on the
transfer of Egyptian supplies through Israeli lines, under the
auspices of the International Red Cross Committee, to
encircled Egyptian troops-and that condition was that the
Egyptian Government, the Egyptian armed forces should be
humane, should act as human beings, as Israel is acting, that
Egypt should apply the Geneva Conventions and should
observe the humanitarian international obligations imposed
on it.

151. But let me once and for all put on record what we
have been continuously trying to point out when we have
to face the empty falsehoods being hurled at Members of
the United Nations by the Arab representatives.
152. On what is based this argument that Israel violated
the cease-fire? Of course, it is perfectly all right to forget
what preceded the hostilities of 1967. It is all right to
forget that for years Syria proclaimed openly that its aim is
to shatter the existence of the State of Israel and worked in
that direction. But what happened in those days of June
1967?
153. We heard the Deputy Foreign Minister of a State
Member of the United Nations come here, throw charges,
accusatidns, calumnies, at others and then say, “Now let me
prove to you by quoting from a Security Council resolution.” Before doing so, he said: “I shall prove to you how
Israel violated the cease-fire, how Israel was registered as
being the attacker and the aggressorin 1967”-a tale which
we hear again and again, here, in Committees of the General
Assembly and elsewhere.

157. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union in exercise of his right of reply.
158. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I provided infor,nation in
response to a question put by Mr. Baroody concerning the
attitude of the five permanent members of the Security
Council to the Middle East question, the five permanent
members of the Security Council being those which bear
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security in accordance with the Charter and
United Nations practice.
(translation

154. And then he read out the first preambular paragraph
of that resolution:
“Noting that the Governments of Israel and Syria have
announced their mutual acceptance of the Council’s
demand for a cease-fire,“. [resolution 235 (1967).]
16

from

Russian):

159. My statement accurately and truthfully reflects the
position of the five permanent members with regard to this
question, and especially with regard to consultations and
voting on the resolutions. It is not surprising that, as a
Russian proverb has it, truth pricks the eye. The truth has
pricked the eye of the Chinese representative. Since he is
not in a position to refute the truth, he has resorted to his
usual routine, hackneyed methods and has brought out his ’
standard quota of slanders against the Soviet Union. He also
began to bully the United Nations and its members with
talk of a diktat or an imposition. There is another Russian
proverb which states “If the mother-in-law is a bad woman,
she will not even believe her own daughter-in-law”.

to ask a question. Mr. Kissinger noted the fact that Israel
had violated a Security Council decision-the resolution
which you and I, Mr, Scali, introduced in the Security
Council and defended. I am entitled to ask: what has
Mr. Kissinger done, after having noted the violation and the
seizure of additional Egyptian territory, in order to ensure
that Israel implements that resolution? I am entitled to ask
that question. I did not in any way distort what wassaid by
Mr. Kissinger, and the idea of doing that had not even
occurred to me. But I am entitled to ask that question,

160. From this very malicious reply, only one conclusion
can be drawn, and that is quite an obvious one: China and
its representative in the United Nations do not wish to
promote a settlement in the Middle East. They would
prefer the Suez Canal to be in the hands of Israel, rather
than those of Egypt. They would prefer Israeli forces to
remain in the occupied territories. That is where the essence
of their policy lies; their objective is quite obvious.

166. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): I regret that I must
speak again but I must make it clear to the Council that my
quotation from the Reuter dispatch was meant to prove
that there were conditions put before the convoy could
proceed from Cairo. This was my only point in presenting
what was very clearly stated in this dispatch. I did not
fabricate it. I just mentioned that a convoy of 14 trucks
was supposed to proceed to the city of Suez with medical
supplies and plasma, and it has been delayed by conditions
imposed by Israel on the arrival of these supplies to their
destination. This was my point.

165. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Egypt who wishes to exercise his right of reply.

161. As for the slanders, there is a total alliance between
Zionism and “Chinaism”, and they are competing with each
other to see which will take first prize in slandering the
Soviet Union. In individual casesI am prepared to give the
first prize to the Chinese representative, and not to my
“ally”, as the Chinese representative calls him, the representative of Zionism. This is a joke; it is monstrous! To what
unthinkable limits will the Chinese representative go with
his fabrications?

167. The second one is on the attitude of the Government
of Israel regarding the application of the Geneva Convention. I should like to place on record in the Security
Council this official press release from the International
Committee of the Red Cross, which I have before me. This
official communique of the International Committee of the
Red Cross is dated 20 October 1973, published under press
release number 1176B, and it is entitled “Negative Reply
By Israel to ICRC Proposal”. It reads as follows:

162. I should like to refer to what I said at our last
meeting. I said that the delegation of the USSR will ignore
the standard quota of slanderous fabrications made by the
Chinese representative, and that it does not consider it
necessary to react to them. I repeat that in confirmation of
my position. The slanders and fabrications are so monstrous
that they do not even require refutation.

“Geneva, ICRC
“After the Governments of Syria, Iraq and Egypt had
sent in their replies accepting the proposal put forward by
the International Committee of the Red Cross, that
articles 46, 47 and 50 of Part IV-“Civilian Population”of the draft additional protocol to the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 relating to the protection of
victims of international armed conflicts, should forthwith
be observed, the Government of Israel replied on 19
October stating its position as follows:

163. As for the Israeli representative, I would advise him
to put an end to his practice of using slanders against
members of the Security Council in order to conceal Israel’s
aggression and international brigandage. It will not convince
anyone, and will not help anyone. That is your tactic-to
slander members of the Security Council and anyone else
and thus to divert attention from the substance of the
matter under discussion. Set aside your slanders and answer
cluestions: when will Israel put a stop to its shooting, and
when will it begin to withdraw its troops to the line of 22
October? That is what is being asked of you. And no
slanders against the members of the Security Council will
help you to conceal the aggression and international
brigandage carried out by Israel and its disregard, its
violation of three Security Council resolutions. Consequently, when you resort to slanders, you place yourself in
a ridiculous position. It convinces no one. It is not a serious
approach. It is merely an attempt to find something to say
to cover up Israel’s policy of aggression.

“ ‘In response to the ICRC appeal, the Government of
Israel states that it has strictly respected and will continue
to respect the provisions of public international law
which prohibits attacks on civilians and civilian objects’.
“The ICRC considers that the Government of Israel’s
communication is tantamount to a negative answerto its
proposal.“I repeat“ . . . that the Government of lsrael’s communication is
tantamount to a negative answer to its proposal. This is
all the more deplored by the ICRC since its proposal was
intended precisely to ensure for the civilian population of
the Middle East a more efficacious protection than that

164. Now I should like to say a few words to Mr. Scali. I
have accurately reproduced what was said by Mr. Kissinger
and I am entitled, as the representative of the Soviet Union,
17

provided by existing public international law, the texts of
which in respect of the subject go back to 1907 and
consequently do no longer correspond to situations to be
found in modern warfare.”
This is the end of the special communique published by the
International Red Cross.
168. The only conclusion to be drawn from this attitude is
that Israel intends to deprive the city of Suez of our
supplies of medical equipment. Israel resolves to fabricate
pretexts and allegations in order to deny the wounded
personnel such vital supplies as blood and medical equipment.
169. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
Israel in exercise of the right of reply.

of

170. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I shall be very brief. Indeed, I
did not intend to respond to the statement made by the
representative of Egypt because I think that, as all members
of the Council must have realized when listening to him, he
simply did not understand the point I made about a
humanitarian condition being put by an officer in the field,
or perhaps some representative of the Israeli authorities, for
allowing Egyptian medical supplies to be transported
through Israeli military lines to encircled Egyptian troops.

174. Under these circumstances, in conditions of war
imposed on us by the Egyptian-Syrian
aggression, the
Government of Israel responded to the suggestion by
saying: “Of course we have abided and we will continue to
abide by the letter and the spirit and ensure the purpose of
these articles of the draft protocols”-that
is, refrain from
hitting civilian targets. The only difference between our
attitude and the attitude of the Arab Governments on this
point is that they, as I explained, for constitutional reasons
have no difficulty at all about saying: ‘LYes, of course.
Suggest just about anything. It does not matter that it does
not exist and is not binding yet. We say ‘yes’ to everything
and we act in exactly the opposite way. We agree to any
formulation which restricts air actions or land actions, But
we do hit civilian villages; we do launch missiles against
towns and inhabited localities.”
175. The Israeli Government took a more responsibIe view
and said: “Yes, of course. We are acting exactly as required
and suggested.” That is why our formulation is of a more
general nature and does not refer to articles 47, 48 and I
think, 50-which
still do not exist-of
a non-existing
additional protocol which still has to be discussed by an
international conference.
176. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Sudan in exercise of the right of reply.

171. I should like simply to put on record a brief
clarification regarding the second point which he made,
quite dramatically.
He simply omitted-and
this is
unusual-a statement of what the proposal was, namely,
that the Government of Israel should commit itself to
several draft articles of a draft protocol which is at present
non-existent, which is going to be discussed in half a year’s
time at an international conference,

177. Mr. ABDULLA
(Sudan): I was very reluctant to
respond to the ungracious remarks of Mr. Tekoah about my
country, but I feel that the record must be set straight,
178. We are all familiar with Mr. Tekoah’s method of
using notes and making points which are often off the
record or points with which he plays up to the gallery. 1
think this one is completely off the record, and is therefore
for the benefit of the gallery because he used a very big lie
in referring to my statement. I never mentioned the Jews in
my statement. I never mentioned what he has been saying
about the Jews. But that is the usual record which he plays
in order to get more millions of tax-free dollars from the
American citizens. To what purpose? To continue this war
of aggression. That is exactly what he is always trying
to do.

172. The Israeli Government happens to be a democratic
Government. That constitutes a difficulty, apparently, in
the eyes of the representative of Egypt. Apparently, in
Egypt there is somebody who can say “yes” to whatever he
so desires to, and it really does not matter whether he says
“yes” but really means “no”. Throughout the years, after
all, we have been witnessing Egyptian protestations of
loyalty to the Charter of the United Nations at the very
time when Egyptian leaders used to proclaim publicly that
their objective was to destroy a Member of the United
Nations. We have all watched Egyptian aggression at the
very time when Egypt was saying that it was a peace-loving
country.

179. Now, he is wrong in quoting me as having said
anything about the Jewish people-whether
they are in
Israel or outside Israel. But, in any case, why should he talk
about the Jews who are citizens of other countries? Why
should he address them? What right does he or Israel have
over Jews outside Israel? I ask him.

173. But in Israel, as in all democratic countries and
Governments, it so happens that in order to ratify a
convention, an international protocol, two conditions are
necessary. The first is that one should know what one is
ratifying; one should have some formulation, some international instrument to agree to ratify. Now, that does not
exist in this case. Every one of us who has some knowledge
of international law will understand the difficulty. The
second condition is that, as I already said, in a democratic
Government there is a process of ratification; there is a
parliament; there is a Government. You do not have a single
person who simply puts a stamp on a document and says:
“I promise to love peace”-and then goes out to make war.

180. At any rate, they are not our concern here. Our
concern here is the Zionists of Israel who have been waging
war there and breaking peace whenever peace was in view.
181. Another point he spoke about was human rights and
genocide in southern Sudan. I am glad in a way that
Mr. Tekoah has given me this platform. Quite modestly and
humbly, we have not referred here to the peaceful solution
of the southern Sudanese question. Mr. Tekoah knows-if
18

1

You have to go through a certain parliamentary democratic
process.

he knows any history-that
it was no creation of the
Sudanese people. It was a historical problem which we
inherited and which, to our credit, we have been able to
solve in a most peaceful and exemplary manner. If there
was any killing, Mr, Tekoah might tell this Council whether
or not Israel had a hand in it. If there should be any doubt
remaining in this Council, we shall be very pleased to
furnish the proof of Israeli weapons which have been
smuggled into the Sudan.
182. That is a normal Israeli routine in Africa, and it is the
reason why they have been dismissed from most parts of
Africa. With each minute that passes, other African
countries
are severing diplomatic relations with Israel
because now they know the real story.
183. However, that is not my point. My point is that the
Sudan has never practised genocide. There was a conflict
inside the Sudan, which ultimately we settled. To our great
pride we settled it peacefully. It has been an exemplary
solution, praised all over the’ world. I know that to him that
was a bad thing to have happened; it was not his wish. We
know
how his wish goes, I ask him: What did they do in
Deir Yassin; what did they do in the King David Hotel;
what did they do with the Libyan plane; what did they do
in Europe? All those things are Zionist works, which the
world knows. What did they do to the Palestinian people
which had been in Palestine before them? Ninety-three per
cent of the population living there was Palestinian and they
owned almost the same percentage of the land. What did
they do with them? They sent them away destitute and
homeless, and they still deny them the right to come back,
despite a decision of this Organization, to which Israel has
not yet replied.
184. I mentioned something about the Khartoum message.
The Khartoum message was correct, because it was dictated
by Israel itself, through its aggression on the Arab territories, against the Arab people and the Palestinian people,
and they are still continuing that aggression. SO the
Khartoum
message was a message of resistance, a message
of fighting aggression, and that still holds good.

188. The PRESIDENT:
I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt in exercise of his right of reply.
189. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Egypt will always be
ready to say yes to a humanitarian move and Egypt will
always say no to massacre, aggression and genocide. Let the
representative of Israel remember that. He could not refute
what was in this official communiqu& of the International
Red Cross. He said that these are just draft articles, and as a
democratic State they will have to look for the acceptance
of such draft articles-as if other countries as democratic as
Israel, in accepting them, have committed a breach of
democracy.
190. If the representative of Israel is referring to this draft
convention, let me, Mr. President, put through you a
question to him: how about the Fourth Geneva Convention, relative to the protection of civilian populations in
time of war, to which Israel is a party by signature and
ratification? Is he ready to declare here that his country
would respect this Convention in all its parts?
191. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Saudi
Arabia wishes to exercise his right of reply. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and I appeal to him again,
always, as an old colleague and friend, to be brief.
192. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I will
be as brief as it is humanly possible for me to be, but for
heaven’s sake, I think you are on good terms with
Ambassador Malik-please, next time appeal to him also to
be brief. I am very interested in what he says, you see. I am
all ears. And please appeal to some others, but because you
appealed to me as a friend and not as a President I will be as
brief as possible. I think Ambassador Malik is a friend of
yours; I see you chuckling and laughing with him.
193. I take exception to what Mr.Tekoah said about
democracy. He cannot fool anybody with platitudes about
democracy. Democracy has been reduced to a ritual,
especially since the beginning of the First World War, when
many crimes were committed in the name of democracy.
194. I have lived for over 40 years in so-called democratic
countries. They were in western Europe and the United
States of America, and I saw with my own eyes the
deterioration of democracy. The kernel of democracy has
shrivelled or has been devoured by the worm of greed and
of ambition for power.

185. Mr. Tekoah has told these stories in order to get off
the hook in the Council, and I should like to return him to
the hook and ask him questions which he should answer.
186. Mr. Tekoah has been presented today with certain
questions. He has been asked whether Israel is to comply
with our resolution 338 (1973) immediately, and go back
to the lines of 1650 hours GMT on 22 October. He did not
speak on that. He still has to let us know whether the Red
Cross can pass and whether the Egyptian authorities can
pass food and medicine to people in cities and outside the
cities.

195. The First World War was waged allegedly to save the
world for democracy. Everybody knows that that war was
fought with the motivation on the part of the western
Powers that Kaiser Wilhelm and Germany were militarists.
England was the biggest naval Power at that time and
France had one of the greatest armies. The First World War
was not waged to save the world for democracy; it was not
waged against German militarism; it was waged against
German mercantilism, and the people of Europe were sent
to the slaughter-houses in the name of democracy.

187. I will ask him the last question: What does Israel
intend to do between now and dawn? Is it going to go on
breaking the cease-fire? Is it going to go on with its plan of
genocide-and
I repeat the word-genocide?
These are
questions
to which I should like Mr. Tekoah to reply if
possible,
properly and adequately, but not to pick the
wrong paper from his files.

196. In 1917 the Zionists

railroaded the United States

into the First World War. This wasa democracy,the United

States, before it entangled itself in the affairs of Europe. I
19

really was moved to see the crosses in Verdun in the 192Os,
of the flower of youth who were duped and lost their lives
in the name of sham democracy, to which this gentleman
on my left refers.
197. Then democracy deteriorated further in between the
two world wars and finally its death knell was sounded in
the Second World War. Again the war was against Germany
because Hitler challenged the Western Powers. There was
secret democracy. I was living in England in 1938 when in
September Mr. Neville Chamberlain and Mr. Daladier had to
go to Munich. When he was asked by reporters,
Mr. Chamberlain evaded the issue. All he said at Hendon
airport when he returned from Munich was, “I brought
peace to our generation”, Then when he was asked by
correspondents
again “What happened about Czechoslovakia? ” he said “My lips are sealed.” No wonder
Mr. Scali’s lips are sealed; he is like Mr. Chamberlain. But I
am sure Mr. Scali acts upon instructions from his Government. I see that Mr. Kissinger’s lips are not sealed, but I
could gather nothing from his press conference or from the
press release which Mr. ScaIi was generous enough to send
to us.

201. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
France on a point of order.
202. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation fronl
French): At the request of Egypt this meeting was
convened this evening with a sense of urgency, because we
were told by the representative of Egypt that there were
violations of the cease-fire in the Middle East, that cities
were in danger and peace itself was in danger.
203. We have been listening to speeches for three hours. 1s
it necessary, Sir, for us to listen now to a lecture on
democracy and the origins of the First World War? I have
the greatest admiration for the erudition of Mr. Baroody
and I should be happy to listen to him at some otlrer
opportunity, but at the moment we have to consider the
Secretary-General’s report, and if we listen to speeches for
another few hours none of us will be able to study that
report. There is a certain urgency, and I would ask
Mr. Baroody to postpone his historical disquisition on the
First World War and his theories on democracy to some
other time and allow us now to conclude our consideration
of the question put before us by the representative of
Egypt.

198. Democracy? In the name of democracy, Dresden,
which was not a military target, was wiped off the earth.
Mr. Tekoah says “We are a democratic society. We have a
parliament.” So did the Western Powers have parliaments.
Did those responsible in the West take a plebiscite of the
people, whether or not to destroy Dresden?

204. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Saudi
Arabia has heard the proposal-what
I would call tire
appeal-of the representative of France. It is a proposal
with which I find myself, I have to confess, in a great deal
of agreement. I have no desire to limit the right of ttre
representative of Saudi Arabia to address this Council, but
what the representative of France has said is, I believe, very
cogent. The hour is very late, and I still intend, after this
meeting is adjourned, to invite my colleagues on the
Council to join me in informal consultations in pursuance
of our work. And I have to agree with the representative of
France that the remarks which the representative of Saudi
Arabia is now addressing to us are not relevant to the
subject that we are pursuing.

199. And then the great President Harry Truman, did he
poll, through the democratic process, the American people
before wiping out Nagasaki and Hiroshima in the name of
democracy? When I asked Mr. Telford Taylor in the State
of Washington in 1946 when he addressed the Rotary Club
and I had addressed the Kiwanis Club the day before-he
had come from Tokyo, where he had acted as prosecutor in
the tribunal which tried the Japanese General Yamashitahe made a mistake: he probably thought that all those
present were Americans; I happened to be the only Arab-I
asked Mr. Taylor, “Did the Japanese defence adduce what
Mr. Truman”-he was then President-“did? Yamashita was
a good family man, as no doubt was President Truman;
Truman loved his family, he was open with all his friends.
With all due respect to his being President, did he not
commit a worse crime than Yamashita at Bataan? Did he
poll the United States people about wiping out Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, in the name of-what, democracy? ” And
Mr. Telford Taylor, the blood drained from his face and he
said “It was a necessary surgical operation to shcrten the
war and to save American lives.” That is democracy. The
American people were not consulted through the democratic process. Everything is done in secret, because the
security of the State imposes that. That secrecy, I will not
let anybody get away again with that narcotic of decadent
democracy, whether it is practiced in Israel or in any other
country in the world, including Arab States that sometimes
in demagogy pretend, like other States, big and small, that
they are democracies. The ritual is with us.

205. Might I appeal, as I have done already, to the
representative of Saudi Arabia to conclude his remarks;
otherwise, I fear, in response to the point of order206. Mr. BAROODY

(Saudi Arabia): Don’t threaten me.

207. The PRESIDENT:-of
the representative of France, 1
shall have to rule the representative of Saudi Arabia out of
order.
208. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Okay. I will be brief.
But I want to comment in a democratic way. We are talking
about democracy now. May I comment?
209. The PRESIDENT:
of Saudi Arabia-

May I remind the representative

210. Mr. BAROODY
to explain.

(Saudi Arabia): You don’t allow me

211. The PRESIDENT: I ask the representative of Saudi
Arabia to respect the Chair for one moment. May I remind
him that a great deal has been said already this evening
about democracy. If he would agree to speak for only one
minute more, I shall allow him to proceed.

200. In replying to the representative of the Sudan,
Mr. Tekoah resorted to the open society20

212. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): In deference to my
colleague from France I will leave what I was going to say
on democracy for another occasion. But that wasonly the
preface, and I will not now- speak on democracy, in
deference to you, Sir, and my colleague from France, as I
say. But, incidentally, I touched on the Second World War,
not only the First World War; so he was napping or not
listening.
213. Now, this is directed to you, Sir, asPresident, not as
a friend: Was the interchange of rights of reply between our
co&agues from China and the Soviet Union relevant to the
question, or allowable just because they are great Powers?
You keep silent when they speak, but when I-who
represent a small Power-talk, you use your friendship for
and the irritation of some friends of mine such as-1 hope
he is my friend-Ambassador de Guiringaud to muzzle me.

218. If this gentleman. Ambassador Scali. casts off his
official garb, do you think we have anything against him?
He becomes part and parcel of the American people, who
are generous and good-hearted; but they may one day be
driven into another slaughter-it was in this context that I
was discussing the First World War and touched on the
Second World War-if they are manipulated by those
Zionists who seem to inspire United States policy-although
I believe the noble American people will stand as one and
refuse to let their Government plunge them into another
slaughter-house.
219. Mr. Tekoah knows very well there can be no survival
of Arab or Jew, American or Russian-or perhaps of the
whole human species-unless the political Zionists come to
their sensesand stop making Zionism a world problem.
220. That is my answer, Sir; and just remember how long
the other representatives spoke before you or any one else
try to interfere with my statement.

214. I am not talking about democracy. Treat me like
everybody else. Did Ambassador Huang and Ambassador
Malik always speak relevantly to the subject, or were they
just, so to speak, as the Americans would say, “washing
their linen in public”? I will not say “dirty linen”, because
I have no right to say whether it is dirty or not. I will not
speak on democracy, but I have the right to speak,just like
others whom you have allowed to speak, Sir; and, for
heaven’s sake, know that Baroody will not be muzzled by
any President-unless you want to make a ruling; and I will
not challenge the ruling, because I am not a member of the
Council. But I have had occasion to challenge rulings every
place else. And God help me.

221. The last point is this: I warn the United States, as
someone who has seen things happen in Europe and here
for more than four decades, to beware lest this time, with
the nuclear arsenals filled as they are, they might by
mistake create a situation that will annihilate the human
species.
222. We would rather die, as even nations die-not fighting
to shed blood, but die to defend justice, rather than bow
down to the rule of force. That is my messageto the major
Powers; that is my message through you, Sir, to
Mr. Tekoah, who wantonly makes fun of the Arabs, some
of whom need not have a wooden box and a sheet of paper
to develop so-called modern and decadent democracy.

215. I will not speak on democracy at this time, although
I have a lot to say on democracy and it would be a
dissertation. But I will speak for a couple of minutes on
how-there
is a war in our region-on how, with all the
good intentions that I believe the so-called super-Powers
have, to stop the fighting.

223. Thank you, Sir, for your kindness and indulgence. I
will ask again for the floor if someone challenges what I
said.
224. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Israel, who wishes to exercise his right of reply.

216. Now I want to reply to what Mr. Tekoah said
regarding Khartoum. Why do I reply rather than the
representative of the Sudan? Because His Majesty King
Faisal attended the Conference of Khartoum. And this
gentleman tried to besmirch the Arab people becausetheir
Chiefs of State congregated in Khartoum to see that the
Zionists do not conspire with other Powers. Do you follow
me? This is not about democracy. I am explaining to
Mr. Tekoah and the Council why they met in Khartoum.
And the spirit of Khartoum is not dead-certainly not
among the chiefs of Arab States; nor is it dead in the hearts
of Arab youth. And I have my thumb on their pulse, and I
dare any one to challenge me.

225. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): A question was put to me by
the representative of Egypt, and I would like to reply to
him. Before I do that, however, after listening for 15
minutes to a Saudi Arabian definition of what Zionism
is-you heard from me the other day what the historical
definition of Zionism is, but apparently some members of
the Council do share the views expressed by the representative of Saudi Arabia, who preceded me-1 should like to
give a very precise and concise definition of what, according
to the King of Saudi Arabia, Zionism is.
226. In an interview with Amir Taheri, King Faisal of
Saudi Arabia was quoted in an Iranian newspaper, Kayhan
Hernational, on 18 March 1972 as follows:

217. From Morocco, throughout North Africa, Syria, Iraq,
the Sudan, all the Arab world has been fermented by the
Palestinians.
And this gentleman casts doubts about the
future. That is why I have been repeatedly telling his
predecessors before .he was here that there will be no peace
in the Arab world, Khartoum or no Khartoum, as long as
Arab youth, to whom the next generation belongs, challenge their leaders if they give in to Zionist aggreSSiOn,
abetted as it is by the United States of America-for whose
people we have the greatest friendship.

“The Zionists were responsible for unleashing upon
mankind the torrential invasions of the Mongols. Marx,
Engels, Lenin, Trotsky and Stalin were all Jews and
Zionists.”
227. I hope the representative of the Soviet Union listened
very carefully. 1 sometimes suspect that he shares Ambassador Baroody’s views on what Zionism is.
21

228. In answer to the auestion by the representative of
Egypt whether Israel agreks to abide by the-Fourth Geneva
Convention, the answer is “yes”, and the answerwasgiven
on 8 October, two days after the Egyptian-Syrian aggression, to the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
on 19 October the President of the Security Council was
informed likewise,
229. One question, however, put by me-put by all
mankind to the Governments of Egypt and Syria-still
remains unanswered: when will *those two Governments
abide by the Geneva Convention, by fundamental principles
of humanity and morality, and transmit through the
International Red Cross the lists of Israeli prisoners of war
in their hands?
230. The PRESIDENT: I allow two minutes to the
representative of Saudi Arabia in the exercise of his right of
reply.
231. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): In reply to the
interview that allegedly someone, a journalist in Iran, has
printed after his talk with Prince Faisal, I wish to state that
I do not have the text of that with me now. But since the
hour is late I want to tell Mr. Tekoah that a good
percentage of the European Jews who were not Sephardim
came from the northern tier of Asia where the ancient
Mongols were. They belonged to what is known as the
Chazars, who converted to Judaism in the eighth century,
in what today is southern Russia. If King Faisal mentioned
the Mongols, he wastalking about the Mongol wavesof the
tenth and twelfth centuries, maybe the cousins, if not the
ancestors, of this gentleman. But the Mongols of today are
no longer the Mongols of ancient time. Their country is a
progressive country. If he wants to confuse the issue, I can
tell him that what the Israelis are doing to the Palestinians
far surpasses what the Mongols of the Middle Ages did in
the Middle East and also farther to the west, until Europe
trembled before them. But the Mongols of today are
different. His Majesty the King wasreferring to the Mongols
of yore, at whose hands not only the Arabs suffered, but
the Seljuks, the Ottomans and the people of the Balkans.
They were chastened by the abuse of power, and today
they are a country to be lauded. The Mongols live not only
in a progressive country, but also a peace-loving country.
232. Mr. SEN (India): This is not an hour for levity or for
intellectual exercise, however profitable that may be on
other occasions. With the greatest of effort, I restrained
myself from commenting on the day-to-day developments,
both in the Council and also in the Middle East and
elsewhere, for nearly three weeks now. I wish that I would
not have any opportunity of making such comments, but I
fear that I may have.

234. However, the moment has come when we should
take whatever practical steps we can. Because of this, we
requested the Secretary-General to send us his report on the
United Nations Emergency Force within 24 hours. That
report has been with us for nearly seven hours, and we are
still to passon it.
235. While waiting to do so at the earliest possible
moment, we have all been most seriously concerned with
the deteriorating situation in the Middle East. Before we
can control the situation by adequate measures, including
the stationing of observers and the Emergency Force, it is
necessary to take some urgent action if we are to ensure
with a degree of certainty that the situation will not
become worse within the next few hours while we consider
the Secretary-General’s report, perhaps tomorrow morning,
236. After much consultation with all the members of the
Council, I would suggest that, first, the Secretary-General
be authorized, as we authorized him yesterday, to send
additional men from Cyprus, should he consider that such a
step is necessary as an interim measure. In deciding how
many men can be dispatched in addition to those already
sent he would clearly depend on a number of factors. But I
am quite certain that the Council would like to leave
discretion to the Secretary-General and to strengthen his
hand to the greatest extent possible in this present
emergency.
237. My second proposal is that both the Secretary
General and our President should immediately and simul.
taneously send telegraphic appeals to the parties to co.
operate fully and effectively with the International Red
Cross for the proper discharge of its humanitarian task. The
Secretary-General, we would hope, would extend, as he had
done in several instances in the past, such practical
co-operation as may be necessary.
238. As soon as the Council has approved these two
proposals, as I hope it will, we can leave it to the President
to decide at what hour we should meet tomorrow and when
we should consult among ourselves, under the President’s
guidance, to decide how we might deal with the Secretary
General’s report received this afternoon. This is entirely the
President’s prerogative, but since he has unfailingly and
courteously consulted us on these matters, I have made
bold to convey to you the general feelings of the Council
on this important matter of the time-table as well. But this
was some time ago and since then we have listened to
several long exchanges, inevitably using up some time and
bringing us to this late hour.
239. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): After the long debate
this afternoon and this evening, I do not intend to make
any statement. I simply wish to join in supporting the two
proposals just made by the representative of India. His firs1
proposal takes into account both important elements with
which we are faced in considering the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 340 (1973), that is, first, the need for speedy
consideration of the report and for speedy measures and
activities to set up the United Nations Emergency Force
and dispatch it to the area in sufficient strength to fulfil its
mandate, and secondly, the need for members of the

233. We are now confronted with a situation of utmost
gravity and, in spite of the Council debating the problem
practically continually for the last few days and in spite of
the fact that the Council has taken several measures to
bring about a degree of sanity, we have failed to introduce
any appreciable measure of calm in the area of conflict.
And our search for a just and durable peace promises to be
indefinite.
22

Security Council to have enough time to study the report,
which contains many important proposals, and for members of the Council to have time to consult with their
respective Governments.
240. That is why I support his proposal that we need to
consider the report of the Secretary-General as soon as
possible and not later than tomorrow morning. I also
support whole-heartedly the second proposal of the representative of India, which is guided by highly humanitarian
considerations. I sincerely hope that the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council will use their
authority to issue an urgent appeal for full co-operation
with the International Red Cross for speedy arrangements
for sending to the area a supply of medicines and necessary
provisions in order to avoid further loss of human life and
suffering.
241. The PRESIDENT: The representative of India, now
supported by the representative of Yugoslavia, has put
forward two proposals. The fist is that the SecretaryGeneral be authorized to send an additional Force from
Cyprus, as an interim measure, should he consider it
necessary, That is perhaps a shortened version of what the
representative of India has proposed, but I believe it
represents reasonably accurately his proposal.
242. The second proposal is that the Secretary-General
and the President of the Council should appeal to the
parties to co-operate fully and effectively with the International Red Cross.

246. I now call on the Secretary-General, who would like
to make a statement.
247. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I shall be very brief. I
have noted the proposal of the representative of India,
supported by the representative of Yugoslavia, that
additional troops from Cyprus might be sent, as an interim
measure, to reinforce the elements of the Emergency Force
now in Egypt, if I consider it necessary. I shall most
certainly actively consider this proposal, having in mind of
course the task of the Force in Cyprus and the number of
troops available there.
248. As regards the second proposal, 1 shall consult with
the President about the necessary steps. I should like to
inform the Council in this connexion that I have been in
touch with the International Committee of the Red Cross
in Geneva in the past 24 hours and have been kept
informed of its efforts. I shall continue to do all I can to be
of assistancein these efforts.
249. The PRESIDENT: Unless any other representative
wishes to take the floor I propose now to adjourn this
meeting. Following consultations with members and in
accordance with the proposal of the representatives of India
and Yugoslavia, I propose that the next meeting of the
Council should take place tomorrow, Saturday, at
10.30 a.m. to consider the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation
of Security Council resolution
340 (1973)/S/11052].

250. On the question of consultations, I should like to say
that, as we all know, we had intended to have informal
consultations on the subject of the Secretary-General’s
report at an earlier point this afternoon, but other events
have supervened, and we have had so far to postpone those
informal consultations. A suggestion-indeed a proposalhad been made that, following the adjournment of this
meeting, I might invite the members of the Council to join
me in informal consultations on the Secretary-General’s
report. The hour is rather late, but I would still invite
members of the Council to join me at least for a short
meeting in my office, where members can exchange views
on the desirability of further informal consultations and the
possible timing of such consultations-whether they should
be held tonight or tomorrow morning before the meeting.

243, May I ask whether any member of the Council sees
any objection to both or either of those proposals? Since I
hear no objection, I shall regard the proposals made by the
representatives of India and Yugoslavia as approved by the
Council.
244.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
I have only one remark. AS I
listened to Mr. Sen, my impression was that he used the
words “interim measure”.

(translation

from Russian):

245. The PRESIDENT:
If I did not use the word
“interim”,
it wasan omission on my part, I think I did.

The meetingroseat 10p.m.

23

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite I Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales’

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont on vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
sup&s de votre libraire
ou adressez-vow
h : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC

ItOJWVP&iTI>

U3AAHUfl

OPI-AHM

3AUMFi

OC%EAMHEHHhIN

HAIKHH

Haqnii
MOXAO ~ynrrr~
a KHWXHLIX hfaraSHH~X M arewwraax
DO acex pafionax
Papa. Hasonsre
cnpaamc
06 us~awwrrx
n
BS.LLI~M KHHXAOM MW&L~AHC unu ~HIJ.IHT~ no aApecy : Opra~uaannn
06-beAMHeHHblX
Haqwfi,
Ce~qwn
no npo~axte
un~asufi,
Hbro-Wopn
IUIU
Xwiesn.
tI3gaHNn

Opr~n~~3nqlili

OB’Le~mtenmxx

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de Ins Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
