323rd

United Nations

PUNARY MUTING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

Jrledne.sday, 13 Decembe,.19SD, at '8 p.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Flushing Meadow, New York

Official Records

CONTENTS
F~ge

Intern;ltional control of atomic energy (conclud,d) ....••..•••••• ,.....

639

Presidel,t: Mr. NasrolIah ENTEZAM (Iran).
International control 0:. Q-Jmic energy
( eoru:luded)
[Agend~ item 26]
1. Sir Gladwyn JEBB (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is one of the sponsors of the draft
resolution [A/1668 and Corr.1] which is now before
th~ Assembly. We are anxious, as all, o!" at least
almost all Member States. must be, that :}~lY progress
that can be made towards agreement Of, the control
of atomic energy and on the regulation arid reduction
of armaments should be made. The threat of o.n atomic
war which hangs over the world is regardoo. with
horror by the people of all countries. It is equally
repugnant to us that we should be forced to devote
such large proportions of our national budgets to the
strengthening of our armed forces and tht! amassing of
what are called conventional armaments. Our experiences in the last war, which are still OILy too recent
and vi'Vid, have· shown us what destruction and suffering can be wrought by these conventional weapons, and
there is every reason to fear that any future world
war, even if atomic weapons were not used, would
be the more terrible and would indeed threaten the
very basis of human civilization.
2.' Th~te can therefore be no question of our desire,
and the desire of every sane man, to bring about agree··
ments . which would establish effective international
control of atomic energy, ensuring .the prohibition of
atomic weapons, and. also measures to regulate and
reduce conventional armaments~ which are equally
essential for real world peace and security.
3.. I confess that the immediate prospect of any agreement,· either on atomic energy or on disarmament,
seems to me very small, and I think we should be
deluding the peoples of the world if we, in the United
Nations, were to adopt any resolution which glossed
over the .realities of the present situatio~) unpleas~t
though they may be, and which pronused a qUIck
solution, when we mo\v that there is not at the moment
that· minimum degree of international confidence and
co-oeeration which would make· ·such agreement
pOSSIble.

4. It may sQund, I know, like it confes~ion. of failure
to say that for the time being we see little hope of
any l"eal progrt.~s. But what· is the alternative? To
elaborate a fornl of words which might give the impression that something was being achieyed, but which
would in fact do .nothing to preserve .mankind from
the menace ofa new war and might indeed increase the
danger of future aggression? It is very easy to coin
slogans such as "Ban tlie atomic. bomb I"~ And we all
know how the Soviet propaganda machine tries to
exploit in this way the genuine desireo! people all
over the world for security against this terrible weapon~
But what value can we attach to the assurances of the
USSR about its peaceful intentions and its desire to
reach agreement on atomic energy so ·.long as it rejects
the only plan which has yet been worked. out for effective control of atomic energy and eff~ctive prohibition ()f
atomic weapons?
5. I do not now propose to go overall thre loid t~ound.
This subject was exhaustively debated at tll\.... la~stses­
sion of the Assembly, and in my view ~e statement
presented by the five Powers on 25 October 19491 sti11
represents the best analysis of the two ()pposing points
of view. I am afraid that since that tUne very few
new elements have emerged. We stand by th~ pbin. approved by the Assemblyin 1948 [t"esolution 191 (Ill)],
wlllle the So'riet Union brings up again and again the
proposaiswhich it put forward in 1946' and 1947*.
These proposals· were found to· be inadequate at. that
time, and although they have been examined and reexamined since then, they are still. found wan:t!ng.
Nothing which Mr. Vyshinsky has said this year [321#
meeting] or .last year suggests that the USSR would
accept a systenl of international control which would
be ~ective and enforceable not only in the democratic
countries but, above all, in the Soviet Union itself.
6. It is really no good Mr. Vyshinsky repeating what
he has said time .after time - that it is all the fault of
or:

..,;

Official Recewds of the Gmeral Assembly, Fourth
Session" S~pplentent No. ·15.
J See Official Records of the Atomic Energy ComHlis.riOlf.
TAird Year" SPtool SUPPlement" Annex 3 (A).
.
a Ibid." Annex 3 (B) and (C).
1 See

639
A/pV.32S '

Gener~l

Anembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

the America,tl monopolists. It is of course true that
the bomb if; being manufactured in tite United States
through ftte instrumentality of private companies, but
this fact hS quite irrelevant to the actual issue, which is
that, in :he. absence of an agreed system of international
control, st!ch manufacture is essential not for purposes
of profit, 'Jut for the defence of the free world against
aggre@sicrJ1.
7. It s~ms in any case that the only cure Mr. Vyshinsky can suggest for our ills is that the American system of free enterprise should be replaced by a system
in which the United States economy, I suppose, is
centrally controlled by a small body of men who are
replaced at intervals by purges resulting in a series
of judici~l assassinations. It is open, of course, to Mr.
Vyshinsky, since he has played such a pJ;ominent part
in this system of government, to assert that it is a good
one. But it is extremely doubtful whether the American people, at any rate, will think it is preferable to
their present system. In any case, if Mr. Vyshinsky's
communist system were introduced in the United
States, it is not in the least clear that the new United
States government would not create some supermonopoly which might really be a menace to the
peace of the world. .The argument, in fact, is bogus
and only put forward to distract popular attention from
the real issue.
8.. What, in any case, are we to make of the argument
of the USSR representative that the atomic bomb
must instantly be banned because of its appalling effect,
and of his simultaneous assertion that it has little or
no military value? Or of his argument that the Soviet
Union. - unlike the capitalist world, of course - is
using atomic energy only for peaceful purposes, while
the USSR Government asserts that in the event of
war it would be able to use the atomic bomb with tremendous effect?
9. I pause at this point to inquire how many more
mountains have been moved by the Government of
the Soviet Union since Mr. Vyshinsky made the
same speech last year. Has the creation of a new
range in central Asia increased the standat d of living
of the Soviet people? These are questions to which
we should certainly like to know the answers. But
Mr. Vyshinsky told us· nothing about these things,
and this seems to indicate, I suggest, tm..t such small
amounts of uranium as the USSR Government has
been able to extort from Germany and Czechoslovakia
have been put to qmte a different purpose.
10. Finally, what indeed are we to make of Mr.
Vysmnsky's central argument, around which his
speech was built as it was built up last year and the
year before, the argument that international control
is essential but that sovereignty must in all circumstances remain inviolate?
11. Indeed, in view of all these contradictions, for Mr.
Vyshinsky to talk any more of capitalist contradictions
is really rather ironical. His communist contradictions
are in fact so staggering that we can only hope that
they will be detected .by the faithful even in Outer
Mongolia.
12. One ~Jnt, but only one point, was new in what
Mr. Vyshinsky said - at any rate unless I understood

it wrong. He &>ught to insinuate t~t the atomic bomb
was being constructed in the United States only for
use against Asian ~oples, by which presumably he
meant peoples of Asia otb.er than tb,{lse' in the Soviet
Union. It if" quite evidel~t why this malicious suggestion waf, made; it was in order to embroil the
western with the Asian peoples, and particularly to
cause alarm and despondency in Peking.
13. Our position, therefore, is the reverse of the position taken up by Mr. Vyshinsky. w..~ stand by the
maj,J,rity plan for the control of atomic energy, while
the Soviet Union, of com,'se, rejects this plan and stands
b)r its proposals of 1946 and 1947.
14. There seems to be some feeling that in these
circumstances it is we who must ~. ompromi;')e, perhaps
because in the past the west~rn Powers lw.ve so often
shown themselves willing to make cornpromises in the
hope of reaching agreement with the USSR, while the
latter has almost invariably stood rigidly by its own
point of view and refused to make any concessions
whatever to the will of the majority. It is also sometimes said that the majority plan is too rigid and
elaborate, and that many of its provisions could be
dropped or watered down without any real risk. I wish
this were so. We certainly do not claim that the majority plan is the best which could be devised, but
we do say that it is the best which has so far been
devised and we cannot abandon it unless and until we
are' persuaded that something better is available.
15. It is perhaps natural that when faced by an apparently unbreakable deadlock on such a vital matter
as atomic energy, there should be suggestions for
some half-way house, some temporary agreement or
armistice which might halt the race in the production
of atomic· weapons. We should be entirely in favour
of any such proposal if we could be sure, or even reasonably confident, that it would in fact halt the production of atomic weapons on both sides and not
merely on one side. But suppose we were to agree to
a plan which depended for its execution entirely on
the good faith of the nations concerned and not on any
watertight system of international control. Knowing
what we do oi the USSR record since 1945, of the
secrecy on which the whole Soviet system of government is based, of the rigid exclusion of all external contacts and communications by th~ countries behind the
iron curtain, what reliance could we place on any assur~t1ces on the part of the Soviet Union that it would
at om:e destroy any atotriic bombs which it might have
been able to produce and would forthwith cease to
produce any more?
16. In August 1939, when the treaty between Nazi
Germany and the Soviet Union w:as finally concluded,
Hitler is reported to have sai.d: "Now I have the
world in my grasp." He may well have said so, for he
was very nearly proved to be right. I can well imagine
that if we agreed to any plan for the immediate prohibition of atomic weapons and the destruction of existing stockpiles without the certain knowledge that the
USSR would QO likewise, Stalin. would say, and with
reason: "Now I have the world in my grasp."
17. We must therefore continue to work for and insist on a plan of international control in which we
can all have confidence. The immediate outlook may

641

S23n1 Meeting-IS ~ember 1950
be very unpromising, but given time and patience none
of the world's problems need prove insoluble. We, for
our part, stand ready at all times to undertake further
consultations or negotiations if there is even the smallest chance that they will bring us nearer to any real
settlement.
.
18. The present draft resolution does, in our opinion,
afford such a chance - a small chance, but a chan:~~.
Hitherto, the work on atomic energy and on disarmament has been ppisued in separate United Nations
commissions. In Ol.1r view, there was much to be said
for this arrangement, since the control of atomic energy
poses very special problems which are different in
kind as well as in degree from the problems presented
by conventional weapons. We still feel that the two
subjects need different treatment, and there can, in our
view, be no questionaf scrapping the work which has
been done on them in the hope that some new and allembracing plan might be e!aborated and applied without discrimination to both. But even though the treatment of atomic energy an.d conventional armaments
may need to be different, the two problems are obviously closely related.
19. If an agreement. were reached which could effectively prohibit the manufacture and use of atomic
weapons, the threat of wrh\" would not be removed so
long as mass armies were still being mobilized and
trained, and war, if it came, wowd be only one degree
less terrible than if atomic weap01!IS were also used.
20. It is therefore clear that if the fYace of the
world is to be securely established, control systems
must be worked out and applied both to atomic energy
and to conventional armaments, and the method and
timing of such controls must be closely co-ordinated.
21. This aspect of the question has not been given
very detailed study in the past, and the work of the
proposed committee may therefore be of considerable
value. The task of the committee is a relatively modest
one, but in present circumstances this seems to us to
be both prudent and honest.
22. We should be doing a disservice to the world if
we were to promise more than we can achieve at the
moment. The free world is now resisting aggression
in Korea, and the immediate task and duty must be
to strengthen still further the defences of the free
world against the possibility or threat of future cases
of aggre~sion. At the same time~ we must abandon the
hope of eventual agreement or t"elax our efforts to attain it.
23. It is in accordance with these principles that my
delegation wiII support the joint draft resolution, and
we hope that it will be approved by the overwhelming majority of the Assembly.
24. Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): It is clear that
the circumstances in which we are now debating the
question of the control of atomic elllergy and atomic
weapons are somewhat different fron.. those envisaged
by many at the time when it was decided [285th meeting] to bypass the discussion of this question in committee and to bring it directly before the General Assembly. At that time we were all aware that we were
not dealing with an academic or technilcal question,
but that we were dealing with the probl(:m of control

of a weapon whose horrendous potentialities .. were
already so needlessly d~onstrated at Nagasaki ,!nd
Hiroshima. We were alreaCly aware tha~we.were dealing
with an instrument for the mass ex.termtnat1onof people,
the use of which had already deeply troubled the conscience of the world. It was already clear that no
elaborate sy~\tem of simultaneous translation was needeO. to make: intelligible to us the deep and powerful cry
pealing forth fro~ all. humanity, demandin1g t~~ we
of the United Nations should act at once ancl dectslvely
to render forever impotent the threat of atomic
'Weapons.
25. But the fuU importance and timelessness of this
problem was often, overlooked. Since that time, events
'have taken l)b .ce and. n~w threats have been·· made
which pose thi 5 question before mankind in its a'wful
reality, and therefore gives to this discussion its chat-.
acter .of timdessr.. .ss and great significance. For it
is evident that. with President Truman's statement that
the use of the atomic bomb rem...-uns under "active consideration", we have passed to a new phase cf the
Ithreat of atomic warfare which has been with us for
the past few years. For the past few years we have
been treated with the barbarous spectacle of war-mon,.
gers, both semi-official and private, calling for the immediate use of the atomic bomb against the USSR.
For the past few months we have been hearing demands by war-mongers for. the use of the atomic weapon to further the purposes of United States aggression in Korea. And for the past few weeks we have
been hearing a mounting demand from the same w:;lrmongers that this weapon of mass extennination should
be immediately employed against. the Soviet Union"
against the People's Republic of China and the PeopIe's Republic of Korea.
26. On Thursday, 30 November however, it was
made patent that the cries of those war-mongers were
not the futile howling of a pack of wolves. For on that
day, brushing aside the fiction that the forces under
General MacArthur are United Nations forct'S with
the statement that the United States feels· free to use
the atomic bomb wIthout consultation, and btushing
aside 'the clear meaning of General Assembly resolution 1 (I) of 24 January 1946, by which in effect the
United Nations outlawed the use of th.e atomic weapon,
the President of the United States openly declared that
his finger was on the trigger. and that he would not
hesitate to pull it if he so decided.
j

27. AIl of us are aware of the tidal wave of horrified
response that greeted that statement. It was a wave
of horror, indignation and anger, the imPa.ct of which
was felt throughout this Organization. There should
be no illusion that the reaction of the overwhelming
majority of mankind to that projected use of the
atomic bomb is anything else than that such action is
immoral, inhuman and impermissible. The truth of
this is demonstrated, for instance, by the statement of
almost two hundred Labour Party members of Parliament to the effect that British troops should be pulled
out .of Korea if the atomie bomb were used, and .by
the haste with wmch· the French Government authorized the issuance of. a statement to the effect that· the
Korean objectives were not important enough to justify
the use of the atomic bOfilQ.

642

General Auembly-Fifth Seslion...".;Plenary Meetings

28. The More than four years of discussion of this
question, made sterile by the deliberate intransigence
of the United States, with the acquiescence of the majority, have therefore achieved only this result"; it
railS brought us to the point where the ,.·verwhelming majority of mankind places an Heither/or"alternative before this Organization. The alternative is
that either the United Nations takes definite steps to
outlaw the scourge of atomic warfare, or this Organization defeats whatever moral standing it still retains
among the peoples of the world. Either it breaks
loose from the immoral and untenable position into
which the United States has forced it, or it takes
upon itself the inevitable consequences 0'£ the just
wrath of the peoples against those who first would
use this instrument of aggression and mass extermination of peoples, or who by their silence and inaction
acquiesce in its use.
29. It cannot be said that the majority of the Members of this Organization were not forewarned of the
precise dilemma in which they now find themselves.
When, in Mr.rch 1950, the P~rmanent Committee of the
World Peace Congress fifst advanced what has come to
be known by the historic name of the Sto:::kholm Appeal,
the war-mongers everywhere tried to push that appeal
into oblivion by deriding it as a communist manoeuvre or
another trick of Soviet propaganda; but only a few brief
months were necessary to give the lie to such demagogy,
because it became increasingly clear that the Stockholm
Appeal was an expression of the broadest and most formidable mass movement· for peace in the history of
humanity.
30. No cry of trick or fraud can obscnre the fact that
500 million people - and that means almost half the
adult population of the world - have affixed their
signatures to an appeal demanding the unconditional
prohibition of the atomic weapon as a weapon of aggression and mass extermination of human beings1 and
the institution O! strict international control to enforce
this. No cry (~f trick or .f.t"aud can obscure the fact
that 500 milliun people have declared that they will
regard as guilty. of war crimes the government which
is .the first to use the atomic weapon against any
country. No cry of trick or fraud can obscure the
fact that 500 million people of all races and nationali..
ties, of all political and religious views, have affixed
their signatures to an appeal whi(:h puts forward the
only just a.nd moral course of action this Organization
can tak~.
31. It was the mass movement. for peace,expressed
in the signing of the Stockholm Appeal" that. .received
organized expression in the World Peace Congress
:-ecently held in Warsaw. At that congress, to which
my country was proud to p~ay the host, representatives of almost 800 milliotl people, in an appeal directly
addressed to this Organization [A/1660}, again expressed the demand that the United . Nations should
take action to prohibit unconditionally all types of
atomic weapons and declare its intention of branding
as a war criminal the first government which employs
atomic or other tt1ean~ of mass destruction. A world
council . of peace was created to observe the implementation of tIDo desire. The World Peace.Congress, the
vV"'a rId Peace Council and the signatures to the Stockholm Appeal are the response of the peoples of the

world to the fact that the guidance for which they
looked to the United Nations is not forthcoming; they
express the decision of the peoples of the world to take
the initiative in their own hands, 'to build a strong
front of peace, to bar any possibilitY of a war of annihilation and destruction, to preVf~nt any use of instruments of mass extermination of human beings.
32. Hence it cannot be said, I repeat, that the majority
of the Members of this Org~nization were not forewarned that any such statement as that made by the
President of the United States would call forth, not
only from· those who have signed the· Stockholm Appeal, but from all mankind, the demand that the United
Nations shOUld act at once to interdict the projected
use of atomic weapons.
33. The Members of this Organization must ask
themselves the question that is today being asked the
world over. Why is it that the United Nations, after
more than four years t')f discussion, has taken no
action to achieve real control of atomic energy, prohibit atomic warfare, det~troy existing stockpiles of
atomic weapons and thus ,create conditions for realizing the enormous potentiaI:.ties for good presented by
the discovery of atomic fiss1.<m?
34. The answer to this question is one of which the
majority of the ~rembers of this Organization are well
aware, an answer which they find . it increasingly
difficult to conceal from their own peoples. It lies
in the foreign policy of the United States and in
the military and strategic calculations designed to
implement that policy. It is here that we find the reasons why the United States has ruthlessly and recklessly placed every possible obstacle in the way of
achieving any solution or compromise on the question
before it. That foreign policy, it has been made clear,
is one designed to further the mad ambitions of the
ruling circles of the United States for world domination.
35. Even before the end of the war against fascistH,
those ambitions had become self-evident. With tlle
end of the war, they began to be expressed openhr hl
policies designed to establish United States hegev:.oay
over the world, to subordinate the economics and gov(~rn­
ments of other countries to United States aims, to enslave
other cou~tries and peoples and to unleash a new war.
36. The United States emerged from,th~ war practically untouched, with a tremendous apparatus to be
kept going at a profit, on the one hand, and with a
shrinking internal and world capitalist market on
the other, with vast economic and military power at its
disposal and its imperialist rivals either crushed or
vastly weakened. The tuling circles of the United
States therefore considered the moment propitious for
embarking upon an attempt to fulfil their long-cherished .aim, world empire, to achieve that mad goal and
to bolster the badly shaken system of world capitalism
by war against the.countries of socialism and by crushing the resurgent national liberation movements of the
.
,
colonial peopies.
37. It is this and this clIone that explains every aspect
of the post-war foreign .policy of the United States:
the Marshall Plan, with ib motive of destroying the

S2aM Meeting-IS Deeomber 1950
sovereigtlty of the countries of western Europe and
forcing them into the war schemes of Washington; the
Truman doctrine, which stands revealed in all its
nakedness in the ravaging of Greece; the North. Atlantic Treaty which was openly proclaimed a pact for war
against the Soviet Union and the peoples' democracies
38. It is these openly expansionist and aggressive
aims. of the United States that explain the scrapping of
the Yalta' and Potsdam agreements; the renazification
and remilitarization of western .Germany; the ·freeing
of war criminals and restoration -to power of the
Mitsuis and Mitsubishis in Japan; the vast aid. giv~n
to the rotten and corrupt Chiang Kai-shek clique; the
arming of reactionary governments and the support
of every fascist clique the' world over. It is these·-aggressive aims that explain the monsh-ous growth of
the military budget, the war preparations of the United
States Government and the plague-like spread of its air
and naval bases in· every corner of the world into
which it has been able to bribe or bully its way.
39.. It was clear from the start that it was· not upon
dollars or productive capacity or ordinary military
weapons alone that the ruling circles of the United
States placed thdr chief .reliance in satisfying their
insane ambitions for world domination. Uppermost in
their calculations was the belief that their monopoly of
the atomic bomb gave them the sole possession of a
supreme weapon,. an irresistible force before which all
and everything must yield. To create the proper impression, the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were arranged, with enormous cost in lives, with
this instrument of mass destruction of which they
thought they had exclusive possession. They felt that
they could intimidate and blackmail other nations and
peoples into complete submission. If that failed, the
atomic bomb could come into its own as a perfect
military weapon for achieving United States world
domination.
..
40. This latter conception was advanced at the time
only by the most rabidly imperialist elements, who
fallaciously assumed that a knock-out blow could be
delivered in a blitzkrieg fashion by a fleet of bombers
carrying atomic bombs and by rockets with atomic
warheads. It is well known, of course, that this policy
of intimidation achieved only dismal failure as regards
its effect upon those ~gainst'whom it was chiefly
directed - the Soviet Union and the peoples' democracks. It cannot be said, however, that the policy of
th\: atomic bomb blackmail did not achieve certain
results and did not gain some Pyrrhic victories. The
support given. by the majority of the Members of this
Organization to the completely unworkable and un...
acceptable Baruch plan is evidence of that fact. It will
pay us to look briefly at the sad history of the discussions of this plan which only this afternoon was
described as the only possible solution.
41. It will be recalled that on 24 January 1946, at
the first session of the General Assembly, a resolution
was passed directing the establishment of the Atomic
Energy Commission. In order . to understand the
causes of the failure of the Atomic Energy Commission
one must go back to 14 June 1946,4 when the Baruch
• See Official Rl'cords of the A.tomic Energy Commission,
First Year, No.! (ist meeting).
.

report was laid before, the CQmmission. In a tone of
almost biblical self..rigbteousness, Bernard Baruch pre..
sented the United St.ates plan. It was clear from the
start that that pro!XJsal for an international atomic development authority was intended to. guarantee. for the
'United States a virtual monopoly m the entire field
of atomic energyj\ a mot"opoly to be ensured by the
fact that within· the inl:ernational authority, in the
foreseeable future at leas t, there would be a majority
amenable to United Sh\t.~s 'dictation. Not satisfied
with tnis, howj~ver, Mr. :aaruch demanded ·that the
principle of the unanirnit)~ of the great Powers should
he eliminated, that the· sovereignty of nations should
be eliminated. However, the bnsic questions of the
elitnination of. atomic weapons and the destnt<..tion of
existh1,ff stockpiles were left to the discretion of the. majority o£the members of the authority, which could, of
course, prolong indefinitely tbe existence of the grow-·
ing United States stockpile of bombs.
42. Throughout the interminable months of ~ebate
in the Atomic Energy Commission, it became dear
that the United States had o;idopted a "take it or leave
it" position -as Mr. Baruch expressed it _. on the
plan, and was not prepared to accept any genuine
compromise.
'
43 The repeated efforts of the Soviet Un,ion delep.tion and of my delegation; which at that time was a
member of the Security Council, to bring the points
at issue to a compromise, were coldly rebuffed
and again. Thus when the USSR, in its desire for
a solution, agreed to provisions for freedom of ·inspection whereby· the inspectors would have"unitnpeded
rights of ingress, egress and aCC~S$ ••. into, from and
within the territory of every participating nation, unhindered by national or local authorities",G and whereby the m:gans of inspection would operate "on the basis
of their own rules, which should provide for the adoption of decisions, in appropriate cases, by a majority
vote"," even then the United States declined to explore
the merging. area of agreement on this crucial point.
44.. The proposals of the Soviet Union of 11 June
1947'1 expounding those it had advanced in 1946~ contained a comprehensive scheme of control based. on
international inspection as well a~ an outline of an
organization for scientific research in the field of·atomic
energy. Before submitting the plan, the USSR, in its
'efforts towards a compromise, had agreed tb&t all
decisions within the competence of the control agency
'should be adopted by an ordinary majority and that~
'incase of violation, Article 51 of the Charter should
be .applied. The Soviet Union also agreed that
countries should be allotted quotas for production and
consumption at every stage of the work,. from mining
to the release of atomic energy.
45. It was clear to all at the time that the USSR proposals constituted a well-rounded plan aiming at a
sound compromise which would guarantee the legitimate positions of all the. parties concerned and which
therefore afforded a basis for a. workable agreement.
. Events showed, however, that the United StatGS was
bent uMn preventing any agreement, believ~l1g that

nme

1I Ibid., First Yeat', S.pecial Supplement, page 18.
8

Ibid., Third Year; Special Supplement, page 21.

'1 Ibid., page 22.

General Assembly-Fifth SeeJ8ion-Plenary Ideetinga
it had a moncpoly of atomic energy secrets. The United
States considered that monopoly to be a major weapon
in its power politics and was not prepared to give
up its use, either in war or in peace, as a weapon of
pressure, blackmail and extortion.
46. At the third ~ession of the General Assembly,
in Paris, the United States delegation came to the
United Nations with the determination -- and with the
assurance, or so it thought, at least, that the majority
of delegations would be prepared to follow it and assist
it - to anaesthetize the Atomic Energy Commission
and withdraw the disposal of one of the most crucial
problems of our time from the limelight of world
~1.1blic opinion, placing the blame for the failure on the
USSR. Tbat, the United States thought, would permit it to pursue an unimpeded course ('f building up
an ever greater stockpile of atomic weapons and gradually capturing control of uranium resources the world
over.
47. The pressure of public opinion and the intense
desire for peace of peoples everywhere put a. snag in
the implementation of those aims of the United States.
So strong was the impact of the stand iaken at the
third session of the General Assembly by the representatives of the USSR, Poland, Czechoslovakia, the
Byelorussian SSR and the Ukrainian SSR, so strong
was the response of the peoples of the world to the
Soviet Uniod proposal for an immediate pact to bring
about the reduction by one-third of the armaments of
the great Powers,s that the United States and its associates had to back down on the issue of discarding
the Atomic Energy Commission. The resolution for
the suspensiof\ of the Commission9 and the accusation
against the ~ :SSR were withdrawn. The resolution
which was adopted by the General Assembly [resolution 191 (Ill) h although its final version was unsatisfactory from the point of view of establishing a genuine
possibility .of agreement, neverth~less directed the
Atomic Energy Commiss{on to resume its ar.tivities
and the possibility was preserved, at least th~oretically,
for continued negotiations among the Powers.
48. There is no doubt that a certain c1imaY 'Nas
reached in the discussion in Paris when, in his desire
to reach an agreement, the chairman of the Soviet
Union delegation,Mr. Vyshinsky, demonstrated to
the world the genuineness of his country's 3ntention to
arrive at a solution of the impasse on the atomic energy
question.
49, It will he recalled that throughout ,he whole debate
011 'tbat question, and in accordance with General Ass\..mbly resolutions 1 (I) and 41 (I) of 24 January
and 14 December 1946, the USSR and Poland' demanded in the Security Council that in settling the
question of control of atomic energy, priority should
be given to the adoption of a convention outlawing the
atomic bomb and ordering the destruction of existing "stockpiles.
I submit that, the validity ot that approach continues to be unquestionable today, yet in order to
8 See t. ifficial Records of the General Assembly, Third Session, Pan' 1, Plenary Meetings, page 135, and ibid., Annexes,
document A/723.
,
9 See 01'!itial Records of the S emrity CoUlttil, Third Year,
'l"os. 83 anl} 88.

,---------

remove any lingering suspicion and, to facilitate the
needed agreement, the USSR expressed its willingness to accept a simultan.eous enactment of botb conventions, one dealing with international control and
the other with the prohibition of atomic weapons,
50. Amidst an immense wave of hope, amtdst optimistic reactions the world over, responsible statesmen who
were genuinely con~emed about a peaceful settlement
of outstanding internation~l issues looked to the United
States for the next move, but their statements betrayed
a lack of knowledge of the real ~,ms pursued by
American business, military and political leadership.
The answer was a resounding uNo", while the American people, subjected as they are to the fury of the
soying witch-hunt hysteria, were not given even a
chance to examine the Soviet Union attitude. The
summary and curt fashion in which the United States
Government rebuffed that proposal, the cursory way
in which the American Press reported it, left little
room for doubt as to the real intent of the ruling circles of the United States to preserve what they hoped
would be their monopoly in the field of atomic ent'rgy.
51. The Baruch plan and the policy of atomic bomb
blackmail and intimidati011 received the most staggering setback when, during the period between the third
and fourth sessions of the General Assembly, a new
situation arose - when the world learned tt:tt the
United States could no longer even claim monopoly of
the atomic bomb. What is more, the world learned
that at the very time when the United States had
been bent on the utilization of atomic energy for destrnctive purpo~>-:s ,and had obstructed every attempt
made in the United Nations to resolve the problem
of atomic energy and atomic warfare, the USSR had
been putting atomic energy to wOlk in the performance
of great tasks of peaceful reconstruction.
52. No che..ap irony, no cheap jokes will belittle that
fad. The world learned that in the socialist Soviet
Union atomic energy was being used, to carry out vae.t
econo'11ic plans, that it was being utilized for the blowing up of mountains, changing the course of rivers,
irrigating deserts and laying out new lines of life where
human foot had never trod. The world learned that
in the USSR atomic energy was being used to advance
the welfare of the Soviet people and to further the real
progress of human culture.
53. The announcement by President Truman that the
Soviet Union was also in possession of the atomic
"know-how" and' the atomic bomb had, it will be recalled, the effect of a bombshell in the United States.
The American people, who had been bullied by demagogy intt> believing that their security rested solely
upon the myth of the American atomic bomb monopoly,
felt betrayed, let down. Their weapon, the American
atomir. bomb, h~::! ceased to be in the possession of the
United States alone. Their false feeling of security had
been shattered to pieces. How did the government react?
The government ordered the preparation of bett~r
bombs, meaning bombs which would destroy more,
cause more destruction and kill more people. The
famous hydrogen bomb was botn of that fear.
54. One would have been justified in believing, at
that time, that the fact that the alleged monopoly of
atomic weapons by the United States had proved to

_-..._._---_..

323rd Meeting-IS December 1950

_----------~,-=::....._---------------_

be non-exist~nt would exert some influence on the

foreign policy of the Unit~d States and would help to
advance the cOJ::1trol of atomic energy and the universal
and unconditional prohibition of its use in war. The
debates wh\ch took place during the fourth session of the
General AssemblylO plt'oved that that was not the case;
they proved that while the USSR was continuously
maintainir.g its position for the t-Tohibition of atomic
weapons, the destruction of existing stockpiles and the
l,tilization of atomic energy for peaceful purposes the
world over, the United States was insisting even more
intransigently that it would permit the adoption of its
own proposals only.
55. The draft resolution submitted jointly by Canada
and France Wild approved by the Ad If oc Political Committeel l was, as my delegation pointed out at that time,
only anothe~~ version of the position of the United
States. It prolonged and sanctioned the existing impasse, while the dra;ft resolution of the USSR12 again
demonstrated the stDcere and constructive efforts of
that Power in the field of control of atomic en\ergy.
The Soviet Union demanded effective action. Its proposal was rejected..
56. Among the ruling circles of the United States,
the faint line of demarcation separating those who had
viewed the atomic bomb solely as an instrument of intimidation or as an irresistible weapon in the event
that intimidation did not succeed, and those who had
been calling for the immediate use of the atomic bomb
in a so-called preventive war, grew increasingly faint.
Adventurously sweeping aside the new reality created
by the loss of what they had thought was their
monopoly, the ruling circles of the United States projected a foreign policy and strategic plans based on the
determination to have more, bigger and more destructive bombs, to use them, and to use them first. It is
this that explains the increased feverishness with which
~he United States Government began to increase its
stockpile of atomic weapons, to speed up its development of bacteriological and chemical means of mass
destruction. It is now its intention to strive to create
what the world has correctly named the "hell bomb",
and it has appropriated millions of dollars for that
purpose.
57. It is incontestable, therefore, that the entire
foreign policy and military strategy of· the United
States, the entire system of what is hypocritically
named "United States security", is based upon the
intention to keep the atomic weapon. The representatives of the United States made this more than clear
when they cynically declared that even if all mankind
signed the Stockholm Appeal, it would not influence
their way of thinking.
58. In the light of what I have just st*\ted, it is easy
to understand the entire history of our discussions on
the question of atomic energy. No elaborate statement, such as we heard from my predecessor, wiII
change these basic facts, nor will references to the new
10 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth
Session, Plenary Meetin(ls. 252nd to 254th meetings inclusive,
and ibid.• Ad Hoc Politfcal Committee. 30th to 37th meetings
inclusive.
11 Ibid.• Fourth Session. Plenary Meetings, Anne:r. document A/1119.
12 Ibid., document A/1120.

. . . . - . . . . .- --,

prophet of certain States, Adolf Hitler, change the
fact that the Soviet Union has always adopted a position which, if accepted, would lead towards control and
prohibition and would guarantee the economic development of atomic energy for peaceful purposes on a basis
of equality. On the other hand the United States, in
producing the Baruch plan as the only solution, has
sought to maintain a monopoly for the purpose of
blackmailing the world and furthering its imperialist
aims. We need not go further to explain the stubborn...
ness with which the United States, and the mechanical
majority which it commands in this Organization,
cling to that plan in spite of the fact that they know
that it is unacceptable to the USSR, the country which
also possesses atomic energy and which proposes to de..
stroy atomic bombs after others have subscribed to the
prohibition of that weapon. They stick to this plan in
spite of the great criticism which has been expressed
in many circles and from many sourc('''j, including
United States and British scientists.
.
59. It is quite clear to everyone that the Baruch plan
was not intended to be accepted by the Soviet Union.
It was devised with the full knowledge that its ternlS
were unacceptable to any State which wished to have
the right of sovereign development. It was destined to
be rejected. It was first advanced in a period when
it was thought that the United States possessed a
monopoly and that the USSR would not have atomic
energy for many years to come. The Baruch plan was
intended to harness all the atomic energy research of
the allies of the United States to the direct aims and
requirements of the United States' drive for- world
domination. At the same time, it was intended that
the rrejection of the Baruch plan by ·the· Soviet Union
should be used as a potential weapon of propaganda
in an anti-Soviet campaign, as it was used this afternoon by the representative of the United Kingdom. The
idea, as practised by him, was to heap accusations upon
the USSR for having rejected the plan and thus place
that country in the position of allegedly constituting
the main obstacle to the control of atomic euergy and
atomic weapons.
60. This, I am sure, is clear even to those who support the position of the United States on this question.
It is therefore unnecessary for my delegation once
again to analyse the details of the Baruch plan or to
expose it point by point. The discussion we have had
for more than four years has made it quite plain that the
United States has no intention and never had any intention of yielding to any international control; that it will
continue to refuse to accept any compromise; and that
the. sole alternative.whi.ch it proposes is acceptance.of
UnIted States domInatIOn and control of all atomic
ener~ resources and it~ exclusive right to possess
atomIC weapons and atomIC energy.
61. The balance sheet is clear. One has to admitand I do so with great regret -- that the United Nations has not fulfilled its duty of finding a solution to
this problem. It has yielded to the strategic interests
of the United States and to the designs of' that
country for world domination. It has continued to
yield to the. United States despite the increasingly
evident contradictions in the proposals advanced by
that country.
.

General AIsembly-Fifth Ses8iob-Plonary Meetings
62. The clumsiness with which the delegation of the
United States has tried to conceal the falseness and
untenability of its positions is most clearly revealed
in its latest manoeuvre" It will be recalled that when
the movement for signa.tures to the Stockholm Appeal
first began, the Secretary of State, Mr. Acheson, tried
to ridicule it, to disregard it, to pretend that it did not
exist and to bury his head in the sand. Soon, however,
when the signatures to the appeal kept exceeding all
expectations, Mr. Acheson had to take a new tack.
On 12 July 1950, Mr. Acheson stated that the type of
weapon used was quite incidental. Thus he bluntly
declared and admitted that he did not consider the
prohibition of atomic weapons at all necessary and that
the goals presented in the appeal were unacceptable to
the United States Government.
63. Following Mr. Acheson's line of reasoning~ the
President of the United States, speaking before the
United Nations on 24 October [295th meeting], tried
to put all weapons on the same level, thereby trying to
link up the prohibition of atomic weapons with general
disarmament. It is quite characteristic of the entire
policy of the United States that on the qt,.estion of
atomic energy control, when it believed that it had a
monopoly of the atomic bomb, it hesitated even to
discuss jointly the question of prohibition of the atomic
weapnn and general disarmament. Now, all of a sudden, it sees no difference between the atomic bomb
and other types of weapons, and all it is concerned with
is aggression. The United Nations was founded to
prevent aggression.
64. The imperative necessity to outlaw the atomic
bomb, resolved in the first days of the existence of
the United Nations, was based on the very nature of
this type of weapon, on the fact that it is solely and
wholly a weapon of aggression destined to be used for
attack, for the destruction of cities and for the mass
annihilation of peaceful populations.

65. Less destructive and less cruel weapons have been
outlawed and condemned separately. It is enough to
mention the conventions on the prohibition of poison
gas and the dum-dum bullets. Is it not therefore correct
that this weapon, which can be used only as a weapon
of aggression and aga:nst peaceful cities, a weapon
whose military important\: i~ limited, should be treated
separately and should be outlawed as one of the first
steps in the drive for general diS&:"dWllent and the creation of a better atmosphere in which further steps
would be possible?
.
66. All the double talk about the identity of weapons
and the necessity of joint disarmament, whether the
weapons are rifles or atomic bombs, is meant only to
confuse the issue, to hide the fact that it is a crime
against humanity to use weapons of mass destruction.
This attitude has been formulated before this Assembly
in a draft resolution which, if we reject and remove all
the verbiage of its introductory part, is reduced to this,
that the United Nations will be given an opportunity
during the coming year to study whether the linking up
of the consideration of the problem should or should
not be adopted. Then next year we shall be faced with
a report which we may discuss and perhaps make
amenrlrnents and recommendations for further studies.

67. It is clear that in view of the position of the
greater part of humanity, expressed in the Stockholm
Appeal, in view of the desires and tendencies of all
humanity, no disarmament could be rejected. Therefore
the problem is reduced to a discussion which would
dissolve into technicalities and legal quibbles, and from
which no genuine solution, or even any solution at all,
could be brought forth.
68. It is therefore clear that by yielding to the pressure of the United States. the majority of the Members
of this Organization have condemned themselves to the
necessity of following every twist and turn of the
manreuvres m the United States on the question we are
now discussing. By supporting the position of the
United States on this question, the majority have
brought themselves before the court of all mankind, by
whom they will be declared no less guilty than those
who are preparing atomic warfare.
69. I cannot, however, refrain from expressing in all
earnestness, the hope of my delegation that the Members of this Organization will not close this discussion
without taking some definitive steps in the direction of
real control of atomic energy and the prohibition of
atomic weapons. When we say this, it should be clear
that we do so out of a genuine desire for peace and not
out of fear. We have made it clear in the past, and we
make it clear again, that we consider· the brandishing
by the United States of the atomic bomb and of the
hydrogen bomb as an attempt to blackmail the world,
and neither we nor any other people intent on maintain·
ing control over their own destinies will yield before
such pressure. No, our only hope is that this Organization may yet take some positive action at this session
to resolve this question, and this hope is based on the
belief that not all of you will or can close your ears, as
the United States would have you do, to the insistent
and resounding cry of humanity that the United Nations should act to outlaw the atomic weapon and brand
as a war criminal the government that first uses this
instrument of mass annihilation.
70. Those of you who seek for a positive course of
action do not have to look far. In the proposals which
the Soviet Union has placed before us, proposals which
my delegation unreservedly supports, we have a plan
for which we can vote with the full knowledge that we
are meeting all the requirements of the sovereignty of
our countries, of logic, workability and morality. These
proposals put the issue squarely before the Assembly.
They are for the prohibition and the destruction of the
stockpiles and the implementation of that through control, which has been made plainly clear. The control
must be efficient. We shall have to work through a
commission which will act on its own rules of proceaure
and which will, at the same time, create new hope and
new possibilities for co-operation in this world where
various social systems are maintained. The simultaneous
introduction of both conventions is more timely than ever
before, in view.of the repeated threats with which we are
faced from many circles in the United States.
71. Therefore, before anyone here r.dsht;~ once again
to reject these proposals, I ask you to consider most
seriously what it is that you are rejecting. Also, that what
we have before us is not purely a USSR proposal. The

641

323rd Meeting-IS December 1950
proposals which are contained in the Soviet Union draft
resolution [A/1676], to which we request you to give
most serious consideration, embody the demands which,
through the Stockholm App'eal and the World Peace
Congress, more than 800 mIllion people have individually and collectively placed before us. The peace movement which brought forth the Stockholm Appeal is a
great historic event. It directly embraces the greater
part of the' population of the world. It represents the
interests of the human race, the interest of the preservation of culture and civilization from madmen who, in
their drive for world domination, would not hesitate to
leave the most terrible destruction and an abyss of suffering in their wake. It expresses in the most conscious
and emphatic manner the appeal for relief from the
threat of atomic bombs that welled forth spontaneously
when the President of the United States openly brandished the atomic bomb last week.
72. The peoples of the world, to whom we refer in the
first words of our Charter, have thus voiced their
desire and demand that what they have hoped for, the
United Nations will at last make a reality. They have
voiced a demand that atomic weapons, and all other
instruments of mass extermination of human beings,
should be prohibited and destroyed, thus clearing the
way for the universal utilization of atomic energy for
peaceful purposes. They have voiced the demand that
this gigantic step forward in man's mastery of nature
should be used not for the mastery of the many by the
few but to promote the welfare and raise the standard
of living of the peoples everywhere. to heal the sick, and
to make the grass grow green in the desert.
73. And those who do not heed the people, who treat
them as pawns to be moved about in the wild game of
world conquest, will not long escape the just retribution that will be visited upon them for having failed to
act while there was still time.
74. In the name of the Polish delegation, I call upon
the Members of this Organization to break the deadlock in wbich the United States has kept us on this
question. Vote for the proposals of the USSR and thus
convince the peoples of the world that they can still
c~ntinue to regard the United Nations as a force for

peace.

75. Colonel GHALEB Bey (Egypt): More than five
years have elapsed since it ~.vas stipulated, in Article 26
of the Charter, th.at "in order to promote the establishment . . . of international peace and security with the
least diversion for armam,'mts of the world's human
and economic reoources", pl~\ns should be submitted to
Members of the United Nations "for the establishment
of a system for the regulation of armaments".
76. The Charter speaks of armaments as a whole.
That means all types of weapons used by armed forces.
This approach to the problem was maintained in several
resolutions of the General Assembly for which my delegation and a great majority of other delegations voted.
77. The consistent and impartial stand taken by the
Egypt.1.ri delegation, whether in the General Assembly,
the Set.urity Council, the Atomic Energy Commission,
or the Commission for Conventional Armaments, derives from the correct conception of the General Assembly's resolutions on the question.

78. In its resolution 41 (I) of 14 December 1946, the
General Assembly pronounced as an urgent objective
the prohibition and elimination from national armaments of atomic and all other major weaponsadapt~
able to mass destruction, the early estabUslunentof
international control of atomic energy and other modern
scientific discoveries, and technical developments to
ensure their use only for peaceful puwoses. In the
same resolution it made clear its intention to ensure
that the general prohibition, regulation and reduction
of armaments w~re directed towards the major weaPQns
of modem warfare and not merely towards the minor
weapons.
79. In its resolution 192 (Ill) of 19 November 1948,
the General Assembly stated "that the
of the reduction of conventional armaments and armed forces can
only be attained in an atmosphere of real and lasting
improvement in international relations, which implies
in particular the application of control of atomic energy
involving the prohibition of the atomic weapon".
BO.· The Egyptian delegation has consistently held the
view that the two questions of the prohibition and con- .
trol of atomic energy, and the regulation and reduction
of conventional armaments and anned forces, are interrelated and closely connected. That view, based not
only on Article 26 of the Charter, but on the subsequent
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, has not
been spared criticism.
81. It is not, therefore, without a sense of satisfaction
that the Egyptian delegation finds itself readily supporting the joint draft resolution now before us [A/1668
and Corr.1] It can only hope that the draft will receive
the unanimous support of the Members of the United
Nations. We cannot afford to waste any more time to
bring about agreement on this vim! issue.
89. Our goal, as frequently expressed by the General
Assembly and the two United Nations organs most
directly concerned with the problem, can be reached
only in an atmosphere of real and lasting improvement
in international relations. It is with this object in view
that Egypt co-sponsored the· two draft resolutions3.8
presented to the First Committee regarding the cease...
fire in Korea and the question of peace in the Far East.
social advancement of the
83. The economic
human race in all parts of the globe necessitates the curtailment of arms expenditures. This can be achieved
only if the present tension is relaxed to the extent
necessary to lay the foundation of friendly international
relations among nations. By voting for the joint draft
resolution, which provides that the Atomic Energy
Commission and the Commission for Conventional
Armaments should be merged in one disarmament commission, we feel we are lending our support to a practical and, we hope, a fruitful measure that· has long been
sought.
84. In line with these views, the Egyptian delegation
will th~refore abstain from voting on the USSR draft
resolutton [A/1676].
85. We must always bear in mind the fact that the
most essential prerequisite for the formation of practical
proposals for disarmament is an atmosphere of international confidence and security. In the name of the

mm

and

tl See documents A/C.1/641 and A/C.lI642.

General Anembly-Fifth See.lon-Plenary Meetings

I

living, and in 1tlemory of those who have fallen or are
now dying, shall we, great and small, strive to achieve
that gOat?
86. Mr. BARANOVSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (translated from Russian) : There is no
need to stress the exceptional importance of the prohibition of the atomic weapon for the maintenance and
strengthening oiintemational peace and security. Nevertheles$, ~though the General Assembly has now been
considering the question it:'" five sessions, the United
Nations has bef:tl unable to arrive at a satisfactory solution, namely, the prohibition of atomic eneriY for military pUq.Nses and the establishment of strlct international control to ensure observance of such prohibition.
8? It is there~ore natural to ask who is responsible
for this situati01.1, whose fault it is that the United
Nations still cannot adopt the requisite recommendations for the prohibition of the atomic weapon, and who
has brought about the deadlock in the Atomic En.ergy
.Commission. The responsibility lies with the AngloAmerican bloc and, above all, with the ruling circles of
the United States. Ca,rried away by feverish plans for
world domination, the United States, aided by the
United Kingdom, has staked its greatest hopes on the
use of the atomic bomb and relies on its! superiority in
atomic weapons. United States policy on the utilization
of the atomic bomb is based on the popular misconception that supremacy in international relations belongs
to the country posse~sing the largest stock of atomic
bombs.
88. Thus, although at one time there was much talk
in United States official circles about the vast potenti..
alities latent in the use of atomic energy for peaceful
purposes, the question is in practice considered only
frDnl a military standpoint. The only reason why industry for the production of atomic energy is being developed in the United States is in order to manufacture
the atomic weapon, not to satisfy peace-time needs.
89. In· the official report of the United States Atomic
Energy Co~l1tIii~sion, published in 1949J it is bluntly
stated· that "the activity of the Atomic Energy Commission receiving major attention has continued to be
the production and improvement of atomic weapons~'.
Further on it is stated that "new designs of weapons
have been tested and found to be successful, and further
developments are now in prOiress".u It is perfectly
natural, therefore, that the Untted States Government
should sabotage the prohibition of the atomic weapon
and the setting up of a system of.effective international
control to ensure'observance of the. prohibition of the
use of atomic energy for military purposes.
90. The United States ruling circles, acting through
certain dele~tions to the United Nations which are
dependent t!f~n them, are pushing through the adoption of such resolutions as suit their purposes. Those
resolutions not only do not contribute towards a satisfactory solution of the atomic energy question but, on
the contrary, actually hinder the establishment of
atomic energy control. The debates on the question of
atomic energy in various United Nations organs have
shown that the United States ruling circles are not in
14 See Fifth Stmiannual Repot't of the Atomic Energy Commission, January 1949,pa.ge 40.

the least prepared to give up the use of atomic energy
for the production of atomic bombs and do not intend
to suhmit their atomic energy industry to international
control. On the contrary, th~ United States, by stubbornly forcing its plan for atomic energy control on the
United Nations, is seeking to place U9der its control the
atomic energy industries of all other countries and to
appropriate their reserves of fissionable materials, such
as uranium and thorium ore.
91. The United States plan for international control
reflects the military and strategic aims of the ruling
circles of the United States. Its purpose, therefore, is to
. confirm the United States in its position of superiority
in the production and stockpiling of atomic weapons,
and to maintain the economic supremacy of the United
States in the world by preventing a rational utilization
of atomic energy. This .plan not only does not offer
guarantees for peace and international security, but it
is actually directed against the economic development of
other countries, particularly the smaller and insufficiently developed countries for which the use of atomic
energy in economic development is of exceptional
importance.

92. Under the United States plan, all world resources
Qf atomic raw materials and all atomic energy plants
and allied industries are to be handed over to the socr.lled international control agency which would, in fact t .
be an American super-trust directed by the chief monopoly groups of the United States. The United States
plan would not only fail to restrict but, on the contrary,
would encourage the production of atomic weapons by
the United States, and would enable the American
monopolists to interfere in the internal affairs of other
countries under the pretext of control and to subordinate the economic and political development of those
countries to their own interests.
93. The attitude of the United States Government to
the problem of control of the use of atomic energy was
unequivocally stated' by President Trtlman at a Press
conference held in February 1950. He said that the
Baruch plan was as good then as when it had been
worked out, that it had not been revised and that there
was no reason to revise it now. Thus the head of the
United States Government stated in direct terms that
the U::tited States was against the introduction of any
control of atomic energy other than the so-called control
provided in the Baruch plan.
94. This is also the position of the United Kingdom
Government, which is entirely at one with the United
States on this matter. That is what we were told today
by the United Kingdom representative, Sir Gladwyn
Jebb, who, as usual, appeared in the role of attorney for
the United States ruling circles.
95. The USSR plan for the prohibition of the use of
atomie energy for military purposes and, at the same
time, the establishment of strict international control to
ensure observance of that prohibition, is based on different and, indeed, directly contrary premises. It is
designed to ensure, as rapidly as possible, the utiliza-·
tion of atomic energy as a new and inexhaustible source
of energy for the acceleration of the development of the
national economy of the Soviet Union. The policy of the
USSR in the field of atomic energy is aimed at increas-

323rd Meeting-13 Deeember 1950
ing'the welfare of the people of our country. The control plan of the Soviet Union reflects that policy.
96. That plan provides for the establishment, within
the framework of the Security Council, of an international control commission which would carry out
measures of control of atomic energy facilities and
would be ,empowered to conduct periodical inspections
of facilities for the mining of atomic raw materials and
for the production of atomic materials and atomic
energyY;
,

97. The Soviet Union considers it essen6al to vest the
international control commission with wide powers in
keeping with the purposes and requirements of control
and in$pection, which would ensure the setting up of
real international control. Mr. Vyshinsky, the head of
the USSR delegation, has listed those powers in full
[321st m~eting]. It is sufficient to study the provisions
regarding those powers and the methods of the international control commission's work to realize that all
the assertions of' the representatives of the United
States and certain other countries concerning the allegedly unsatisfactory nature of the Soviet Union plan
of control do not bear scrutiny and are wholly unfounded. Such allegations are made by the champions
of the United States control plan merely in order to
discredit the USSR plan and to cover'up the defects
and the reactionary nature of the United States plan.
98. The Government of the Soviet TJnion considers
that without the prohibition of the atomic weapon, any
control of atomic energy is impossible; control without
prohibition would be meaningless and would benefit no
one, except the United States, That is why the l.TSSR
delegation is proposing [A /1676] that the General Assembly should decide in favour of the immediate preparation of conventions on the unconditional prohibition
of the atomic weapon and the establishment of international control to ensure observance of that prohibition,
the intention being that they should be drafted and
submitted to the Security Council not later than 1 June
1951. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR fully suppoits that proposal.
99. The United Kingdom representative, Sir Gladwyn
J ebb, is insincere when he says that the Governments
of the United States and the United Kingdom now wish
to reach agreement with us regarding the utilization of
atomic energy arid' the prohibition of the atomic
weapon. Those governments have no such wish. They
are doing everything to prevent even the discussion of
t~is question, not to mention the adoption of conventIOns.
lOO. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR does not
believe that the eight-Power draft resolution [A/1668
and Corr.1] brings us any closer to a satisfactory solution of the atomic energy question, as Sir Gladwyn Jebb
asserted today. It is clear, on the contrary, that the purpose of that draft is merely to divert attention from the
prohibition of the atomic weapon, which has been demanded by more than 500 million signatories to the
Stockholm Appeal throughout the world. The draft
represents an attempt to shelve the question of the
prohibition of the atomic weapon for at least a year,
15 See 0 ffic·ial Records of th.e Atomic Energy Com':1tission,
Third Year, Special Supplement, page 23.

thus leaving the United States and its partners frf.e to
exp~tld their production of atomic bombs, upon which
th\~ military adventurers and war-mongers have come to
count more and more.
lOt. That is why the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR
will '\fote against the' eight-Power draft resolution and
will support the draft resolution submitted by the
USSR delegation.
102. Mr. KISELEV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): The Assembly
has embarked upon the discussion of one of the most
important questions of our time, a question which is
causing great anxiety to every human being and to
every nation in the world-the prohibition ef the atomic
weapon and the establishment of inh~rnational control
of atomic energy. This question, as we ;;.11 l"Ilow, is not
new. Every clear-thinking person is aware ,of the fact
that practically nothing has been done SD far to implement General Assembly resolutions 1 (I) and
41 (I), of 24 January and 14 December '1946 respecth;ely, on the prohibition of the atomic. weapon and the
establishment of control of atomic energy.

103. It may naturally be wondered why nothing has
been done and who is to blame for that. It must be said
outright that the fault' lies definitely with the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom. I
shall endeavour to substantiate this statement by facts
and documents.
104. We accuse the ruling circles and the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom of
having systematically and stubbornly prevented the
United Nations during the past five years from reach'ing agreement on the prohibitjon, of the atomic weapon
and the control required to, ensure observance of such
proldbition. They have tried to cover their refusal to
agree to the prohibition of the atomic weapon by idle
talk about the precedence of control over pl;ohibition.
They have harped incessantly on the Acheson-BaruchLilienthal plan, a subject which they have no intention
of dropping, but they have not expressed a single new
idea which might inspire hoPe in the solution of this
problem.
.
105. The ruling circles of the United States pretend to
be in favour of prohibiting the atomic weapon, but in
fact they are stubbornly opposing such, prohibition. Ye~
the peoples of the world are clamouring for the immediate prohibition of the atomic weapon. Every day, in
all countries of the world, the movement of the Partisans of Peace is acquiring hundreds of thousands of
new members who demand the unconditional prohibition of the atomic weapon, which is a weapon of intimidation and mass destruction. They call for the establishment of strict international control to ensure observance of the prohibition of the atomic weapon and they
hold that the first government to use the atomic weapon
against any country will have committed a crime
against humanity and must be regarded as a war

j

pions of atomic warfare, who openly sPeak the language
of cannibai~ and 'war-mongers. In that connexion, the
statement made on 18 October 1949 by Mr. Symington. 1
Chairman of the National Security Resources Board,

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings
before the House Committee on Armed Services of the
United States Congress, is truly significant. He said
that there were heavy civilian casualties in the Second
World War, particularly when atomic bombs were
dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and added: "1
think the President once told me he figured it [the
atomic bomb] saved a quarter of a million American
casualties . . • If civilians are going to be killed, I would
rather have them their civilians than our civilians ... I
had never thought of the problem in the military establishment being one· of morality of war before." Morality, he concluded, was a matter for the State Department, and not' for the armed services. It could not be
put more clearly.
107. Thus Mr. Symington comes out openly in favour
of use of the atomic weapon and considers it to be
perfectly normal. In fact, he is surprised that there
should be any talk of ethics. He finds it utterly incomprehensible, and indeed peculiar, that millions of people
the world over should angrily protest against such
.' ghoulish statements and want to pillory. the war, mongers who dream of using atomic and hydrogen
, bombs in order to reduce to ashes thousands of towns
and villages and dozens of millions of human beings.
. 108. It would be a mistake to think that Mr. Symington was an exception. No, there are a good many Symi ingtons among the reactionaries in the United Sta~es
and the United Kingdom. The Washington Post of 12
September 1950 reported a statement by Senator Stennis to the effect that the United States had 450 or more
perfected atomic bombs, enough to drop fifty bombs on
every major city in the USSR. That is Senator Stennis'
, dream.
109. Such statements must make it perfectly clear to
everyone that those who want to further their plans for
empire by' means of the atomic bomb have not become
resigned· to the failure of their policy of blackmail and
; intimidation. Even now they are endeavouring to create
a panic by their propag--cl11da of hate.
110. It is common knowledge that the USSR mastered
. the secret of atomic energy production in an unbelievably short time, thereby putting an end to the United
States monopoly in that field. The war~mongers are
nevertheless continuing their propaganda· for a new war
and encouraging the ~rmaments race, including the
, manufacture of the atomic weapon. They are resolutely
. opposed to peace. They say straight out that the United
States cannot afford to accept a programme of disarmament in respect of the atomic weapon. They threaten to
"shower" the peoples of other countries with atomic
bombs.
111. This anthropophagous doctrine has even found a
theoretician in the United States, in the person of
Theodor Rosebury~ a professor at Columbia University,
who favours using atomic bombs in a future war. In his
book Peace or Pestilence, which has been published in
the United States, he says that it makes little difference
whether a man dies an easy or a painful death, since the
result is the same, and adds: "A man can be no deader
than dead."ls This brings him to the following conclusion: "In my opinion to single out biological warfarej

i

18 See Rosebur~ Theodor, Peace or Pestilence, McGraw-Hitl
Book Co., Inc., New York, Toronto, London, 1949, page 175.

or any other weapon or kind of warfare-as particu..
larly 'horrible' or ethically 'worse' can find neither
useful purpose nor justification."u
,
112. It is quite obvious that such mental gymnastics
on the part of the learned lackeys of atomic imperialism
constitute further damning proof of the utter corruption
and moral decadence of the capitalist system.
113. It is therefore not surprising that Senator Mundt,
speaking at a dinner at the Elizabeth Carteret Hotel on
25 April 1950, should have urged the American people
to launch a world-wide massacre by means of atomic
bombs. When the war comes, he said, as it is bound to
come, the United States must drop a sufficient number
of atomic bombs to destroy the country which is their
target.
114. I could cite hundreds of such ghoulish statements,
but the examples I have given are sufficient to enable
anyone to draw the proper conch..sions.
115. President Truman, in line with the general aggressive trend of United States policy, has also
repeatedly stated that he will not hesitate to use the
atomic bomb if necessary.
116. The attitude of the Anglo-American bloc on this
question is determined by the general aggressive policy
of the ruling circl~es of the United States and the United
Kingdom. For a number'of years now a violentpropaganda campaign has been waged to sway world public
opinion in favour of a new war; instead of being allowed
to die down, this propaganda and this atomic blackmail
are being intensified under every possible pretext, the
whole purpose being to justify the mad armaments race,
including the manufacture of atomic weapons.
117. According to the calculations of economists, the
United States has invested $4,500 million in the production of atomic weapons, while the work on the hydrogen
bomb brings the yearly expenditure to over $1,000
million.
118. It may be of interest to note a statement by
Gordon Dean, Chairman of the United States Atomic
Energy Commission. When asked by reporters whether
he spent the greater part of his time and thought on
producing the atomic bomb and dropping it on somebody, he answered that he could say, in all frankness,
that the main efforts were currently directed to turning
atomic energy into weapons and producing those atomic
weapons at a faster rate. His answer was clear: the
producti..,n of atomic bombs must be expanded and
speeded up.
119. The United States monopolists are growing fat
on the production of the means of mass destruction,
which is already bringing them profits running into
thousands of millions of dollars. The Press is spreading
provocative rumours about. the necessity of taking
special measures for United States defence and frighten·
ing the public with descriptions of the havoc that may
be wreaked by the atomic bomb.
120. The representatives of big capital, the Morgans,
du Ponts, Mellons and others-the true masters of
atomic energy in the United States-are carrying on a
mad atomic armaments race, and at the same time they
are doing their utmost to prevent the use of atomic
11 Ibid.,

page 181.

323rd Meeting~13December1950

651

to peaceful and constructive work. Soviet. sdentists, who
energy for peaceful, purposes. Yet they wish to keep
are working day and night on, the problem of the
public opinion from discovering that research work on
peaceful use of atomic energy, have already achieved
the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes is
some results. We need atomic· energy for peaceful
deliberately being sabotaged, and' are trying to justify
purposes as man needs air, water and food.
the utterly unsatisfactory state of that res'~arch by
attributing it to various extraneous circumstanc~s.
127. In an article entitled "Peace and Energy" one of
our, scientists, Professor, Golubtsov, wrote that Soviet
121. To that endt they have recruited a number of
scientists who are devoting considerable effort to proving
scientists had discovered different technological methods
and other technical possibilities for using atomic energy
that it is perfectly natural that the United States should
have .failed to achieve any results whatsoever in the
f"t peaceful purposes by converting it directly into heat
field of the utilization of atomic energy for peaceful
and electricity, and that Soviet science was far ahead of
purposes, while such progress has been made in the
foreign science in the field of atomic energy.
proQuction of all kinds of atomic weapons of mass
128. This bears out Mr. Vyshinsky's statement at the
destruction. Atomic energy will not be used for civilian
fourth session of the General Assembly19 to the effect
purposes, according to Professor 'Hafstad, for another
that the USSR was using atomic energy to accomplish
decade or two.
great tasks of peaceful construction, to water the deserts
and to chart new paths of life in regions untrod,den by
122. All this talk about the difficulties involved has
been disproved by Mr. Philip Morrison, a famous
human foot. The American Press attempted to suppress
United States scientist and one of the inventors of the
or distort those words. Even today, in the General
atomic bomb, who has now come out in favour of
Assembly, the United. Kingdom.· representative, Sir
prohibiting this weapon. He has urged large-scale reGladwyn Jebb, attempted to be sarcastic on the subject
search on the utilization of atomic energy for light and
of that statement. That was not wise, nor was it. in
heat. It is not easy to solve this problem, he wrote, but - ,accordance with the facts, because he was speaking
much easier than to produce a hydrogen. bomb, and
against the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes.
.
much more useful.
129. Thus, the champions of the atomic bomb fear the
123. Other scientists, however, are resorting to a
truth, even in the field of science. The' assertions of a
variety of spurious calculations :n the endeavour to
number of foreign scientists~ ~t1d also or some diplomats,
prove that the utilization of atomic energy for peaceful
that the \1se of atomic '"'n ergy for peaceful production is
purposes is irrational and unprofitable. The \.'sual argunot expedient, are utteriy untrue. They are designed to
ment advanced in support of this thesis i~, that th~
convin.ce plain· people of the in.evitability of preparing .
United States has sufficient resources of water, coal, oil,
for war and to justify the. intensified production of
etc. and needs no new form of energy. Consequently it
super-bombs. This explains their desire to detract from
would be more profitable and rational to spend thousands
the impression created by the successes achieved in every
of millions of dolia1,,"s from the taxpayers' pockets on the
branch of Soviet science.
invention of weapons of mass destruction than to
130. In.their frequent public statements, the represenintroduce atomic energy into peace-time industry.
tatives 'of the United States, the United Kingdom,
124. The secret designs of the American monopolists
France, Canada and other States have contended that
have been revealed by Senators Vandenberg and
the responsibility for the breakdown of the highly imMcMahon, who, according to the American magazine
po:t:tant negotiations on the atomic energy question lies
CoUier's,113 asserted that the advent of atomic energy as
solely'with the delegation of the Soviet Union, whose
a cheap source of power would lead to a fall in the shares
proposals for control, they say, would offer a solution
of all raHroad and coal companies; insurance companies
only on paper. They slanderously assert that the Governwould go bankrupt and general· financial chaos would
ment of the· USSR is primarily concerned about its·own
ensue. Thus one of the main reasons why the American
sovereignty· and· declines ,to accept any measure ·which
monopolists oppose the use of atomic energy for peacemight encroach upon its unrestrk1:ed sovereignty. They
ful purposes is that they regard atomic energy as an
further assert that for the United States to place any
undesirable competitor for such existing industries as
confidence in such a paper guarantee would serioitsly
the coal, oil and electricity industries, from which they
endangei its security. Without a strict system of interare deriving vast profits. The American monopolists are
national control, a mere convention on prohibition of
doing everything in their power to prevent the use of
the atomic weapon would give the peoples a false sense
atomic energy for peaceful economic purposes.
of security.
125. Reflecting the will of its people, the USSR Gov131. In his detailed speech yesterday [321st meeting],
ernment has always stood and still stands for the
Mr. Vyshinsky, the head of the USSR delegation, gave
um.:onditional prohibition of the atomic weapon and for
a comprehensive and profound analysis of the question
a strict and effective international control to ensure that
before us. He gave an exhaustive reply to the charges
atomic energy is not used for military purposes.
levelled against the Soviet Union. There is therefore no
need for me to go over the same ground or to deal With
126. The discovery of atomic energy-one of the
the
question in detail again.
greatest scientific discoveries of our time--has created
gigantic possibilities for expanoing man's productive
132. We have before us a draft resolution [A/1668
capacity and increasing the w1ell-being of peoples; it
and Corr.l] submitted by the delegations of Australia,
must not be used for destruction and mass exterminaCanada, Ecuador, France. tl1e Netherlands, Turkey. the
tion. Atomic energy must be wholly and exclusively put
United Kingdom and the United States, which calls for
18 See Collier's, 3 May 1947, article by Robert de Vore entitled "Passport to the Golden Age'~.

19 See Official Records o/the General Assem!;ly, Fourth
Session, Ad Hoc Political Cummittee, 33rd meeting.

1652

!
f
I

General Assembly-Fifth Senion-Plenary Meetings
J

the establislunent of a comn.littee composed of the
representatives of twelve States to pr~re proposals on
the atomic energy question for submission to the sixth
session of the General Assembly.
133. The sponsors of that draft apparently believe that
the atomic energy question will be solved by merging
the Atomic Energy Commission and the Commission
for Conventional Armaments. This draft resolutinn is a
saff'ty measure to stave off the adoption of the USSR
delegation's proposal for the preparation of a convention
for· the unconditional prohibition of the atomic weapon
and' the establislunent of strict international control to
ensure observance of that prohibition. The sponsol"s of
the draft resolution place no reliance on the peoples'
support, and base all their calculations on the atomic
bomb, on the use of atomic energy for the purposes of
monstrous destruction and for the annihilation of
millions of people.
134.. No honest person in the world will deny that the
problem we are discussing-the prohibition of the
atomic weapon and the establislunent of strict international control to ensure complete and unconditional
observance of this prohibition-is of great importance
for the maintenance of peace and security, the strengthening and development of friendly relations among
States and for co-operation among States in the solution
of international disputes.

.

135. The USSR delegation's proposal [AI1676] regarding the immediate preparation of conventions for
the unconditional prohibition of the atomic weapon and
the simultaneous establishment of strict international
control has been warmly supported by hundreds of
millions of partisans of peace in all countries. Peace~oving peoples cannot resign themselves to the threat to
use the atomic weapon, which is a weapon of aggression
~t1d an inhuman instrument for mass destruction and
the annihilation of civilians.
. 136. Therefore, bearing in mind the aims and purposes
of the United Nations and the will of the peoples we
represent here, we must at long last adopt a resolution
instructing the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission to resume its work and to proceed immediately
to prepare draft conventions for the unconditional prohibition of the atomic weapon and for the international
control of atomic energy, both conventions to be concluded and brough~ into effect simultaneously. The draft
conventions must be submitted to the Security Council
not later than 1 June 1950.

Printed in D.S.A.

~

137. By taking this decision, we shall snatch this
dreadful weapon from the hands of the brutal advocates
of atomic warfare. We shall free mankind from the fear
of mass destruction and destroy the plans of the warmongers.
138. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR calls
upon the delegations here present to adopt the draft
resolution submitted by the Soviet Union.
139. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The list of spclers is exhausted. If no one wishes to
speak, we shall proceed to the vote.
140. The General Assembly has two draft resolutions
before it, the first [A11668 and Corr.l] has been submitted by Australia, Canada, Ecuador, France, the
Netherlands, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the
United States. The second draft resolution [AI1676]
has been submitted by the Soviet Union.
141. I put to the vote the first draft resolution [AI
1668 and Cor,..1]. The Chilean delegation has requested
a roll-call vote.
.
A 'Vote was taken by roll-call.
Yugoslavia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, B~l­
gium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece,
Guatemala, Iceland, India, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon,
Liberia, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Saudi
Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Union of
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen.
Against: Bye10russian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Czechoslovakia, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Abstaining: Yugoslavia, Indonesia, Pakistan.
The draft resolution was adopted by 47 votes to 5,
with 3 abstentions.
142. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put to the vote the draft resolution submitted by the
Soviet Union [AI1676] .
The draft resolution was rejected by 32 votes to 5,
with 16 abstentions.
The meeting r(J;S6 at 5.25 ;.fIJ.

A-40464-April 1951-3,600
