UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/24
6 August 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND
RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3914th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 August 1998, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Afghanistan", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the new sharp
escalation of the military confrontation in Afghanistan, which is a growing
threat to regional and international peace and security, and demands an
urgent and unconditional ceasefire leading to a final end to the
hostilities.
"The Security Council reiterates that the Afghan crisis can be settled
only by peaceful means, through direct negotiations between the Afghan
factions under United Nations auspices, aimed at achieving mutually
acceptable solutions accommodating the rights and interests of all ethnic,
religious and political groups of Afghan society.
"The Security Council calls upon all Afghan parties to return to the
negotiating table without delay and preconditions and to cooperate with the
aim of creating a broad-based and fully representative government, which
would protect the rights of all Afghans and observe the international
obligations of Afghanistan. The Council calls upon all States neighbouring
Afghanistan and other States with influence in Afghanistan to intensify
their efforts under the aegis of the United Nations to bring the parties to
a negotiated settlement.
"The Security Council demands that the Afghan parties and those
countries concerned observe fully the provisions of the relevant
resolutions on Afghanistan adopted by the United Nations General Assembly
and Security Council.
"The Security Council calls upon all States to refrain from any
outside interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan, including the
involvement of foreign military personnel. It reiterates that any such
interference from abroad should cease immediately and calls upon all States
to end the supply of arms and ammunition to all parties to the conflict and

98-22992 (E)

060898

/...

S/PRST/1998/24
English
Page 2

to take resolute measures to prohibit their military personnel from
planning and participating in combat operations in Afghanistan.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the serious humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan. It calls upon all Afghan parties and, in
particular, the Taliban, to take the necessary steps to secure the
uninterrupted supply of humanitarian aid to all in need of it and in this
connection not to create impediments to the activities of the United
Nations humanitarian agencies and international humanitarian organizations.
The Council condemns the killing of the two Afghan staff members of the
World Food Programme and of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in Jalalabad.
"The Security Council once again urges all Afghan factions to
cooperate fully with the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and
international humanitarian organizations and calls upon them, in particular
the Taliban, to take the necessary steps to assure the safety and freedom
of movement of such personnel. The Council deplores the measures taken by
the Taliban which have made it impossible for nearly all international
humanitarian organizations to continue their work in Kabul. It supports
the efforts of the Office of the Coordinator for humanitarian affairs in
its current talks with the Taliban in order to ensure adequate conditions
for the delivery of aid by humanitarian organizations.
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned at the continuing
discrimination against girls and women and other violations of human rights
as well as violations of international humanitarian law in Afghanistan.
"The Security Council calls upon all parties to respect international
conventions regarding the treatment of prisoners of war and the rights of
non-combatants.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
