SECURITY-%
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

246Sh

MEETING:

NEW

16 AUGUST

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. ... ... ... ... ... .... ... .. .... ... ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 8 August 1983 from the Chargt d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15914) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2468)

WPV.2468

.’

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.
^.

2468th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 16’August 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

de NANTEUIL
L

received letters from the representatives of Czechoslovakia, Egypt, the German Democratic Republic and India,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the <discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2468)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kulawiec (Czechoslovakia), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Hucke (Getian Democratic Republic) and Mr. Krikhnan (India) took the places
reserved for .them at the side of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

Letter dated 8 August 1983 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15914)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Members of the Council have before them the following
documents: S/15924, containing a letter dated 12 August
1983 from the representative of Somalia to the President
of the Council, and S/15925, containing a letter dated 15
August from the representative of Egypt to the President
of the Council.

The meeting was called to order at 4.25 pm
Adoption of the agenda

4. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): The month of August has been
exceptionally hot and humid in more ways than one for
all of us here. You, Mr. President, have had to bear an
unfairly large part of this humid heat, and yet you have
remained cool, calm and superbly efficient. It therefore
gives me pleasure to compliment you once more on the,
guidance and direction you have already given us which
augurs well for the eventual outcome of these meetings.

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 8 August’ 1983 from the Chargh d’affaires a.i. of the Pkmanent Mission of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15914)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
conformity with the decisions taken at previous meetings
on this item 12464th to 2466th meetings], I invite the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to a take place at
the Council table; I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Sudan,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Viet Nam to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

5. The Council was seized of a similar complaint by
Libya last February [S/156ZJJ, and only a few weeks later
the Council was seized of a matter raised by Chad
[S/15643’J. Today it can perhaps be said that the Council
has a “seizure” on a concurrent mixture of two separate
but linked items, each of which is an almost inevitable
corollary of the issues previously discussed. Unfortunately,
however, the situations on the spot in both instances have
gravely deteriorated, and the sober climate needed for their
discussion has equally deteriorated in this chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Burwin (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya) took a place at the Council table; Mr.
Zanif (Afghanistan), Mr. Garcia Iturbe (Cuba), Mr. AI-A/B
(Democratic
Yemen), Mr. RajaieKhorassani
(Islamic
Republic of Iran) Mr. Vongsay (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic), Mr. Evaki (Sudan), Mr. Al-Atassi (Syrian Arab
Republic) and Mr. Le Kim Chung (viet Nam) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. My delegation expressed its views in considerable
detail on each item on the two previous occasions. We
will not, therefore, repeat those details today, but we feel
constrained to make a few additional observations with
our customary frankness because serious and honest comment is called for.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have

7. The present international situation is unprecedentedly precarious. We are living through a period of very
1

great tension with outright conflict raging out of control
in far too many sensitive areas at the same time. The
world is in fact lurching from one crisis to another.
8. And yet, for too long now constructive efforts proposed from various sources and designed to relieve tensions and even to reduce confrontation
have been
receiving scant response from the super-Powers. On the
contrary, the tone of rhetorical posturing has become
more bellicose; at times, hastily pronounced national
positions have tended to increase fears, complicate issues
and even undermine the relevance of a classical interpretation of the principles of international law as applicable
to contemporary situations. It is, perhaps, a form of
“instant diplomacy** particularly ill-suited to the needs of
modem times.
9. We feel that, even as 1984 approaches, double-think
and double-talk seem already to be in vogue; the viewpoints of national positions are clouded by ideological
and strategic considerations. These, all too often, are completely alien to given situations and tend to ride roughshod over the real interests of small countries, which,
mainly, are only striving to overcome difficulties arising
from their past history and yearning for change and progress, principally in the economic and social sectors.
10. Against this background, against this sickly situation which calls for wise and patient decisions, remedies
which belong to a past era are recklessly still being applied
today.
11. In Malta’s view, three major current approaches in
particular give great concern to the majority of countries.
12. The first, and certainly the crudest of all, essentially
envisages the threat or actual use of force. This approach
may be contained, albeit ruinously and precariously, when
manifested by one military alliance against the other.
Each side has practically become immune to any pressure
from the other. In fact, so used is each side to the existing
state of super-armament that efforts have even been made
to accept this state of affairs as normal, by labeling frequent and massive military exercises announced in
advance as “confidence-building
measures”.
13. What seems to be overlooked, and certainly is often
conveniently forgotten, is that these so-called confidencebuilding measures, which can be nonchalantly shrugged
off as routine by evenly matched opposing alliances, are
more likely to be seen as “panic-inducing measures*’ by the
smaller countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America, which
unfortunately have become the preferred arena of the two
super-Powers in their competition for predominance.
14. It might be added that, the longer the period of
advance notice given, the longer the period of acute concern and uncertainty for small countries-which
even the
most solemn assurances by the super-Powers, given their
past record, can hardly be expected to allay.
15. In this sense, therefore, my country-among
the
smallest in the world, unarmed and unaligned by the will
/

of its people, but situated in an area of turbulence, confrontation and uncertainty-can
readily understand and
even share the concern of other relatively small countries
when faced with a massive armed naval and aerial military build-up near their shores. The potential for destruction, even in the case of accident, is almost impossible to
estimate. In an enclosed sea, the shores of one country are
the shores of many countries.
16. A second approach, less crude perhaps but none the
less dangerous, is the tendency of either one of the two
super-Powers to nudge its preferred and protected friends
into adventurist policies. “Unwise grins” is the apt phrase
used to describe this attitude in an article by Gideon
Samet in The New York Times of 16 August. Many actions
in the fairly recent past might not have been taken had
there not been a fairly reasonable assurance given, or at
least calculated, that no adverse concerted international
reaction would immediately follow. This approach might
work in the short run but it can only exacerbate conflicts,
because in international relations even the laws of nature
are defied, and to every action, sooner or later, there will
be an opposite but unequal reaction.
17. All too often, in addition, there is the tendency of
one side to even-out a “score” previously made by- the
other. And so the circle of violence increases. Its most
fertile field, and the safest for the super-Powers, once
again is in the ranks of the third-world countries.
18. And the third major category of current cotmterproductive measures is the insistence of the super-Powers
on controlling and manipulating according to their dictates the working of international organizations to which
they belong and to frustrate the fragile efficiency and
effectiveness of those to which they are not parties. This
applies not only to political organizations such as the
United Nations but also to other, specialized institutions
for the provision of untied aid, expertise and finance.
19. As a result, these organizations are being shaken to
their very foundations, and unless remedial action is
taken in time the organizations will be unable to deal with
the very problems for whose resolution they were established: a bleak prospect indeed. A low common denominator of agreement on any one issue inevitably has
repercussions 6n the discussion of other issues. We have
sunk so low that, as the Secretary-General has pointed
out, we need to start practically from scratch through a
new re-commitment to the Charter of the United Nations,
nearly 40 years after its solemn proclamation.
20. Nor, apparently, will the super-Powers consider
favourably the creation of new avenues for progress, new
initiatives for dialogue. For many years now, Malta, right
at the centre of Mediterranean instability and conscious
of the inherent danger of such a situation, has ‘ardently
been advocating a new spirit of independent dialogue
between Europe and the countries bordering the Mediterranean, designed to herald a new awakening of the Mediterranean identity and to build new foundations for peace
based on co-operation.

21. We therefore find it surprising, indeed disquieting,
that those same countries which themselves belong to several regional organizations are the ones that frown on the
creation of a mechanism for effective Mediterranean cooperation. They are the first to extol, as they frequently
do, the benefits of the regional and sub-regional organizations to which they belong; yet they profess to see no need
to consider some concrete form of preliminary work for
reducing tension and increasing the sectors of Mediterranean co-operation. Instead of working for the creation of
a zone of peace they seem to prefer a sea of instability to
remain in the region.

ciliation within Chad and good relations with its neighbours. This, it seems to us, is the only way to progress.
28. We stress once more that it is only natural for
regional States themselves, which bear the primary
responsibility for safeguarding the peace and security of
their own region, to take the initiative. We do not believe
that the brandishing of military hardware, .however
limited in scope and objective, can help; unfortunately, it
only superimposes extraneous considerations which tend
to exacerbate, rather than to alleviate, any local tension
which may exist. The road to peace lies not in strife but in
a dialogue amongst equals, helped by the regional organization concerned and backed by the Council.

22. My Foreign Minister, in his statement before the
thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly,’ and I
myself on numerous other occasions have given concrete
examples of what can and should be done, gradually but
surely, to reverse the present trend, which is perhaps at
one of its most dangerous periods even right now as we
speak in the Council. We hope, therefore, that the favourable response we are seeking in the process of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe will soon be
forthcoming.

29. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): Mr. President, I have already expressed my delegation’s great
pleasure at seeing you in the Chair directing the Council’s
affairs this month. My main objective this afternoon is to
state my Government’s position on the matter which is
before the Council.
30. It will be recalled that on 19 February of this year
the Government of Libya requested the Council to meet
urgently “to consider the deteriorating situation’ near the
Libyan shores that could jeopardize the security and
peace of the region and the world” [see S/Z5615J. The
Council then met to consider the situation which, as
members will remember, was attributed to what the Permanent Representative of Libya characterized as “provocative military actions of the United States Administration” [ibid]. Libya had objected to the presence of the
United States nuclear-powered aircraft-carrier Nimitz and
some other naval vessels near its coast. It had also complained of the dispatch of four AWACs aircraft to one of
its neighbours. As far as Libya was concerned the presence of those planes was a form of aggression against its
own territory and they were to be used for the purpose of
spying over Libyan territory.

23. In short, instead of throwing up our hands in resignation and despair, we need to commence a search for a
change of attitude, for patient understanding and for the
dedicated collegial work necessary to turn the present tide
away from disaster-both
here, in established regional
organizations to which we belong, and in the new ones
which need to be created.
24. So much for the general approach as it relates not
only to the Mediterranean but equally to other sensitive
areas.
25. Let me now refer briefly to the issue between Chad
and Libya. We very much regret that the process favoured
by the Council, as it unanimously pronounced itself on 6
April [243Oth meeting], has not yet been embarked on. We
recognize that, on the contrary, the situation has in fact
deteriorated.

31. As members of the Council know, Libya has once
again drawn urgent attention

26. We very much regret the loss of life and property
suffered by the people of Chad as a result of the intensitied conflict. The people of Chad need to be left alone,
completely free of any outside interference, so as to overcome their internal problems through dialogue and reconciliation and to orient their efforts to economic and social
development under a Government of their own exclusive
choice.

“to the intensification of United States intervention in
the affairs of the regions of the Mediterranean, the
Middle East and Africa to the acts of intimidation and
provocation directed against the Socialist People’s
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which is a part of these
regions, as well as to the consequences of the dispatch
of United States forces and military equipment to the
said regions” [see S/Z59Z4].

27. For that they need the help and patient understanding of all countries, and particularly of their neighbours.
My own country pledges to extend any help necessary
within its modest means. We are glad to note the constant
readiness of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
which is apparently meeting even now, to continue to seek
a peaceful solution, if necessary even to send fact-finding
missions. We believe that the Council should urge the
speedy cessation of hostilities, a subsequent withdrawal of
all foreign forces and offer to help and to back the efforts
and good offices of the OAU to promote national recon-

32. The representative of Libya has also told the Council that his Government regards United States activities as
constituting a flagrant violation of the Jamahiriya’s territorial waters and airspace.

33. While agreeing that the Council is confronted with
“a most grave threat to international peace and security”
[see 2464th meeting, para. 34, the United States representative has however attributed this situation to Libya,
which he has accused of “brazen, contemptuous challenge
3

:

to the bedrock principles of the Charter of the United
Nations” [ibid]. He has also dismissed Libya’s current
complaint about provocation and aggression as a mere
smokescreen of patently diversionary charges, in his opinion designed to divert attention from Libya’s own aggression against Chad.
..’
.,
34. Those, therefore, are the charges and countercharges
before. the. Council. However, one thing is clear to the
Council: these charges and countercharges by the two parties are symptomatic of a dangerously escalating situation
of tension which, unless ended immediately, may lead to
open conflict, with grave consequences for peace and security in North Africa, the Mediterranean and other regions.
The Council, the only, international body charged with
primary responsibility for world peace and security, must
therefore make it abundantly clear to the two parties that
they are under obligation .to avoid any acts likely to disturb .peace and security not only in those regions but anywhere else in the world. As Members of the United
Nations the parties must scrupulously observe all the principles outlined in the Charter with regard to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, The parties should be told in no
uncertain terms that, while affirming every nation’s right
to pursue its own interests as it perceives them, the Council does require every Member of the United Nations to
refrain, in pursuing and promoting its national interests
and in conducting its international .relations, from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of other States.

from employing the same vocabulary ‘with regard to
Libya and its leaders. And yet everyone in this chamber
knows that there is much to be said on their account.
40. I would merely inform him that his insults have not
touched us. We will never disown our friends, and it is not
for Libya or for any other countryyfriend
or foe-to
dictate our choices to us.
.
41. I would also remind him that all countries in the
world have some amount of debts; yet Zaire retains its
dignity. In any event, never will a Zairiaa go to Libya
begging for alms.
42. Frankly, I should think it would make our Libyan
brothers feel embarrassed, and even ridiculous, to boast
about their wealth every time they are implicated or
caught red-handed in some misdeed. They sound like a
worn-out gramophone record. Does wealth, after all; justify aggression?
43. As it happens, Africaand the world community are
once again accusing Libya of interference in Chad’s internal affairs and are calling upon it to halt that aggression.
^
44. ‘First, the Libyan representative denies any intervenl
ticm by his country in the affairs of Chad. He justifies
what is going on in Chad, claiming that it is a civil war
amongst the people of Chad alone. As my colleague from
the Ivory Coast recalled, Mr. Goukouni Weddey ‘left
Chad without even a suitcase. Even if he was able to take
a suitcase with him, I still find it a bit hard to believe that
any suitcase made is large enough to contain tighter aircraft, bombers and tanks-equipment
that Mr. Goukouni
never possessed while he was in Chad. Libya alone denies
its intervention and aggression against Chad, even though
we have a vast amount of incriminating evidence to prove
it.

35. In the meantime, the massive intervention by foreign
Powers has seriously complicated the situation in Chad. It
is therefore our firm conviction that peace and stability in
Chad can be restored only by the immediate and unconditional withdrawal from that country of all foreign military
forces and war materials.
36. Mr. UMBA di LUTETE (Zaire) (interprefa?ion$+-om
French): I am speaking again before the Council in order
to state my country’s position on the issue before the
Council. I shall do so unambiguously and forthrightly.

45. Despite all that evidence; Libya attempts to justify
the aggression, claiming that the Government of N’Djamena is illegitimate. The response to that is that it is not
up to.Libya to legitimize or illegitimize Governments in
the world. In any event, the Government ‘of Mr. Hissein
HabrC is a legitimate one. Having run out of arguments
and in an attempt to gain time; the’Libyan representative
then cries out against the aggression supposedly being
planned by certain States against his country.

37. First, however, I wish briefly to mention the Libyan
allegations and insults with regard to my country and its
leaders. Those insults began on Thursday, 11 August, and
continued through Friday, 12 August. And there is every
reason ‘to suppose that there will be more in the days to
come. However, as the saying goes, the dog howls and
the caravan passes on. Invective is usually the recourse of
those who are in the wrong.

46. Although as the Libyan representative himself is
aware that is a mere ruse,.let us speak of that ‘complaint.

38. When,,in my right of reply on 3 August, I spoke of
a “naked madman” several representatives then present
in this room laughed. However,. after the various statements made by our Libyan brother, who was visibly ill at
ease-and who would not be, given such unspeakable
behaviour-I
imagine that those same representatives are
even more convinced that the proverb I employed has a
firm basis in reality.
_-_
:_
;,_ ,
*-_
,‘,
,‘.

,‘,‘_
,-,
,-_
,‘d

47. Aggression is a serious act, and since my country has
frequently been the victim of aggressions from a11sides it
must deal with this complaint with the seriousness the
I
subject deserves.
..
48. Let us ask, therefore: what does it ,involve? Is there
aggression against Libya or are there facts or at least indications that would lead one to believe that there is a con-.
spiracy against that country7.

39.. Faithful to our line of conduct, therefore, I shall
refrain from mentioning all of those insults and, indeed,
4

49. Let us briefly recall the facts: some time ago Libya
annexed the Aouzou Strip, which belongs to Chad. Chad
complained to the Council [S/156433, and our body
invited the parties involved not to take advantage of the
fait accompli and to enter into negotiations.
50. In order to avoid having to return that piece of land,
and with the complicity of a disciple who might moreover
be able to help it to annex all of the territory of Chad,
which it knows to be rich in raw materials, Libya commits
aggression against Chad. Chad calls upon its friends, and
some countries, including my own,’ fly to the assistance of
the victim. None of those countries against which Libya
claims to have a complaint is to be found to be occupying
that country’s territory, not even in the Aouzou Strip, an
area which, though disputed, belongs to Chad, as everyone knows. Not one shot has been fired against Libya.
51. In these circumstances, who is the real aggressor?
-The answer is patently obvious. -Hence, is the complaint
of our Libyan brothers well founded? Certainly not.
52. If, upon leaving this chamber, we should suddenly
encounter a wicked wolf or a kind of King Kong determined to devour or crush an innocent baby, no matter
how peace-loving or justice-loving one may be, would it
not be a spontaneous reaction to cast at least one stone in
the monster’s direction?
53. What Libya wants, however. is to have its hands left
free to pursue its aggression and to engage in destabilization and destruction. For that reason, my delegation feels
that our brother from Sudan made a perfect analysis
when he stated:
“Libya’s designs and plots have one and the same
source and present an unchanged scenario. In the
past-last February, to be specific-while Libya prepared to launch aggression against my country it hastened to complain to the Council [S/I5625’J about the
provocations and threats of the United States of America, which were said to jeopardize its security and
safety and to be part of an aggressive plot aimed at
toppling the regime in Libya. The Council convened
1 [%15th to 2418th meetings], and all members know the
rest of the story, which I need not go over once again.
Suflice it to say that the regime which was said to be
threatened has remained intact and unharmed to date.
Today, while Libya is flagrantly and directly intervening in another neighbouring country, using all kinds of
land and air weapons against it and against the suffering people of Chad, subjecting the country to the worst
torture, displacement and murder, Libya once more
comes before the Council claiming, as it has in the past,
that its security and safety are threatened. What we are
again witnessing today reminds us of a popular saying
in Sudan, a saying that unmasks such deception: ‘He
transgresses against me, then with crocodile. tears
hastens to complain.’ That is an exact expression of the
essence of what Libya has now had recourse to at the
international level to camouflage its aggressive plots
and designs against its neighbouring
States and
peoples.

“Libya’s request for an urgent meeting of the Security Council is nothing but a ploy, a poor attempt to
deceive the Council as well as the whole intemational community and to divert their attention from the
present situation. Whereas attention should be focused
on the wanton, stark aggression perpetrated by Libya
against the people and Government of Chad, Libya is
trying to obstruct the Council from continuing its meetings on that subject, which started on’3 August [2462nd
meeting], to consider the legitimate complaint raised by
Chad [S/ZS902l against Libya’s aggression and intervention, striking by land and air towns and villages in
Chad, using internationally prohibited weapons, such
as phosphorous, fragmentation and napalm bombs, as
we were told yesterday by the representative of Chad
[2463rd meeting] and as we learned from the various
mass media on a daily basis. Libya also helps the rebels
and insurgents, and recruits mercenaries to work
against the sovereignty, independence, security, safety
and territorial integrity of Chad.
“We are confident that Libya’s stratagem will not
deceive the international community and that it will
not attract the Council.” [246&h meeting, paras. 108 to
ZZO.]
54. Be that as it may, I can state that the reaction will
not change.
55. Libya’s manoeuvres had already failed at the first
and second meetings at Tripoli; they failed at Managua
and New Delhi and, even more recently, Addis Ababa.
They also failed during the attempts to destabilize
Morocco, Egypt, Sudan and other States. I am sure that
similar attempts will fail in the cases of the Palestine Liberation Organization and Chad. but meanwhile we must
stop the flow of blood. Perhaps their present failure will
be a final lesson to our Libyan brothers to. devote their
resources to the development of their population and not
to foment trouble and cause havoc in other countries.
56. To put an end to its consideration of the Libyan
complaint, having shown the futility of that complaint
and having listened. to the punctilious reading by our
Libyan brother of statements unrelated to the subject
under discussion-it is to be hoped that next time he will
not come to read to us from the Bible or the Koran-the
Council would do well to close the debate on this,
question.
57. As regards the Libyan aggression against Chad, I
can sum up my position no better than by adopting the
statement of the ,mpresentative of the Soviet Union on 12.
August this year. I paraphrase what he said as follows:
“[Zaire] demands an immediate cessation of interventionist actions undertaken to the detriment of the
national unity of the Republic of Chad and the cause of
peace in Africa and throughout the world. Such.
actions [I would add ‘this aggression?] and hegemonistic claims are in flagrant violation of the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and

,‘/
,*,.

.

,‘,’

_

.‘_
:-_

other international
documents
(2465th meeting, para. Z9].

signed by [Libya]”

5X. It is the Council’s duty to help Chad to return to
peace, under the guidance of its legitimate Government,
that of Mr. Hissein Habre. All of us in the Council certainly believe in the principle of negotiation, but with
whom should the Government of Chad negotiate? Should
it negotiate with Libya-that
is, with the aggressor? I
think not. One does not negotiate with the aggressor. The
aggressor must withdraw unconditionally
and leave the
people of Chad to get down to reconstructing their
country.
59. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of India. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
60. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): May I extend to you, Sir,
the felicitations of my delegation on your assumption of
the presidency for the current month. We are especially
happy to see you occupying this high office. France and
India have traditionally enjoyed a very cordial relationship marked by warmth and close co-operation in various
fields. Your high diplomatic skill and experience and personal qualities are well known. We are confident that
under your wise and able leadership the Council will be
able to discharge its responsibilities in a satisfactory
manner.
61. Recent developments in the North African and
Mediterranean
regions threaten the delicate fabric of
peace and security, not merely in the immediate region,
but in the world at large. Naturally, they have caused
profound concern and distress’ to the Government of
India.
62. We have followed these disturbing events closely,
and my delegation has listened with attention to the statements made by all the representatives concerned in
respect of the communication addressed to the Council by
the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
[S/25914), as well as the communication addressed to it
by the representative of Chad [S/15902]. Our concern and
anguish have become even greater.
63. What we are witnessing today is a sharp escalation
of tension and conflict in the Mediterranean and North
African regions. This is the result of an increasing
recourse to the use or threat of force, and to military
intervention and interference, in violation of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has always taken a
firm stand against all forms of foreign aggression, occupation, domination, interference or pressures; It rejects all
forms of subjugation, dependence, interference or intervention, direct or indirect, overt or covert, and all
pressures-political,
diplomatic, economic, military and
cultural-in
international relations. Likewise, it is resolutely opposed to great-Power and bloc policies tending to
perpetuate ,the division of the world into blocs or spheres
of influence.

64. The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New
Delhi in March 1983, reaffirmed the need for strict adherence to the principles of non-intervention
and noninterference in the internal and external affairs of States.
They likewise reaflirmed the right of all States to pursue
their own economic development without intimidation,
hindrance or pressure [see S/1567.5, annex]. My delegation hopes that these principles will be observed by all
States, as they are consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations and fundamental to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
65. It was largely as a result of the efforts of the member
States of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries that
the General Assembly adopted on 9 December 1981 the
Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention and
Interference in the Internal Affairs of States, contained in
the annex to resolution 361103. This Declaration was a
historic achievement. Together with the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations,2 it provides a framework of inter-State relations based on mutual respect for
sovereignty and independence, consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter. The Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries at the above-mentioned meeting
noted with concern that policies of intervention and interference, pressure and the threat or use of force continued
to be pursued against many non-aligned countries, with
dangerous consequences for peace and security. My delegation fervently hopes that all States will adhere to these
Declarations and observe these principles in their dealings
with other States.
66. My delegation has supported efforts at the United
Nations to bring about peace and stability in the Mediterranean region. The Mediterranean has often in history
been the theatre of confrontation and conflict. The situation in the region is delicate and complex, exposed as it is
to the repercussions of developments on sea and land
around its shores. Non-aligned countries have been striving to transform the Mediterranean into a region free
from crisis and conflicts. They have called for the reduction of tensions and the solution of problems in accordance with the Charter so as to turn the Mediterranean
into a region of peace, security and co-operation. We
hope that all States will join hands in this common
endeavour and refrain from any action which could exac
erbate an already grave situation in the region.
67. We are particularly concerned at the present situation as it also threatens the unity and solidarity among
non-aligned countries. Indeed such unity is all the more
necessary in dealing with the present situation. The New
Delhi Conference recalled that the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes remains central to the philosophy of peaceful coexistence advocated by non-aligned
countries. It noted that disputes and conflicts amongnonaligned countries cause serious human and material loss
to the economies of the countries concerned and pose
threats to the peace. and progress of their peoples as well
as to the cohesion and solidarity of the Movement of

Non-Aligned Countries. The Conference further reiterated that the non-aligned States should be guided in their
mutual relations by the principles of strict mutual respect
for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, the inviolability of legally established international frontiers, non-interference and respect for the right
of peoples to free national and social development. It also
called for all disputes to be resolved exclusively by peaceful means in full conformity with the purposes, principles
and provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the principles and objectives of the Movement of NonAligned Countries, as well as within the framework and
principles of regional organizations such as the OAU
without interference and without recourse to pressure,
threat or use of force.

72. It is known to all that there are certain -differences
and disputes among countries in the region. However,
these are all third-world countries’whose differences and
disputes can and should be resolved in a fair and reasonable manner through peaceful consultations within the
framework of the OAU and the League of Arab States in
accordance with the principle of respect for independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. ‘As a matter of fact,
the afore-mentioned regional organizations have continually been making positive efforts for mediation.
73. No infringement of or threat against the indepen-dence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries
there by any outside forces should be permitted. Meddling
by super-Powers can only make the situation more.complicated and aggravate tension, thereby jeopardizing the
peace and security of the region and even the world at
large. These developments therefore call for high vigilance.~

68. We cannot but avail ourselves of this opportunity to
express our anguish at ‘the sufferings of the people of
Chad. That country has lived through strife and violence
for almost the entire period of its independent existence,
strife which has drawn it into the vortex of extraneous
influences and outside pressures. Not only has this strife
brought misery to the Chadians, but it has also served to
exacerbate tensions in the entire North African region.
We are against any action which tends to internationalize
the situation in that country. Such intemationalization
would only serve to intensify and globalize the on going
armed conflict and to make the situation even more
serious and more difficult of eventual solution. The future
of Chad is the sole responsibility of the people of Chad,
and it is for them to resolve their problems free from
outside intervention or interference of any kind from any
quarter, near or far.

74. Mr. ICAZA GALLARD
(Nicaragua) (interpretation
from Spanish): Allow me, ‘Sir, to state my delegation’s
satisfaction at seeing you presiding over the difficult
debates of the Council this month, You represent a country and a people with which my own enjoy solid relationships -of friendship and co-operation based on objective
and ‘fraternal understanding of the reality of Central
America. Nicaragua has every confidence in your experience and your skill as a diplomat, and we are sure.you
will conduct hour debate -wisely.
75. Today my country has to refer to a situation that
confirms that the policies of intimidation and the threat of
force-policies of provocation and of demonstrations of
force-against independent countries are nut limited to
Central America. The big stick policy and gunboat diplomacy have been rightly criticized by many Governments
around the world and by the people of the United States
itself.

69. The urgent imperative of this hour is the exercise of
restraint on all sides so that.the fighting which threatens
to engulf the whole area can be ended immediately and
the process of dialogue in search of peace and reconciliation begun without delay. We are confident that the
people of Chad and the OAU have the will, the capability
and the means to find a solution to this essentially African
question. We support all efforts to promote a solution
within the framework of the OAU and in the light of the
decisions taken at the nineteenth session of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the OAU, held at
Addis Ababa last June. We trust that peace and harmony
will soon return to that unhappy land so that the people
of Chad can turn their attention to the constructive task
of building their nation and to its much needed economic
development.

76. On 27 July 1983 the Co-ordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned
Countries, at the request of Nicaragua,
emphasized what was stated by the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or .Govemment of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983, that the halting of
military manoeuvres or demonstrations of force would
reduce tension and facilitate dialogue to achieve negotiated political solutions to the problems of the region [see
S/15896, annex].
77. In fact, the Coordinating
Bureau, in urging the
United States to reverse its decision to carry out naval
manoeuvres, emphasized a position of principle, which it
behoves us to stress once again, as follows: *‘expresses its
opposition to the holding of military manoeuvres as a
means of exercising pressure” [ibid].

70. I should like to conclude by expressing the hope that
the Council will be able to take meaningful action to deal
with the present situation, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
so that the threat of a wider conflict is averted.

78. Moreover, it must be understood that the presence
of United States warships and aircraft carriers off the
coasts of my country or of Libya is not a simpie military
exercise but, rather, a dangerous step towards aggression.

71. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The situation in Chad has been deteriorating for
some time now. New tensions have flared up ‘recently
because of the intensified super-Power military activities
in the area. This cannot but cause serious general concern.

79. The deployment of United States forces in the Mediterranean, with the repositioning of the nuclear aircraft
7

..

:

carrier Eisenhower and the holding of the military
manoeuvres called “Bright Star 83”-all
very close to
Libya-are
acts of provocation which do not contribute
to a relaxation of tension, nor do they foster reconciliation between the parties in contlict. These enormous military activities violate the spirit of the Declaration of the
Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, since they do not promote the
transformation of the Mediterranean into a zone of peace
and co-operation.

stand by the principle that all States must be constantly
guided by the principles of strict respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States,
non-interference and upholding the right of all peoples to
self-determination.
87. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker’ is the representative of Czechoslovakia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

80. With the same intention of exercising threats and
intimidation-this
time against Nicaragua-the
military
manoeuvres called “Big Pine II” are under way. According to spokesmen of the United States Administration
itself these manoeuvres involve more ,than 4,000 United
States soldiers and an enormous fleet of warships on both
coasts of Nicaragua. Even if, as the Administration maintains, it is a mere show of force, it is an unnecessary
exercise, since Nicaragua does not .question the strength
of the most powerful country on Earth.

88.

Mr. KULAWIEC
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
Russian): Mr. President, I thank you and the
members of the Council for granting my delegation an
opportunity to participate in the debate. We are pleased
to associate ourselves with the congratulations addressed
to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of August. We are sure that your experience and
ability will greatly assist you in guiding the work of the
Council effectively.

from

89. This is not the first timkthis year that the Council is
obliged to discuss the provocations and hostile acts of the
United States against Libya. The Council has taken this

81. However, ‘the aims of these manoeuvres are not so
simple or so limited in scope; firstly, they are directed
against countries with a COlllmOn
denominator,namely,a
genuinely non-aligned policy; and, secondly, they are an
instrument for’domination
and subjugation, the purpose
of which is to curb the drive and determination of these
peoples. To put it more clearly, they are a way of exercising diplomacy which at the end of the twentieth century is
unacceptable to the overwhelming majority of the countries comprising the international community.

step

because

Libya

is

faced

escalating direct military
against its independent,
alignment

with

continuing

and

further

threats and pressure aimed
anti-imperialist
and non-

policy.

90. At this time American naval, air and land forces’are
operating not far from Libya’s borders. United States military aircraft are engaged in acts of provocation in close
proximity to Libyan borders. .American AWACs aircraft
are carrying out open reconnaissance of Libyan territory.
Four States of the region, two of which have direct borders
with Libya, are the arena for- broad military manoeuvres
with the participation of United States forces, which is the
largest demonstration of American military strength in
North Africa since the Second World War. These military
actions are accompanied. by a broad slanderous campaign
against the Libyan people and its leaders. This campaign
includes direct military pressure and armed provocation.

82. Just as in Central America, the situation in North
Africa is complex. Undoubtedly,
some of the social
upheavals that are violently convulsing some countries as
a result of under-development and exploitation are having
an impact at the regional level.
83. African peoples have the political wisdom and the
adequate leadership to meet the challenges ‘of their own
history by recourse to the ways and means which they
themselves have created. For,these reasons, we reject the
reference to spheres of infhrence made by the President of
the United States on 11 August. Africa, we believe, is a
sphere of influence solely for Africans.

91, All this taken together serves as a pretext for interference in the internal affairs of Chad, for sending large
numbers of military advisers, mercenaries, regular troops
and foreign interventionists and for increasing the supply
of weapons to that neighbour of Libya%. The military,
political and propaganda pressure on Libya is accompanied by economic blackmail on the part of the United
States in order to undermine the development plans of the
Libyan people. Libya,-whose people chose the path of
constructing an independent, economic and sociai system,
has been subjected to subversive and provocative acts by
American imperialism virtually from the moment of the
September revolution. That dangerous policy and those
acts of pressure are a cause for concern for ail peaceloving States. The American people has been following
those acts with concern because they are in violation even
of, the internal legislation of the United States and, in
particular, ‘of the United States Declaration of Independence.

84. With regard to the conflict in Chad, Nicaragua
wishes to place on record its position of principle and
appeal for a halt to outside intervention in the domestic
affairs of Chad. That country’s people have the sole and
exclusive right to resolve their own problems and decide
on their own future with complete sovereignty.
85. Fortunately, our African brothers have a genuinely
regional organization representing exclusively regional
interests, and Nicaragua trusts that, within the framework
and the principles of the Organization of African Unity,
all efforts will be made to achieve peace and security in
Chad and in the region as a whole. -,
86. Our country’s own experience of threats and aggression compels us to oppose any policy of intervention, We
8

92. The acts of pressure and provocation against Libya
carried out by the policy of the United States and other
imperialist Powers are nothing exceptional or new. They
form a component of a global strategy of imperialism and
should be seen as part of the escalation of the policy of
acting from a position of strength; the policy of diktat, of
confrontation in relations between States; interference in
the internal affairs of certain States; the stirring up of
existing hotbeds of tension and the creation of new ones,
as-well as the waging of undeclared wars against certain
independent States. ,The most notable examples of that
policy today are the Israeli aggression in the Middle East,
the broadly condemned support of it by the United States
Administration
and actions aimed at overthrowing the
Sandinist Government of Nicaragua. Part of that policy is
to include virtually all regions of the’world in the so-called
sphere of vital interests of the United States.

discussing Libya’s well-founded complaint, to condemn the
aggressive acts of the United Statesagainst Libya and to
take every opportunity to put an end to those acts in the
near future and prevent their repetition.
97. The degree of responsibility of each member of the
Council before the international community becomes
even greater because involved in this question is the conduct of a State which, from the very beginning of the
existence of the United Nations, has used armed force to
a&hieve its .political goals almost 300 times.
98. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Frerzch): The
next speaker ‘is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a ,place at the Councit
table and to make his statement.
99. Mr. HUCKE
(German Democratic Republic): I
already had the privilege, on the occasion of the debate on
the situation in the occupied Arab territories, of expressing to you, Sir, the congratulations of my delegation on
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
August. I should like to thank you, and through you the
members of the Council, for giving me this opportunity to
explain the position of my country on the question on the
agenda of today’s meeting.

93. In addition, as we can see from a recent cynical statement by a senior representative of the United States
Administration,
the imperialist Powers continue their old
colonial practice of applying their policy of spheres of
interest to the peoples of independent, developing and
non-aligned countries. The leaders of the signatory countries of the Warsaw Pact stated in June 1983 that that
policy was leading to a further increase of tension, to a
further destabilization of relations between States and to
an increase of the threat of nuclear war, with all its catastrophic consequences.

100. Once again the Council is considering a problem in
the region of the Middle East and the Mediterranean.
Back in February of this year a debate took place on the
dangerous situation in that area as a result of military
provocations by the United States [2415th to 2428th meetings]. Since then the situation has become further aggravated. My delegation therefore understands the request
made by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for the convocation
of an urgent meeting of the Council.

94. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic belongs to
those States which are building their relations with the
Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and other
States on a completely different basis, that is, on the basis
of peaceful co-existence of States, on the basis of equality,
non-interference in internal affairs, on a policy of mutual
advantage, on respect for the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the’united Nations and international law,
on the expansion of mutual co-operation and on establishing conditions for strengthening and further deepening
the social and economic achievements of countries.

101. World public opinion has been. following with
great concern the mounting provocative actions by the
United States. In various regions of the world the main
imperialist Power is attempting through a “show of
force’* to counter any efforts taken by non-aligned countries in Africa, Latin America and Asia towards independent development. That becomes quite obvious from the
new threats to Libya by the provocative manoeuvres of
United States warships off the Libyan coast, as well as by
the ,flights of espionage aircraft over the territory of sovereign African States. At the same time, the United States
and its allies are holding extensive military manoeuvres
not far from the border of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

95. Czechoslovakia greatly appreciates the fact that
Libya is pursuing a policy of non-alignment and supports
its active participation in the anti-imperialist, anti-Zionist
and anti-racist struggles, as well as in the struggle to
strengthen peace and co-operation among peoples. It is
that policy which forms the basis of the high level of
relations among States and which is reflected in the
Treaty of Friendship and Co-operation between Czechoslovakia and Libya, signed during the visit of the Libyan
leader, Muammar Qaddafi, to Czechoslovakia in August
1982.

102. It is obvious, as was stated by the representative of
the Libyan Arab ‘Jamahiriya, that the provocative military actions of the United States are part and parcel of a
global policy of threats and confrontation
by the
imperialists.

96. We are convinced that only such an approach to
relations between States, only respect for the principles of
the Charter and other principles of modern international
law which regulate relations of peaceful coexistence and
co-operation among States, can form an acceptable course
of action for the conduct of States. We condemn the psychological warfare and acts of intimidation, military pressure
and provocation against Libya. The cause of international
peace and security makes it necessary for the Council;in

103. It is no secret that the imperialists pursue their aim
of expanding their military presence in the Middle East
and enforcing their hegemonic aims in that region. The
peace-endangering character of the “strategic alliance”
between the United States and the aggressor, Israel, and
9

._-.
:

-_
:-.
:.:

the collaboration of those fateful forces against the will of
the peoples for a comprehensive, just and durable solution of the Middle East conflict can very easily be understood. However, in order fully to comprehend the extent
of the danger to peace, it is necessary to take a look at the
situation in other parts of the world, too.
104. By large-scale “military demonstrations” in Central America, the ruling circles in the United States continue to launch new provocations and to threaten the
sovereignty and independence of sovereign States. Their
objective, above all, is to bring down Sandinist Nicaragua. In southern Africa, the apartheid regime is encouraged by imperialist collaboration to commit new acts of
aggression and to stop progressive developments in
Africa. In Western and southern Europe, extensive military manoeuvres under the name “Autumn Forge” are
being prepared by the United States and its allies of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Also, in South-East
Asia, imperialist forces stir up fresh tensions.
105. Such military activities are not only the cause of the
aggravation of tensions and of the destabilization of the
situation in the Middle East, the Mediterranean, Latin
America and other parts of the world, but at the same
time are also aimed, for instance, at preparing the ground
for the deployment of United States nuclear mediumrange missiles in Western Europe in autumn of this year,
an act that would threaten thesecurity not only of Europe
but also of the Middle East region and the Mediterranean.
106. This is an issue that deeply concerns the people of
the German Democratic Republic, too. The most recent
military provocations and the attempts of imperialist
Powers to interfere in the internal affairs of independent
States and to achieve neocolonialist
objectives through
pressure, blackmail, gunboat diplomacy and the threat
and use of force, require the unity of all progressive States
and forces throughout the world in the struggle for the
preservation of peace and security. Persistent action by all
the forces for peace is a constructive answer to the policy
of confrontation pursued by imperialism.

109. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): The
renresentative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has asked
to* exercise the right of reply, and I now call on him.
110. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interprefationfrom Arabic): I should like to reply to the representative of Zaire even though he does not represent an
independent Government and is but an agent.
111. In his book entitled The World Challenge, Mr.
Jean-Jacques Senian-Schreiber wrote:
“The United States sees Zaire’s position in Africa like
Brazil’s in South America. . . .
“Mobutu got the foreign money and then set up a
household guard of Europeans and South African mercenaries. This top-secret operation was co-ordinated by
Colonel Mike Hoare, former commanding officer of
the famous Sixth Commando unit which, with CIA
[United States Central Intelligence Agency] help, had
put Mobutu in power.“*
112. Hence, Mr. Mobutu would want to strengthen the
notion of protecting the. client, regimes of the United
States, South Africa and Israel, from the outside, since
Mobutu found himself in a critical situation: having
seized power with the assistance of the CIA, his downfall
was prevented through the overt protection of Belgian,
French and Moroccan forces.
113. Therefore, Mobutu *has aided HabrC, to’ avoid
being accused of being the only regime to enjoy foreign
protection-a
notion he wants to promote in Africa.
114. The representative of Zaire stated that Zaire, like
any other State, has debts-to which I reply: true, many
States have debts, but they do not have rich Presidents.
For instance, Zaire’s debts amount to $4 billion, and the
personal finances of President Mobutu amount to $4 billion, meaning they are equal.
115. Some spokesmen interested in the military. manoeuvres say that those exercises are innocent, had been
prepared in’ advance and do not constitute a threat to
anyone. I should like to state, however, that there are
no innocent manoeuvres: military manoeuvres always
have a certain political significance and are linked
to certain events. Yet it is claimed that those manoeuvres were scheduled long ago. But the fact is that that attempted justification
is not new. We have become
accustomed to the United States Administration’s preparation and shelving of plans for future implementation at the
appropriate moment.

107. True-to the principles of its socialist foreign policy
and in devotion to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the German Democratic
Republic opposes any military and political action that
dangerously increases tensions; we unswervingly advocate
a peaceful solution to all international issues. Along these
lines, my country supports the most recent efforts of the
OAU to thieve a waceful solution of the nroblems in
Chad.
108. My country firmly sides with peoples that defend
their national independence and sovereignty against all
attacks by imperialist and reactionary forces; it stands
firmly by the side of the Libyan people in its struggle to
exercise its independence and national sovereignty during
this situation, which is complicated by the growing
number of military provocations on the part of the United
States of America.

116. According to the representative of the United
States, Libya is threatening its neighbours. That is not
true. We are a small country whose population of 3 million people desires to live in peace. But let us look at the

*Quoted

10

in English by the speaker.

123. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
call on the representative of Zaire, who wjshes to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.

actions of the United States Administration towards some
of its neighbours or towards those that try to escape from
its sphere of influence. It occupies the Guantanamo base
despite the wishes of the Cuban people. Did’the Cuban
Government request the presence of United States troops?

124. Mr. UMBA di LUTETE
(Zaire) (interpretation
from French): I was not expecting to have to speak again
in this meeting, but when I spoke earlier I predicted that
equivocation and insults might be in store for us. As
always, when they have no arguments what do they do
instead of addressing the question before them? They tell
us the same old stories. Everything the Libyan representative has just told us he has already said in previous statements. As I say, I do not want to respond to his insanities,
but I ask rather whether he would not have been smarter
to bring the Bible or the Koran into the Council chamber;
perhaps if he had read to us from one of those books we
would have had somewhat more inspiring ideas and
words before us. It is not enough to quote an author who,
in any case, puts forward absolutely no proof for what he
claims. Besides, what does that have to do with the pres:
ent debate?

117. Let us look at Grenada, which is prevented from
even the establishment of an airport. Let us look at Suriname, which recently unmasked a CIA plot. Then let us
look at Nicaragua and at the support for insurgents rcbelling against legitimacy: did the Government of Nicaragua
request the United States presence? Let us not forget El
Salvador, Chile and all the others, or United States piracy
on the high seas.
118. He who lives in a glass house should not throw
stones at the houses of others.
119. It is clear from statements by United States officials
that the aim of dispatching arms, tanks, aeroplanes and
warships to that region is not to help the people of Chad
or to support legitimacy-if
legitimacy there be. The primary target is the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, and the intent
is to create a justification for launching aggression against
it, smashing its military forces and undermining its economic capacity and the achievements it has made so far,
in order that it should not exemplify the distribution and
good use of wealth and the prevention of control of its
economy by American monopolies, as exerted in Zaire,
the Sudan and other countries.

125. We are talking of aggression. You are attacking
Chad. You want to install one of your disciples as the
head of Chad. You have long stated that your country has
enough territory and that it absolutely does not want to
make any further conquests. Very well: so what have you
been doing for so long in the Aouzou Strip? Everyone
knows very well that that land, the Aouzou Strip, does
not belong to you, so what are you doing there? Maybe
you are starting to wonder what will happen when your
oil runs out; as you know, the Strip is very rich, and
perhaps that is why you are clinging to it, so that when the
oil runs out you will have something to exploit. Be that as
it may, the problem before us today is the problem of
aggression. Reply to that question, my Libyan brother,
and stop repeating yourself.

120. The President of the United States of America has
stated, and it has been reiterated by other American officials, that “Chad falls within the French sphere of influence and that it is up to the French Government to
intervene there.” It thus becomes clear that the aim of the
United States is not to protect the interests of the people
of Chad, but rather to carve spheres of influence. HabrC,
Nimeiri and Mobutu are nothing but tools and guardians
of the interests of colonialism, as if the world were a
plantation owned by the Americans.

126. I, and many other speakers, have stressed that this
is your tactic: when you are challenged in your pillaging
you cry “Help!“, while everybody knows that you are in
no danger. As we said the other day, it is a little like a thief
who is caught in the act and who cries, “Stop thiefi”. But
it is he who is the thief. And in this case, it is you who are
the aggressor. That is what you are asked to explain.
What is the use of your pointless nonsense, my dear
friend?

121. Let us examine the United States position on
racism, because this will furnish much proof of United
States support for racists and racism. It has gone counter
to the will of the 124 States which participated in the
Second World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, which concluded last week in Geneva, by
boycotting that Conference, along with Israel. That is
because the Conference concerned itself with racist practices in South Africa and in occupied Palestine. In addition, the United States has taken a position in the General
Assembly in support of the apartheid policy of the
Government of South Africa. Hence, General Assembly
resolution 37/69B of 9 December 1982 on concerted international action for the elimination
of apartheid was
opposed by the United States and two other States when
it was put to the vote on 9 December 1982. That resolution was supported by 135 States.

127. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
now tail on the representative of the United States, who
has asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
128. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I
suspected it was too good to be true, and it was. The
afternoon, it seems to me, began in a most remarkable
manner, remarkable particularly for the United Nations
Security Council. The statement of the representative of
Malta was full of insights, wisdom and the levelheadedness that we have come to expect of that representative. The statements of Zimbabwe and India, and
certainly the forceful and factual statement of the representative of Zaire, all contributed intelligence and focus
and substance to the matter before us.

122. That gives a picture of the position of the,United
States on the international scene.
11

/

_-

:_
-.

_.
-_
-.

._

:

..’

I

I

129. I rather suspected that the level of quality would
markedly deteriorate when we got to certain puppet and
client States, and it did. With respect to the statements
made by the representatives of Nicaragua, of Czechoslovakia, of the German Democratic Republic and of Libya,
I want to make two points.
130. First, there may or may not be such a phenomenon
in the world as “innocent” manoeuvres, but there sure are
guilty consciences. I state it as a principle of United States
foreign policy that no country and no people without a
guilty conscience need be fearful of the training exercises
in which the United States engages with its friends and its
allies, in which it long has so engaged, and in which it
continues to engage and intends to continue to engage as
necessary.
131. My second and last point is that we heard much
from various speakers this afternoon of what one might
call the principle of let Africa be Africa, let Chad be
Chad. The United States could not more heartily endorse
any principle: indeed, let Africa be Africa; and, indeed, let
Chad-the people and Government of Chad-determine
the future destiny of Chad.
132. But, as the representative of Zaire has already suggested, when a neighbourhood bully is beating up a neighbourhood kid-a
tought but pretty skinny neighbourhood kid at that-the
Government and people of the
United States reserve the right and indeed the obligation
to respond to a request for assistance from such a Govem-

ment and people. Throughout our history we have done
so, we do so today, and we have every intention of continuing to do so as long as the bullies do not desist from their
provocation.
133. The PRESIDENT
(interpretarion from French): The
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has asked
to be allowed to speak, and I call on him.
134. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretarion from Arabic): At the outset I should like to say that
“Let Africa be Africa” was first expressed by Colonel
Muammar Qaddafi, who advocated that Africa be left for
Africans.
135. The representative of the United States has said that
when a child is threatened or attacked the United States
hastens to its rescue. In brief, we hope that that living
conscience of the United States feels the plight of the
Palestinians, the Lebanese and the African children‘in
South Africa.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

NOTES
’ See OJficial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-sevenrh Session.. Plenary Meetings, 32nd meeting.
z General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

‘.

HOW TO OBTAIN
UNITED
NATIONS
PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughour
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.

.-.
:_

COMMENT
:-.
:_

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

L%IES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dam les librairies et Ieb agences dCpwil;rrrer
du monde entier. Informez-vow
auprh de votre libraire ou adressez-vow
3 : Nations L’nw.
Section des ventes. New York ou Gentve.

-_
.
:.

,KAK

:..

M3natim

nOJIYYHTb
M3IIAHMR
OPTAHM3AUMM
OG%El&lHEHHblX
HAUMl~
Oprami3auwa
06aenmienHb~x
HauM
MO’KHO KyneTb a wiux;Hbis
~larawHa\
H arewrcTaax
BO acex paRotiax wtpa. HaBOneTe
cnpaarn 06 n3ilawras
a aawe~1 );riui(iHo~~
MaraxiHe
HOW nwu1we
no anpecy:
Opraw3awa
OBaennHeHHblx
Hauuil.
Cevuun
n0
nponaxe
bfsnamiB,
Hb&iopK
w-n4 XeCeHeea.

-.

.-_’

.-..
_-.

COMO

-.

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Vcntas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

:.

-_

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

-_
-.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

9O-r3l20S-Au~ust

1991-2.050
