10

General Aseembly-Twe•tieth Session

Noting the report of the United Nations Mediator
on Cyprus, submitted to the Secretary-General on 26
March 1965, 14
Noting further that the Government of Cyprus is
committed, through its Declaration of Intention and
the accompanying Memorandum, 16 to:
(a) The full application of human rights to all
citizens of Cyprus, irrespective of race or religion,
( b) The ensuring of minority rights,
( c) The safeguarding of the above rights as contained in the said Declaration and Memorandum,
l. Takes cognizance of the fact that tl1e Republic of
Cyprus, as an equal Member of the United Nations,
is, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
entitled to enjoy, and should enjoy, full sovereignty
and complete independence without any foreign intervention or interference ,
2. Calls upon all States, i11 conformity with their
obligations under the Charter, ancl in particular Article
2, paragraphs 1 and 4, to respect the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus and to refrain from any intervention directed
against it;
3. Recommends to the Security Council the con-tinuation of the United ;\lations mediation work in
conformity with Council rf'solution 186 ( 1964).
1402nd plenary meeting,
18 December 1965.

2129 (XX). Actions ou the regional level with a
view to improving good neighbourly relations among European States having different social and political systems
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations in which Member States have affirmed
their resolve to live together in peace with one another
as good neighbours and to develop friendly relations
among nations in order to strengthen pean
Recalling its resolutions 1236 (XII) of 14 December
1957 and 1301 (XIII) of 10 December 1958 callitJg
upon States to make every efforl to strengthen international peace and to develop friendly and co-operative
relations, and to take effect i \ c steps towards the implementation of principles r,f J>e.1ceful anti neighbourly
relations,
Aware of the responsibility w111ch today devolves
upon all countries, great and s111:dl, tu e:,tablish an
atmosphere of co-operation and security throughout the
world, and of the role that the existence and development of bilateral good neighbourly relations and unde1 standing among States can play in achieving that goal,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing concern for
the development of reciprocal co-operative relations in
many fields among European States having different
social and political systems, based on the principles of
equal rights, respect and mutnal interests,
Convinced that any improvement in relations among
European countri~s, being in the interest of the States
in that part of the world, has at the same time a positive
effect on international relations as a whole and thus
contributes to the creation of an atmosphere conducive
1 4 Official Records

of the Security Council. Twentieth Year.

Supplement for Jammry, February ·and March 1965, document
S/6253.
111 Official Records of

the General Assi'mbly, Twentieth Ses-sion, Annexes, agenda item 93, document A/6039.

to peace and international security and to the settlement
of the major problems which have not yet been solved,
1. Welcomes the growing interest in the development
uf good neighbourly 1 elations and co-operation among
European States having different social and political
systems, in the political, economic, technical, scientific,
,.:ultural and other fields;
2. Emphasizes the impo1 tance of maintaining and
mcreasing contacts between those States for the purpose
of developing peaceful co-operation among the peoples
of the European continent, with a view to strengthening peace and security in Europe by all possible means;
3. Requests the Governments of the European States
to intensify their efforts to improve reciprocal relations,
with a view to creating an atmosphere of confidence
which will be conducive to an effective consideration
of the problems which are still hampering the relaxation
of tension in Europe and throughout the world;
4. Decides to continue to give its attention to
measures and actions for promoting good neighbourly
, t'lations and co-oprration in Europe.
1408th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
2130 (XX). lnternationHI co-operation
peaceful uses of outer space

in the

The General Assembly,
Rew/ling its resolution 1962 (XVIII) entitled "Declaration of Legal Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space"
and resolution 1963 (XVIJ I) entitled "International
co operation in the peaceful uses of outer space", both
;1clopted unanimously u11 13 December 1963,
Having considered the reports of the Committee on
the Praceful Uses of Outer Space, 16
Conscious that tlie benefits of space exploration can
be must widely enjuyed if Member States support the
widest possible exchange of information and promote
international ro-operation in this field.
T
Urges the Cornmittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer

:--,pace, in developing law for outer space, to continue
with (ktern1ination the preparation of draft international
agreements on assistance to ;111d return of astronauts
and space vehicles and on liability for damage caused
li_y objects launched into outer space, and to give consider at~on to incorporating in international agreement
form. 111 the futnre as appropriate, legal principles
governing the activities of States in the exploration
and use of outer space ;

II
Endorses the recommendations contained in the
reports of the Committef' on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Spare concerning exchange of information, education
and training. international sounding rocket launching
facilities, potentially harmful effects of space experi1,1ents, and encouragement of international programmes;
2. Welcomes the intention of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to continue its activities
in the exchange of information on outer space matters
hy encouraging such means as the preparation of
1.

16 Ibid, Nineteenth Session, ,·lnnexe.1 a.nuex No. 10 document
A/5785: ibid., Twentieth Session, A~nexes. agend~ item 31.

document A/6042

Re110Jqtiom1 adopted on the reports of the First Committee

reviews on the activities and resources of various international organizations and bodies relating to the peaceful
uses of outer space, on national and co operative international space activities, on bibliographies and abstracting services, and on education and training;
3. Notes v.n"th appreciation that a number of Member
States have, on a voluntary basis, co-operated extensively with the programme of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space by providing information
on their space activities, and 1m~es other Member States
to do so;
4. Supports the request of the Committee on th<:'
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the SecretaryGeneral disseminak on a continuing l::1sis information
received from Member States on the needs and facilities
for education and training in space-related subjects:
5. N ates also with appreciation that certain Member
States have contributed to the goals of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, as laid down
in its reports, by establishing educational and training
programmes, and urges other Member States to do so;
6. Notes the decision of the Committee on the Pe;icetul Uses of Outer Space to convene. on 18 January
1966, the Working Group established to examine the
desirability, organization and objectives of an international conference or meeting to he helrl in 1967 on
the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space, as
well as to make recommendations on the question
relating to the participation in that meeting nf the
appropriate international organizations;
7. Accords United Nations sponsorship to India
for the continuing operation of the Thumba international equatorial sounding rocket launching facility,
which is eligible for such sponsorship and such assistance as may he requester! in :ircordance with the
basic principles endorsed hy tlw c;enera 1 Assembly in
its resolution 1802 (XVTT) of H OecnnhPr 1962:
8. Takes note of the resoltition adopted by the Committee on Space Researc-h at its seventh session, held in
May 1964, on the basis of the report of its Consultative
Group on Potentially H::i.rmfol Effects nf Space Experiments;
9. N ates with appreciation that, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1721 (XVI) of 20 De
cember 1961, the Secretary-General continues to maintain a public registry of objects launched into orbit
or beyond on the basis of information being furnished
hy Member States;
10. Notes with satisfaction the growing measure of
co-operation among many Member States in the pf'ace ful exploration and use of outer space;

11. Urges that space activities be carried out in such
a manner that States may share in the adventure and
the practical benefits of space exploration irrespective
of the stage of their economic or scientific development:

12. Noles with appreciation the progress reports
submitted by the World Meteorological Organization17
and the International Telecommunication Union 18 on
their _activities in the field of outer space and invites
these organizations to make progress reports to the
Committee on the Pearefol Use~ of Outer Sp;ice in
1966;
17 Transmitted under the symbol A/AC.105/L.lQ
l8 Transmitted under the ,ymbol E/41H7/<\rld. L

11

III
I. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and making use of the available resources of the Secretariat, and in consultation with the specialized agencies
and in co-operation with the Committee on Space
Research, to prepare and consider during its next
session suggestions for programmes of education and
training 0{ specialists in the peaceful uses of outer
space to assist the developing countries, and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session ;
2. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work as set forth in this
and previous General Assembly resolutions and to
report to the i\ssemhlv at its twenty first session.
1408th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
2131 (XX). Declaration on the Inadmissibility of
Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of
States and the Protection of Their Independence and Sov.-reignty

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the gravity of the international
situation and the increasing threat to universal peace
due to armed inh•rventinn and other direct or indirect
forms of interference threatening the sovereign personalitv and the political independence of States,
Considering that the United Nations, in accordance
with their aim to elirr;inate war, threats to the peace
and acts of aggression, created an Organization, based
on the sovereign e<juality of States. whose friendly
relations would he hased on respect for the principle
of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and
on the obligation of its Members to refrain from the
threat or 11se of force against the territorial integritv
nr political inrlependence of any State,
·
Recognizing that, in fulfilment of the principle of selfdetermination, the General Assembly, in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960. stated its conviction that all
peoples have an inalienable right to complete freedom,
the exercise of their sovereignty and the integrity of
their national territnry, and that, hy virtue of that right,
they freely determine their political status and freelv
pursue their economic. social and cultural development,
Recalling that in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights the General Assembly proclaimed that recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal anrl
inalienable rights of all members of the h11man fomilv
is tht> foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the
world, without distinction of any kind,
Reaffirming the principle of non-intervention, proclaimed in the charters of the Organization of American
States, the League of Arab States and the Organization of African Unitv and affirmed at the conferences
held 'at Montevideo: Buenos Aires. Chapultepec and
'Rogota, as well as in the decisions of the Asian-African
Conference at Bandung. the First Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries at
Belgrade, in the Programme for Peace and International
Co-operation adopted at the end of the Second Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries at Cairo, and in the declaration on
subversion adopter! at Accra by the Heads of State
and \Tovernrnent of the Afriem States.
