UIWTEDNATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFT’H

YEAR

2244”

MEETING:

30 JULY 1980

I

NEW YORK
-‘1.,
\

-\

CONTENTS

x

Page

.. .. ... .. .. ... .. ... .. .. .. ... ... ... .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning
the application of Zimbabwe for membership in the United Nations
(S/14076) . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,,:. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (SjAgendal2244)

SlPV.2244

‘.
..

.a,

. ‘., NOTE
1
. . .“.
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters corn-..
bined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United.
.
Nations document. *

.I

.Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OjJlcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council; numbered in accordance with a’
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and’
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
‘.
I
on that date;
:
i

’

‘
.,.
,_

,’

‘*

.

: .

‘_
i

.)<
:, .

.

2244th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 30 July 1980, at 11 a.m.
President: Mr. Carlos P. ROMULO (Philippines).

Zimbabwe for membership in the United Nations
[S/14076].

Present; The representatives of the following States:

Bar:gladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional
1.

In paragraph 3 of the report, the Committee
recommends to the Council the adoption of a draft
resolution on the application for admission to membership of Zimbabwe. In accordance with the procedure followed on previous occasions, 1 propose that
the Council should first proceed to the vote on that
draft resolution and that those who wish to speak
do so thereafter. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that that procedure is acceptable to the members of
the, Council. Accordingly,. I .shall ‘now put the draft
resolution
to the vote.
,
3.

agenda (S/Agenda/2244)

Adoption of the agenda

.

2. Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application of
Zimbabwe for membership in the United
Nations (S/14076) _
*
The meeting

A vote was taken by show o;f hands.
The ‘draft resolution

unanimously.

’

4. The PRESIDENT: In paragraph 4 of its report,
the Committee on the Admission of New Members
has proposed that the Security Council request the
inclusion of an item entitled “Admission of New
Members to the United Nations” in the supplementary
list of items for the agenda of the eleventh special
session of the General Assembly.

was called to order at II .35 a.m.
Adoption

was ?dopted

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Zimbabwe
for membership in the United Nations (S/14076)

5. I understand that the proposal was made in the
light of the wishes expressed by the Prime Minister
of Zimbabwe in submitting the application of his
country for admission to membership in the United
Nations, and that it was made in conformity with
rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council and rule 18 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly. May I take it that the proposal of the Committee to request the inclusion of
the supplementary item meets with the approval of
the Security Council?

1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
members of the Security Council that I have received
letters’from the representatives of Algeria, Egypt, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Japan and Romania in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
Security Council’s discussion of the application of
Zimbabwe for admission to membership in the United
Nations. I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

It was so decided.

6. The PRESIDENT: I shall immediately convey
these decisions to the Secretary-General for transmission to the General Assembly in accordance with
the provisions of rule 60 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Semichi
(Algeria), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. von Wechmar
(Germany, Federal Republic OJ), Mr. Nisibori (Japan)
and Mr. Marinescu (Romania) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. A number of representatives have expressed the
wish to be allowed to speak following the voting and
I now call on ‘them.

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
consider the report of the Committee on the Admission
of New Members concerning the application of

8. Mr. MANSFIELD (United Kingdom): In my view
it is most appropriate that this meeting of the Security
1

Council should be taking place under the presidency
of one of the founding fathers of the United Nations,
You, Mr. President, must have played a full part in
the drafting of Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which sets out the purposes of the Organization. Your sagacity and your prescience in those
early days have been underlined by what has taken
place in Zimbabwe. I should also like to pay a tribute
to Mr. Ole Algird for the firm and even-handed manner
of his presidency last month. He combined imagination with tact and was indefatigable in his efforts to
bring our deliberations to a satisfactory conclusion.

characteristics
of the people of that country. My
Government has therefore been ready to make every
contribution
it can to future developments there.
13. In addition to a substantial aid programme over
three years, my Government
has written off a large
proportion of outstanding debts and has rescheduled
the remainder. We have also provided considerable
technical assistance in the fields of military training,
education and agricultural
development.
But after a
long war, the needs are great. We hope that other
countries will make generous contributions
to help
Zimbabwe through the period of readjustment
and
consolidation following independence.

9. I was very glad to have the honour to vote, as
I have just done, on behalf of the United Kingdom
delegation in favour of the admission of Zimbabwe
as a Member of the United Nations. The adoption of
the resolution marks a historic day for Zimbabwe and
for the Council, which, for many years, was concerned
with the situation in Southern Rhodesia. Today’s vote
also represents for me, it so happens, the final act in
a long preoccupation
with the establishment
of
majority rule in Zimbabwe. It is a source of particular
satisfaction that this came about through the holding
of free and fair elections in fulfilment of the Lancaster
House Agreement.z

14. Zimbabwe has already taken its place in the
group of front-line States concerned with the problems
of southern Africa and has become a significant member of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and of
the Commonwealth.
The contribution
which the
Government of Zimbabwe has so far made as a member
of those bodies leaves me in no doubt that its application for membership in the United Nations will enable
it to play its rightful and, I am sure, its constructive
role on the international
scene. My Government
is
therefore in full support of Zimbabwe’s application
to join the United Nations. We look forward to continuing with the Zimbabwean delegation, when it is
established here, the close and fruitful collaboration
we enjoyed with the representatives from Zimbabwe
who were here during the Lancaster House Conference and during the electoral period.

10. The role of the Council today should be to look
to the future, not to rake over the problems of the past.
We all know that for a variety of reasons the achievement of independence in Zimbabwe was more painful
and protracted than in any other former British territory. .But it was, nevertheless, a milestone in the
history of Africa. There were many, black and white,
who contributed to that achievement, which demonstrated that even the most intractable problems can
eventually
be resolved if all parties are fully and
patiently determined to find a satisfactory negotiated
solution. This example set by the people of Zimbabwe
should serve as inspiration
for the solution of the
similar problem which faces us today in Namibia.

15. Mr. LUSAKA
(Zambia): Mr. President, I wish,
on behalf of the Zambian delegation, to congratulate
you on your Presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July. As you are one of the founding
fathers of the United Nations and an outstanding
diplomat, we are certain that the work of the Council
is in very capable hands. I wish also to pay a tribute
to your predecessor, Mr. AlgHrd of Norway, whose
presidency last month was marked with maximum
success.

11. The struggle for independence in Zimbabwe was
long and bitter. The country’s infrastructure
and
industry, its educational system, its agriculture and its
health services suffered severely throughout
those
years. It is remarkable how, despite that struggle,
which continued up to the Lancaster House Agreement, the Government of Zimbabwe, under the farsighted leadership of Mr. Robert Mugabe, has already
made such impressive efforts to restore and to build
up the country’s economy and to promote reconciliation. Inevitably,
the tasks ahead are formidable.
But
I am confident that those efforts will provide a firm
basis that will enable Zimbabwe to play a significant
role in international
affairs in general and in southern
African affairs in particular.

16. It is my most pleasant duty to be associated
today with the process of admitting
Zimbabwe to
membership in the United Nations. That has been long
overdue because the people of Zimbabwe have all
along demonstrated
their willingness and ability to
take charge of their destiny.
17. For Zambia, this is a historic occasion. We have
always anticipated
the day when Zimbabwe would
assume its rightful place among this family of nations,
a place denied to them by the forces of domination.
The people of Zimbabwe, under the able leadership of
Prime Minister Mugabe, deserve universal congratulations for the victory of their heroic struggle, which
culminated
in the independence of their country on
18 April 1980.

12. The British people have many links with and a
strong affection for Zimbabwe.
They have great
admiration for the outstanding courage, patience and
good humour which have always been remarkable

18. The admission of Zimbabwe
membership is a natural fulfilment
2

to United Nations
of a people’s right

alreadv done a lot of work most useful for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We are
convinced that under your presidency, the Council
will be able to fulfil in an outstanding manner the
important
tasks it has been entrusted with in the
current month.

freelv to determine its destinv. It has an inalienable
right to speak for itself and to determine its future.
Zambia and Zimbabwe have a great deal in common
which cannot be recounted in this brief meeting.
Suffice it here to restate that we Zambians are proud
of the modest contribution
that we made towards the
liberation of Zimbabwe.
d

<

24. At the same time, we warmly welcome the
presence at today’s meeting of Mr. Mashingaidze,
the distinguished
representative
of the new-born
Republic of Zimbabwe and of the heroic people of
Zimbabwe.

b 19. The independence
of Zimbabwe
marked yet
another step forward in the whole process of decolonization for the region of southern Africa, and in
particular for the oppressed peoples of Namibia and
South Africa. Zimbabwe’s
independence
was, and
continues to be, a source of inspiration
to the oppressed people of the region. Zimbabwe’s independence means that the chances for the process of
decolonizing
the remaining
countries of southern
Africa have been enhanced. We therefore look forward
to the day when Namibia will also be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

25. On 18 April 1980, Zimbabwe proclaimed its independence. On 17 July Mr. Robert Mugabe, Prime
Minister of Zimbabwe, sent a telegram [S/14064] to
the Secretary-General,
applying for United Nations
membership, with a declaration that Zimbabwe accepts
the obligations contained in the Charter of the United
Nations and undertakes to fulfil them. In the view of
the Chinese delegation, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter, Zimbabwe is qualified for
admission to membership in the United Nations. We
fully support its application and are in favour of the
Security Council’s
recommending
to the General
Assembly the admission of Zimbabwe to membership
in the United Nations.

20. My delegation firmly believes that the newly
independent Republic of Zimbabwe has an important
role to play in the United Nations. It will no doubt
contribute to the achievement
of the objectives for
which the United Nations was founded. This commitment has been demonstrated in more ways than one.

26. The independence of Zimbabwe is a great historic
victory won by the heroic people of Zimbabwe, who
have waged protracted and unremitting struggles with
the support of the African countries and peoples. The
Chinese people sincerely rejoice over this brilliant
victory achieved by the people of Zimbabwe.

21. Members ‘of!the international
community should
increase assistance, to Zimbabwe
to help in the
reconstruction
of that country’s economy. We have
no doubt that this will be the case, since the majority
of Member States have had a good record of supporting
the cause of liberation in southern Africa.

27. The successful experience of the people of
Zimbabwe in winning their independence shows that
as long as the oppressed nations are united, they
can certainly achieve their independence and liberation
through
valiant
and tenacious
struggle.
While
carrying out armed struggle, the people who are
striving for liberation do not preclude the search for a
political solution through negotiations.
However, a
political solution in the interest of the people can be
achieved only on the basis of protracted and effective
struggles. The victory of the people of Zimbabwe is
a major historic event having a far-reaching impact in
Africa and the world. It’constitutes a heavy blow to the
racist forces in the whole of southern Africa and a
great encouragement
to the peoples of Namibia and
Azania, who are engaged in the struggle for national
liberation. It can be ‘predicted that following the independence of Zimbabwe, there will be a new upsurge in
the national liberation struggles in southern Africa.
At the same time, the independence of Zimbabwe has
provided favourable conditions for consolidating
the
national independence of the African front-line States
and developing their national economy, and is of great
importance to stabilizing the situation in the region and
maintaining the security of the whole of Africa.

22. Finally, Zambia is delighted to support wholeheartedly the application of Zimbabwe for membership in the United Nations. The people of Zimbabwe
have, through their legitimate
and authentic representatives, expressed their wishes-and
those wishes
must be respected. We are confident that the General
Assembly
will unanimously
admit Zimbabwe
to
membership in the United Nations.
23.

Mr.

CHOU NAN (China) lintermetation
from
First of all, iu the name of the Chinese
delegation., I should like to express our appreciation
to Mr. Alghrd for the exemplary skill and calm way
in which he smoothly handled the extremely difficult
tasks during his term as President of the Security
Council for the month of June. We also wish to express
our warmest congratulations
to you, General Romulo,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the current month. As one of the founding fathers
of the United Nations, General Romulo made outstanding contributions
to the historic Asian-African
Conference held at Bandung in 1955. You are also a
good friend of the Chinese people and of the late
Premier Zhou Enlai. We are greatly honoured by your
presence in New York to preside personally over the
work of the Council for the current month. During
the short period since your arrival here, you have

Chinese):

28. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Mugabe,
the Government
of Zimbabwe is .taking active and
3

steady’ measures to consolidate its national independence,., develop its’ national economy ’ and culture,
support the just cause of the other peoples of southern
.Africa and promote its friendly relations with other
third world and all peace-loving
countries.
We
sincerely wish the people of Zimbabwe continued new
successes in their just cause of strengthening their
unity, opposing imperialism,
racism’and hegemonism,
safeguarding their national independence
and State
sovereignty and-building their ow’n nation.
,i
.;:
,’
29. ” ,On ,the occasion of the proclamation
of the independence of Zimbabwe, Ye Jianying, Chairman of the
Standing Committee
of the National \People’s Congress, sent a telegram to President, Canaan Banana,
and Hua Guofeng, Premier of the State Council of the
People’s Republic of China, sent a telegram to Prime
-Minister Mugabe, extending warm congratulations
to
the Government
and people of Zimbabwe. The Chinese people and the people of Zimbabwe’have
always
sympathized with and supported each ‘other in the
course of protracted common struggles. Now that
Zimbabwe has achieved its independence, the friendly
relations and co-operation
between China and Zimbabwe will certainly ‘make fruitful progress on the
basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
’ ;
30. In conclusion, we firmly believe that upon its
admission to membership
in the United Nations,
Zimbabwe will make positive contributions
to the
realization
of the purposes and principles of the
. Charter, with all justice-upholding
and peace-loving
countries.

guided by! the earnest desire ,actively to suPport the
istruggle waged by the peoples of Africa for the com‘.piete liberation of the continent from all forms’ and
manifestations
of foreign and racist ,occupation and
exploitation,
my delegation voted in favour of that
decision.
.-.,
‘-0, I.
s:

31. Mr. ZACHMANN
(German Democratic Republic): Mr. President, it is with pleasure that my delegation extends congratulations to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of the Philippines,
a country
with which the German Democratic Republic maintains ever closer relations of friendly co-operation,
on the assumption of the responsible office of President
of the Security Council for the month of July. We are
convinced that your great diplomatic
skill and the
rich experience you have gathered during your activities in the United Nations, of which you are among
the founding fathers, will be of extraordinary
value
for dealing with the issues currently before the Security
Council. We are looking forward to further fruitful
.co-operation with you. At the same,time, I wish to use
this opportunity
to thank Mr. Ole Alg%rd for the
comprehensive work which he performed in a circumspect manner as President of the Council in the month
of June, when work was so plentiful.

36. As a result of the victory won by the Zimbabwean
people, the liberation struggle waged by the peoples
in southern Africa has scored fresh successes. The
German Democratic
Republic welcomes the overwhelming election victory recorded by the Zimbabwe
African National
Union and regards it as a clear
expression of that people’s striving for justice, national
independence and sovereignty. The German Democratic Republic is and always will be prepared to
assist the Republic of Zimbabwe in its development.

34. The admission of the Republic of Zimbabwe to
membership in the United Nations crowns with success
the sacrificesand struggle of the’people of Zimbabwe,
waged over many years on the political and diplomatic
levels as well as in the military se&or, for its national
‘independence
and self-determination.
The proclamafion of the Republic of Zimbabwe effected the elimination of one of ‘the last dolonial territories in the
African continent. The historic.vititory
won by the
people of Zimbabwe became possible also because of
the active solidarity displayed by its friends in the
African continent and throughout the world, who, in
contrast to certain States that collaborated with the
Southern Rhodesian racist regime, stood by the side
of that people in the hard times it had to go thropgh.
35. The German Democratic .Republic has always
attached great importance
to developments
in the
African continent and to the struggle for peace of the
African peoples, including the people of Zimbabwe,
and from the very beginning has rendered support
and assistance to them. Anti-imperialist
solidarity with
all peoples struggling for their national and social
liberation
constitutes
an inseparable
part of the
socialist foreign policy of the German Democratic
Republic.

37. There can be no doubt whatsoever that the
Republic of Zimbabwe, fully in line with the principles
and objectives of the United Nations, will conscientiously abide by the obligations
arising from the
Charter. My delegation expresses its conviction that
the Republic of Zimbabwe, as a Member of the Organization, will make a valuable contribution
towards
the realization of the fundamental
goals which th,e
Organization
pursues in its activities,
namely the
preservation and strengthening of ,peace and security
on our globe.

‘32. The. delegation
of the German
Democratic
Republic notes with pleasure that the Security Council
has adopted a unanimous decision recommending
to
the General Assembly that the Republic of Zimbabwe
should be admitted
to membership
in the United
Nations.

38. Already today, the elimination
of the Southern
Rhodesian racist regime and the developments in the
Republic of Zimbabwe have produced a favourable
impact on international
relations. At the same time,
the Republic of Zimbabwe strengthens the ranks of

33. True to the basic principles of its foreign policy
aimed at peace, detente and social progress, and
4

those ,States which, together with the national liberation movements;in
southern Africa, resolutely stand
up for,the independence of Namibia and against the
peace-endangering,
policy of apartheid
pursued by
South Africa.
’

peoples for dignity, self-respect and free :political
expression. The .people and the leaders of Zimbabwe
set a wonderful~example
and showed to the ,worid
that a settlement
of disputes is always possibie
through peaceful means and negotiations, even when
the situation. seems to be without any hope:.1

39. The German Democratic Republic welcomes the
representatives, of freeZimbabwe
to the forum of the
United ,Nations and, wishes them much success in the
performance of the ,tasks .they will face in the framework ‘.of the Organization.
From this rostrum, the
German Democratic
Republic wishes to assure, the
representatives
of the Republic of Zimbabwe of its
readiness and preparedness to co-operate with them in
the’quest for the triumph of peace, .dCtente, liberty
and independence.of
peoples.
:, .’
46. ’ Mr. FUTSCHER
PEREIRA (Poi-tugal): Mr.$President, it, is a great honour and privilege for me to
address to you the warmest greetings of the Portuguese
delegation. As a signatory of the Charter and one of
the. ‘founding fathers of the Organization,
General
Carlos Romulo could hardly be a more fitting representative to preside over the deliberations
of this
body. We have witnessed over the years the extraordinary skill and statesmanship with which you have
steeied the foreign policy of your country through
periods of great international
tension, to the extent
that your counsel is highly esteemed everywhere in
the world. We $re therefore extremely happy to see
you presiding over our deliberations.
Mr. President,
I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Mr.’ &gird,
of Norway, for the very remarkable
qualities he displayed in conducting the business of
the Council during his term of office. I would request
his delegation kindly to convey to him our appreciation
and thanks.

44. The independence of Zimbabwe was above all
a victory of the people of that country and a testimony
to the maturity, good sense and wisdom of its leaders.
To them we extend our most fraternal and warm
greetings on this,occasion, and*we avail ourselves .of
‘this opportunity
to renew our pledge of co-operating
with Zimbabwe in the difficult tasks that lie ahead.
45. With this in mind, the Portuguese ,delegation
supported whole-heartedly
the application .of Zimbabwe for membership in the,United Nations, because
we are confident that Zimbabwe will make a noteworthy contribution
to the cause of peace and justice
in the world-one
of the fundamental
aims of the
Organization.
46. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): Mr. President, first of all, I should like to welcome you most
warmly as a distinguished diplomat and statesman of
the Philippines
and one of the deans of the United
Nations. I wish you every success in carrying out the
very exalted and responsible functions of President of
the Security Council. I should also like to express the
hope that relations between the Soviet Union and the
Philippines will continue consistently to develop for
the benefit of the peoples of our two countries.
47. On behalf of the Soviet delegation, I also wish
to express appreciation to the President of the Security Council for the month of June, Mr. Algbrd, under
whose able guidance the Council discussed a number
of important
issues relating to the situation in the
Middle East, in southern Africa and in Cyprus.

4.1. Now turning to the item on our agenda today,
the application of Zimbabwe for admission as a Member of the United Nations, I cannot help expressing
our great satisfaction at seeing the disappearance from
aui agenda of the item dedicated to the question of
Southern Rhodesia. But in our view, even more
important than that-certainly
much more important
than that-is the fact that after long years of suffering,
‘the peoples of Zimbabwe have finally found peace.

48. The Soviet delegation was extremely happy to
support the application of the Republic of Zimbabwe
for United Nations membership. We are convinced that
Zimbabwe will meet fully all the criteria for membership in the Organization.
49. On 18 April 1980, after the long and difficult
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe for their independence, final victory came to the national and
patriotic forces. Rhodesia, one of the citadels of
racism, whose very name implied that it was the
preserve of the colonialists and was an insult to the
indigenous black population of the .country, has now
disappeared from the map of Africa. The resounding
victory of the patriots of Zimbabwe, won under the
leadership of the Patriotic Front, has failed all the
attempts by the racists and imperialists
to impose a
puppet regime on that people. The victory has turned
a new page in the history of Zimbabwe and has established the necessary pre-conditions
for building a
truly independent and sovereign State.

42. All people of good will hailed with great joy the
signature of the Lancaster House Agreement
in
London in December 1979* which put an end to the
rebellion in Southern Rhodesia, thus opening the way
for the accession of Zimbabwe to independence.
A
war-stricken
country
could, thenceforward,
concentrate ail its efforts on promoting the welfare of its
people in peace and harmony; that this was undertaken
in a spirit of mutual understanding and reconciliation
in such a way that no segment of its population was
left out of the task of national reconstruction
is in
itself a feat that deserves our admiration and praise.
43. The independence of Zimbabwe constitutes, in
our view, a milestone in the history of the struggle of
5

50. On the day the independence of the Republic of
Zimbabwe was proclaimed, the General Secretary of
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union and President of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev,
and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the
USSR, Aleksei Kosygin, sent a cable to the leaders
of Zimbabwe which stated the following:

many important
decisions defending the inalienable
right of the people of Zimbabwe to self-determination,
freedom and independence
and supporting .their
legitimate struggle against the racist minority regime.
If those decisions had been respected by all members
of the Security Council, the path of the people of
Zimbabwe to independence would have been much
shorter.

“On behalf of the Presidium
of the Supreme
Soviet of the USSR, the Soviet Government
and
the people of our country and on our own personal
behalf, we address to you and to all the people of
Zimbabwe
most sincere congratulations
on the
proclamation
of the independence of your country,
and we wish you every success in the building of
ypur new life.

52. The transition from a colonial past to the achievement of true independence is never easy. The young
Republic now has to face urgent and acute problems
inherited from its colonial past. Even now, the racist
regime of Pretoria has not abandoned its plans for
direct armed intervention in the affairs of Zimbabwe;
it has openly threatened to use force if it feels that
Zimbabwe’s policies are not to its liking. Accordingly,
OAU, in welcoming the victory of the Patriotic Front,
quite correctly drew attention to the continuing threat
to the independence
of Zimbabwe. In the circumstances, the future of the people of that country and
their further successful progress along the path
towards constructing their new life will depend to a
large extent on the unity and cohesion of the Patriotic
forces and on their ability to reject and overcome the
designs of the imperialists and racists.

“The victory of the people of Zimbabwe and the
heroic struggle against colonialist and racist oppression waged by that people under the leadership
of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe, with the support
of progressive forces throughout
the world, has
written a bright new page in the history of the
liberation of Africa from the yoke of colonialism and
racism. The Soviet Union has constantly stood side
by side with the people of Zimbabwe and, in word
and in deed, has demonstrated
its solidarity with
that people during the long liberation struggle.

53. The Soviet delegation expresses its conviction
that, with its membership in the United Nations, the
Republic of Zimbabwe will be taking an important
step forward towards completing
the decolonization
of the continent of Africa. Its admission will also help
to implement the principle of the universality of the
United Nations.

“Pursuing
a peaceful Leninist
foreign policy
and guided in its inter-State relations by the principles of equality and of mutual respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-intervention
in
internal affairs, the Soviet Union solemnly declares
that it recognizes the Republic of Zimbabwe as a
sovereign and independent State and that it is willing
now to establish diplomatic
relations with it and
to exchange diplomatic representatives at the ambassadorial level.

54. The Soviet delegation warmly greets the representatives of the Republic of Zimbabwe who are here
in this hall on the unanimous endorsement of the
recommendation
by the Security Council. We trust
that our delegations in the United Nations will establish relations of fruitful co-operation that will serve to
achieve the lofty purposes and principles of the United
Nations.

“We trust that relations of friendship and cooperation will develop between the Soviet Union
and the Republic of Zimbabwe for the benefit of
our peoples and in the interests of the strengthening
of peace and international
security.”

55. Mr. HUSSON
(France) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, I should like, in turn, warmly
to congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of the Security Council for July. You are more
familiar than anyone with this institution,
because
you were one of the Statesmen who participated
in
its creation. No one has forgotten that in 1945 you
were one of the fathers of the San Francisco Charter
which created the United Nations of which your country is a founding Member.
In addition, you have
presided over the Council with particular distinction
on several occasions, and everyone recognizes the
qualities you have demonstrated as chief diplomat of
your country. My delegation is privileged to participate
in this debate under your Presidency.

51. Now that the Security Council has decided to
recommend to the General Assembly that it should
admit the Republic of Zimbabwe to membership
in
the United Nations, we cannot fail to recall that, along
with the decisive contribution
made to the struggle
for their liberation by the people of Zimbabwe themselves, under the leadership of the Patriotic Front, a
significant role in the victory was also played by
international
support from progressive forces throughout the world. As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, it has provided comprehensive
assistance to
the people of Zimbabwe in their struggle for freedom
and independence. This support was provided through
the United Nations and other channels. The Organization, including the Security Council, has adopted

56. We should also like to convey our congratulations
to Mr. Alghrd, who assumed the presidency of the
6

Council at a particularly
busy time. Thanks to his
experience, wisdom and understanding, he was able to
conduct many important debates most successfully.

the members of the Government
of Zimbabwe.
It
conveys its warmest wishes for happiness and prosperity to the new State and to its people.

57. The ‘Security
Council
has just unanimously
recommended to the General Assembly the admission
of Zimbabwe to the United Nations. France welcomes
with great satisfaction the application for admission
submitted by the Salisbury Government.
This is an
important date in the history of Africa and in that of
the Organization;
it closes a painful chapter in the
history of decolonization
and also a difficult chapter,
but one that provided a useful lesson in the activities
of the Security Council.

62. Mr. NEIL (Jamaica): Mr. President, my delegation is pleased and honoured to congratulate you and
to express to you our appreciation
for your having
assumed the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July. Although we have not had many
meetings, we have benefited greatly from your wise
counsel and experience during our informal contacts,
and your very presence here has added dignity and
prestige to the Council.. We also extend congratulations to Mr. Algbrd of Norway for his able conduct
of the presidency during the month of June.

58. The cessation of hostilities, then the organization
of free elections and finally the accession of the country to independence were carried through as a result
of an immense effort at mutual understanding,
which
called for intelligence, determination
and faith in the
future. The Prime Minister
of Zimbabwe and his
Government are to be unreservedly congratulated for
the masterly way in which they have assumed responsibility for what was Southern Rhodesia, for the spirit
of conciliation
they have shown and for the way
they have assumed responsibility
for all the people
whose intention it is to share in good faith the future
of that new country. My delegation, in paying this
tribute, extends it to those responsible for bringing
about those events: to the Government of the United
Kingdom,
which, in circumstances
with which we
are all familiar, shouldered its responsibilities
as the
administering
Power; to the front-line States and those
of the Commonwealth
for the important and realistic
part they played as a mediating body; and, finally, to
the African leaders of all the political movements of
Zimbabwe who for many long years fought for the
independence of their country and who finally gave
the world an example of wisdom and democracy that
we shall not forget.

63. Today we are participating
in an historical
process which, for Africa, began in earnest a little
over two decades ago and in the ensuing years has
resulted in the achievement
of independence
for
50 States, which have been admitted to the United
Nations. The decolonization
process in Africa has in
some cases been smooth and peaceful; in others,
difficult and protracted. In the case of Zimbabwe,
the road to independence has been marked by suffering,
‘bloodshed and sacrifice by the people of Zimbabwe
and also by the neighbouring
States which stood in
solidarity with them in the struggle. We are glad that
this unhappy chapter in African decolonization
is now
closed and that the hopes expressed on so many occasions in debates and resolutions of the United Nations
have been fulfilled. The Jamaican people have always
strongly supported the people of Zimbabwe, and we
take the opportunity once more to salute them on the
occasion of their great victory.
64. After the many years of war that have ravaged
the country, Zimbabwe faces many problems, and
we expect that the international
community will assist
it in solving them. We are also aware of the efforts
of its leadership under President Mugabe to heal the
wounds of war and to rebuild and reconstruct the
nation. Jamaica is confident that the statesmanship
displayed in confronting the challenges of war will be
effectively
employed
in meeting the problems of
reconstruction,
rehabilitation
and development in the
nation of Zimbabwe. As we welcome Zimbabwe into
our ranks, we are also mindful of the fact that the
quest for freedom and independence for the peoples of
Namibia
and South Africa cannot continue to be
denied. It is becoming clearer and clearer every day
that white racist minority rule in Africa is doomed,
and that the struggle will continue from strength to
strength until this scourge is completely removed from
Africa.

59. In admitting Zimbabwe as a new Member State,
the United Nations is coming closer to one of its
fundamental objectives, that of universality. The new
State, independent since 17 April, has undertaken to
abide by the provisions of the Charter. Not only does
it meet the required conditions for admission to the
United Nations, but it will become, my delegation
is sure, an active and influential Member.
60. France, for its part, is ready to respect the
sovereignty and independence of Zimbabwe together
with the goals and the kind of society that its people
will choose. It is in this spirit that it offers to cooperate with this new State in whatever measure it
may desire. Moreover, France hopes that this new
State will soon join the States of Africa, the Caribbean
and the Pacific who have signed the LomC Conventions with the European Economic Community.
61. Before concluding,
my delegation would
most warmly to congratulate the Prime Minister

65. The application of Zimbabwe for membership in
the United Nations is one that my delegation and the
Government
and people of Jamaica whole-heartedly
and unreservedly
support. Zimbabwe’s
admission
will further contribute to fulfilling
the principle of
universality to which the Organization
is committed,

like
and
7

and we confidently expect the ‘new nation to make an
important contribution
to our efforts to build a world
order based on peace and justice. Jamaica and Zimbabwe share common interests and aspirations as
developing countries and members of the non-aligned
movement,
and we expect to work closely together
within the United Nations to advance our common
goals.

70. The whole world, including ‘the”Security ‘Council, is witness to the emergence-of a new country-a
country which is endowed with enormous natural
resources and a people whose determinationto
defend
their freedom has been proved beyond anp’shadow
of doubt. With this’rare combination of naturalbounty,
and blessed with a dedicated people under the leadership of Mr. Mugabe, the future of Zimbabwe is- bright.
I1
71. We pay a tribute to the front-line States of Angola,
Zambia,
Botswana, Mozambique
’ and the United
Republic of Tanzania, which have borne the brunt of
the merciless
assault from so-called ZimbabweRhodesia and South Africa. The front-line States have
set a rare example in the annals of history by paying
in terms of human lives and material for the independence of another fraternal country. We record our
gratitude and appreciation to the people of those great
nations for the epic -struggle they have- waged against
the illegal regimes by standing at the side of the
suffering people of Zimbabwe. They did not ,flinch;
they did not waver; they remained undaunted. It is
a watershed in the history of human civilization,
in
that peace has been achieved and the peaceful transfer
of power has been possible through the democratic
process of elections with adult suffrage--after martyrs
had laid down their lives for that goal. ‘A new chapter
has been opened and a bright page of history written
by the freedom fighters of Zimbabwe, the leaders of
the front-line States and, above all, the peoples of the
whole of Africa. Bangladesh is proud to have made its
humble
and constructive
contribution
in this
achievement.

66. Mr. KAISER
(Bangladesh):’
Mr. President,
I should like to congratulate you most warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July, all the more so because of the
close and cordial relations existing between our two
countries, which .were amply demonstrated
during
the recent visit of President Ziaur Rahman of Bangladesh to your great country, the Philippines.
67. With your presence here as President of the
Council, you have not only brought your wisdom and
leadership but also added a new dimension to the
dignity of the debate in that you are one of the original
signatories of the Charter of the United Nations. To
Bangladesh, to the other members of the Council
and to the family of nations, your presidency is of
particular significance in the changing situation in the
world since the signing of the Charter, whose principles and objectives are now being challenged. We
look upon you not only as the representative
of a
friendly country but also as testimony to the continued necessity of upholding
the principles
and
purposes of the Charter for the maintenance of peace
and security in the world.

72. In the United Nations itself, we appreciate the
constructive role played by the President of the General Assembly, Mr. Salim of the United Republic
of Tanzania, the Secretary-General,
Mr. Clark of
Nigeria, Mr. N’Dong of Gabon and Mr. Oumarou of
the Niger.
,._ : _.
73’. We can ill afford to be oblivious to the role
played by the United Kingdom Government,
as the
colonial authority, in its handling of the situation in
the Lancaster House negotiations;
it demonstrated
extraordinary
statesmanship
and vision and thus
brought an end to the unilateral declaration of independence through peaceful means. The Lancaster
House Agreement* has again driven home the lesson
that dialogue with a positive attitude towards longterm achievement is the path of statesmanship to be
taken rather than a myopic view of short-term, selffulfilling aggrandizement.

68. I should like to take this opportunity to extend
our grateful thanks to Mr. &gird,
a personal friend,
a man of great eminence and distinction,
the representative of Norway, a country with which mine
shares the common purpose of maintaining peace and
stability in the world and the cause of the progress
of mankind. We are beholden to Mr. &g&r-d, who
conducted the proceedings of the Council with such
wisdom and skill last month.
69. “Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, but to be
young was very heaven”, said a bard at a time of
history which was unfolding in not so distant a past,
giving meaning and purpose to those values which we
ail cherish as civilized human beings. Today is a day
to rejoice and .not to recriminate;
it is a day of
accomplishment;
it is a day of pledging ourselves
anew; it is a day to pay a tribute to the freedom
fighters- of Zimbabwe who laid down their lives to
achieve an independent sovereign home: Zimbabwe.
It is a day when we salute the heroic fighters who,
by shedding their blood and by their steadfast
determination,
brought a new dawn of freedom to the
human spirit for peace and progress. We salute all the
people of Zimbabwe, irrespective of their caste, colour
and creed, on ,being free and masters of their own
destiny.

74. The achievement of independence by Zimbabwe
and the vindication of its rights point to the fact that
there is no place for racism in this world; racism is
anachronistic,
unacceptable and invidious. We have
therefore rejected it before and we do so again in the
Council. It is in that context that our delegation has
consistently
supported the heroic struggle of, the
people of Namibia-their
patience, perseverance,
8

_.

‘.

sagacity and, above all, their sense of history. The
people of Namibia have agreed to the latest demands,
made by the South African rigime. There is a mountain
of intolerance,, hatred, injustice and unreasonableness
separating the racist South Africans from the freedomloving .people of Namibia. It will be a better world
when the South African rkgime agrees to a negotiated
settlement,
within the framework
of the United
Nations-and
the sooner, the better.
75. The lesson’of history is clear: exploitation,
prej&dice, injustice ‘and intolerance will be defeated as
forces of darkness.’ I need not be a sodthsayer to
prophesy that, as the sun will rise tomorrow,
the
peoples of Namibia and South Africa will soon be
free-and
may it be without the travail of death and
destruction.

advice has been all the more relevant and penetrating
as ,you were part of that outstanding and far-sighted
team that conceived and drafted .the Charter of the
United Nations. I am happy to have this opportunity
to express to you my inost profound appreciation.
%
. I/
79. As Chairman of the African Group for july grid &
the representative
of my country, the Niger, I am
speaking here today to give very firm support to
Zimbabwe’s for membership in the United Nations.
Here is a new*‘State which is emerging in this cqncert
of nations; it is a young nation ‘which, through its
gallant liberatioq
movements’ and. the mdbilization
and resolve of its people and its unwavering faith in
the ideals of justice and freedom has grasped its hardwon sovereignty and comes here today, all rancour
forgotten, to knock at the door of the United Natiqns,

76. The Bangladesh delegation considers it a privilege to be associated in the Security Council’s decision ,to recommend
to the General Assembly the
admission of Zimbabwe as the 154th State Member
of the United Nations. It has been a consistent policy
of my Government,
in furtherance of the objective of
self-determination
and in pursuit of.the goal of universality, to extend its full support to any State seeking
admission to the United Nations. We have welcomed
the application of Zimbabwe for membership
in the
firm belief that it is fully qualified to become a Member of the United Nations in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter.

80. Zimbabwe’s independence does indeed deserve a
separate chapter in the history of the liberation of
Africa: as in the case of Angola, Mozambique, GuineaBissau arid Cape Verde, its independence was won in
blood and tears, all kinds of torture, arbitrary imprisonment and blind : repression which spared neither
civilians nor villagers. We have had the opportunity to
comment heie on the vanity of such actions, ori their
inhumanity and on how they are in contradiction with
the ideals of the Charter. We have said that the course
of history is irreversible,
and although a -people’s
struggle for freedom may be firolonged for a long
time, it always ends triumphantly
in liberation.

77. I will not take the time of the Council. If I have
been emotional, you will surely understand that; this
is a time for exuberance and a moment of bliss. We
have had a similar experience, hence our appreciation
is all the more perceptive. As I look to my right,
I see my brother, Paul Lusaka; we understand how
he feels today. The gleam of hope and expectation
that I can see in the eyes of brother Paul Lusaka
should be the beacon of light for all of us to look
to the future, the future not only of Zimbabwe, which
is ensured, but that of Namibia, South Africa and of
the whole world. We hope and pray for a future marked
by peace and stability, a future free from State rivalries
and fear, a future where nations, big or small, can live
together and above all, where people irrespe.c;tive of
their colour, caste or creed and irrespective of their
social; cultural or economic differences, can share
common values and live without fear or prejudice in
peace and harmony.

81. The merit of the new Zimbabwe, which we ‘are
today preparing to welcome, is that since the proclamation of its independence,
it has given a fine
lesson in maturity and responsibility
to those who,
at home and abroad, continued to believe that in
Zimbabwe the blacks were simply seen as wolves by
the whites, and that an independent
Zimbabwe,
deprived of the skills of the white settlers, would
simply founder and sink .into chaos.
82. But another merit of this young State is that it
has shown its pragmatism in assuring the whites of
their democratic rights, in protecting their security and
property and in trying to involve them as much as
possible in the running of the country. Let us therefore
pay a tribute to Mugabe, his team and his people. Let
us pay a tribute to the statesmanship of that patriot
who was misunderstood for too long, but who today is
demonstrating
qualities worthy of leaders who have
fought and learned in war.

78. Mr. OUMAROU
(Niger) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, first of all I should like to
congratulate you, not only on your assumption of the
Presidency of the Security Council, but also because
of the rare faith in the United Nations that you have
demonstrated.
Coming here from the distant Philippines and despite your advanced age, for the last month
you have been very busy making contacts, consulting
people and putting forward suggestions to enhance the
effectiveness of the United Nations system. Your

83. Africa certainly does not regret having given its
full support, assistance and solidarity to the Patriotic
Front and to Zimbabwe as embodied in thai Front.
It welcomes the way things are going in the country
and would like to express once again its admiration
to the leaders that Zimbabwe has freely and democratically chosen. This is also the time for Africa to
express its gratitude to the overwhelming
majority of
the international
community,
particularly
the United
9

Nations as a whole and its Secretary-General,
who
have spared neither time nor effort in order to bring
about the liberation of Zimbabwe.
84. Lastly, it would not be fair to pass over in
silence on-such a solemn occasion the role played by
the United Kingdom, which, decisively carrying out
its responsibility,
courageously facilitated and speeded
up the final resolution of the situation in Zimbabwe.
85. Africa, through me, is formally and unanimously
calling for the admission of Zimbabwe to the United
Nations. Africa is convinced that Zimbabwe, which
has shown such noble qualities and has fought so hard
for freedom,
dignity and sovereignty,
will work
in the spirit of the Charter and will thus make an
invaluable contribution to the defence of the principles
and ideals that we defend.
86. Mr. MUNOZ
LED0
(Mexico) (interpretation
from Spanish): Today our work is presided over by
a man who is a very symbol of the United Nations,
General Carlos P. Romulo,
whose unstinting
and
imaginative efforts are closely linked to the life of the
Organization and its democratic drive. Please accept,
Mr. President, the sincere tribute of the Mexican
delegation. Do you know how much you are respected
and loved in our country and to what extent your
person for us is identified with the Philippines?
We
recognize in you the prime mover of the relations of
friendship and co-operation that have been established
between our two nations in recent times.

91. The United Nations is honoured whenever it
endorses the right of a people to self-determination.
About half of the present Members of the international
community have gained their independence during the
life of the Organization.
Perhaps that is our best
advertisement.
Hence, we must not falter in the years
to come; we must continue our efforts until all the
peoples that have a right to self-determination
are able
to exercise it. Until that happens, peace cannot have
any solid and lasting foundations. We are sure that the
next step in this direction will be the admission of
Namibia.
92. As the representative of a Latin American country, I must stress once again what has been done by
our region, since the very inception of the United
Nations, in resolute support for the independence
movements in all continents-movements
that have
met such resistance in the recent past, but that have
finally been able to change the political and moral
geography of the world.
93. My delegation thus joins enthusiastically
in the
unanimous decision taken by the Security Council,
and offers the people of Zimbabwe its most active and
close co-operation in this new stage of that people’s
national life. We warmly congratulate their Govemment on the victories gained and wish them every
success.

88. We have been called together to carry out a
pleasant duty. The Security Council, pursuant to
Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Charter, is to recommend
to the General Assembly the admission of Member
States. In this case it is Zimbabwe, whose people have
not only proved to be peace-loving,
but have also
heroically demonstrated
their full adherence to, the
principles of the Organization.

94. Mr. ESSAAFI
(Tunisia) (interpretation
from
French): The delegation of Tunisia is happy to extend
to you, Mr. President, its warmest congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to tell you once again
that we shall co-operate with you as you diligently
guide our work. We are sure that, thanks to your
distinguished
qualities as a diplomat and an experienced statesman, your efforts will be crowned with
success. We wish to take this opportunity to express
our admiration
and respect to your predecessor,
Mr. Ole Alg%rd, representative
of Norway, for .the
efforts he deployed as President of the Council in
discharging a task which was particularly difficult and
which he carried out with authority and great confidence.

89. With the admission of Zimbabwe to the United
Nations, we bear witness to the fact that a long struggle
towards political independence has ended and that a
new State is joining the efforts towards equality and
human freedom to which we are all committed.
Now
what we must do is scrupulously to respect and support, through disinterested international
co-operation,
Zimbabwe’s efforts to promote its own development.

95. Zimbabwe’s
admission to membership
in the
United Nations has been a long-cherished
hope.
Although we never doubted the outcome of Zimbabwe’s struggle or the legitimacy of its aspiration,
we have always been rather apprehensive about the
traps laid by colonialism,
which has set up so many
obstacles and made it necessary for Africa to ensure
so much sacrifice and delay in its ceaseless fight.

90. Our action today is also a recognition of the
negotiating capability shown by the parties concerned,
in a conflict which endangered international
security,
as well as of the sacrifice and resolute solidarity
demonstrated by the African peoples in their struggle
for freedom, against racism and secular oppression.

96. Zimbabwe, in the very heart of southern Africa,
was directly subjected to the trials of colonialism,
backed by a racially oppressive regime. It won an
exemplary and indisputable
victory over both. The
United Nations offered the support of a large and
consistent
majority
to Zimbabwe’s
tenacity
and

87. To Mr. Ole Algird of Norway, we should like to
reiterate the expressions of genuine gratitude that we
have heard here for the exceptional skill and authority
with which he guided our work in the month of June.

10

’

determination
to triumph. The Organization made no
concessions to manceuvres which, through whatever
breach they managed to slip, were designed to break
the unity and integrity of the national and human
liberation struggle of a people. The United Nations
therefore shares in this victory of the people of Zimbabwe, and it is incumbent on the Organization
to
admit Zimbabwe immediately
as a full and responsible
Member of the international community,
so that it may
become involved in the work of achieving the purposes
and principles to which we are all so devoted, particularly in regard to that region of Africa.

Nations. The world Organization,
and in particular
the Security Council, has been intimately
involved
in the question of Southern Rhodesia. There is no
doubt that the concerted action which followed the
adoption by the Council of concrete measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter contributed to the downfall of the minority regime in Salisbury.
102. The main credit, however, goes to those whose
political
courage and wisdom brought about the
Lancaster House Agreement.z We are thinking of the
British Government,
which acted as host of and
provided leadership to that historic conference; we
are thinking of the Commonwealth
countries and the
front-line
States, which constructively
contributed
to a difficult negotiating process; and we are thinking,
above all, of the leaders of the Patriotic Front, who
made difficult compromises possible.

97. In endorsing Zimbabwe’s admission to membership in the United Nations, the Security Council is
also undertaking to extend to that young nation the
rights and guarantees to which all Member States
aspire-namely,
the preservation
of their independence, security and development,
free from foreign
intervention.
The Council must also assume its full
responsibility
in regard to violations of the principles
of the Charter which hamper the advent of peace in
that region-in
particular, it must assume its responsibility in connection with the implementation
of the
settlement plan for Namibia approved by the United
Nations, the imperative need for respect for human
rights, and the preservation of the security of ail the
States and peoples of the region. In that connection,
Zimbabwe’s
admission to the United Nations will
enhance the ability of the Organization
to discharge
its obligations and to ensure implementation
of its
decisions relating to the peoples of the region, as well
as respect for the universal principles of the Charter.

103. Zimbabwe now needs more than the good
wishes of all nations. It also needs the active and
material support of the world community
in the difficult task of resettling thousands of refugees and of
rebuilding the nation politically, socially and economically.
104. Norway, for its part, has already contributed
financially towards the resettlement of the refugees.
As in the past when we tried to alleviate the sufferings
of war through humanitarian assistance to the Patriotic
Front, we now intend to make further assistance
available for the reconstruction
process. An amount
of 60 million Norwegian kroner, the equivalent of
more than !§US 12 million,
has already, subject to
parliamentary approval, been allocated for this purpose
by the Norwegian Government.
And I pledge to the
Government
and the people of Zimbabwe our continued co-operation and support.

98. Tunisia supports in particular the proposal to
include an additional item in the agenda of the next
special session of the General Assembly, so as to
ensure Zimbabwe’s
admission to membership
next
month, before the opening of the thirty-fifth session
of the Assembly.

105. Mr. McHENRY
(United States of America):
All too often, the Security Council convenes to deal
with sombre matters. Today, however, we assemble
in celebration of a welcome and long-awaited development: the application of Zimbabwe for admission as
a Member of the United Nations.

99. Mr. AASEN (Norway): Mr. President, my delegation is happy to see you in the Chair. It certainly
adds to the prestige of the Security Council to have as
President such an outstanding, experienced and highly
respected diplomat and statesman. I should also like
to thank you, Mr. President, as well as other members
of the Council for the kind words addressed to
Mr. Algird. I shall be happy to convey to him your
words of appreciation, and I feel confident that he will
be thankful to you all.

106. It is fitting, Mr. President, that you should be
presiding over the Security Council on this occasion,
when we are once again demonstrating that one of the
signal achievements
of the United Nations is selfdetermination,
for you were so active in the founding
of the Organization
and you have continued to contribute to it.

100. It gives my delegation
deep satisfaction to
support the application of the independent Zimbabwe
for membership in the United Nations. We consider
this meeting of the Security Council to be a historic
one. The application of Zimbabwe for membership in
the United Nations marks the end of a heroic struggle
for independence
and represents a new major step
forward in the liberation of southern Africa.

107. Zimbabwe’s
admission to the United Nations
will be the culmination
of a long and difftcuh effort
to establish in a former African colony a democratic
Government representative of all of the people of that
nation. The United States is proud to have supported
the process that led to free and fair elections in Zimbabwe and to the birth of this new Member of the
family of nations. We are pleased that the United

101. The attainment of independence by Zimbabwe
should give satisfaction to all Members of the United
11

States ,was the first country to open an embassy in
Zimbabwe and the first donor to sign an aid agreement
with Zimbabwe. We hope to expand and strengthen
our relationship
with Zimbabwe in the months and
years ahead.
C,,!(!‘)’ ‘..
108. I The United Nations and its Member States can
also ,be proud of the role they played in creating the
conditions that made a negotiated settlement possible
in Zimbabwe.’ Particular credit, of, course, must be
given to those most.active in the search for a peaceful
resolution in Zimbabwe: the British, who convened
the’ historic conference at Lancaster
House that
produced a negotiated ,settlement and who oversaw
the.electoral
process itself, along with the Commonwealth countries; and Zimbabwe’s
front-line neighefforts reflected the farhours , whose untiring
sightedness and even-handedness that must eventually
characterize successful diplomacy.

rules of procedure. I invite him to take. a place at the
Council table and to make hisstatement.
114. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): -Mr: President,, let me
first express my gratitude to you.and to the members
of the Security Council for giving Japan- the; apportunity to speak before the Council on the admission of
Zimbabwe to the United Nations. Further, the Japanese delegation wishes to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of July. Your long and illustrious
career as a prominent statesman and diplomat has ‘our
deep admiration, and we are happy to note the friendly
and co-operative
relationship
which our two countries enjoy. My delegation is particularly pleased that
the important question of Zimbabwe’s admission to
the United Nations is being discussed under your
able guidance.
115. The United Nations has long endeavoured to
contribute to the realization of an independent Zimbabwe under genuine majority rule. The fact that this
body is now able to discuss Zimbabwe’s application
for membership
in the United Nations is a source
of profound satisfaction. Japan is especially pleased
because the independence of Zimbabwe was finally
achieved through peaceful means following many
years of armed conflict. We are confident that the
resolution of the so-called Southern Rhodesian question will surely contribute
to the solution of the
southern African question in general and to peace, not
only in Africa but in the entire world.

109.. But proudest of ‘all should be the people of
Zimbabwe, for they have demonstrated to a sceptical
world that it is possible to resolve long-standing racial
and political grievances and to establish a society
based on the principles of democracy and racial
equality.
110. The United States welcomes the determined
efforts of Prime Minister Mugabe and his Government
to create in Zimbabwe a nation where those ideals will
be .translated into an everyday reality. We will do
everything we can to encourage and support those
efforts. We encourage all Members of the United
Nations, and the United Nations itself, to contribute
to those efforts, especially those directed at Zimbabwe’s economic and social development.

116. As a reflection of this belief, the Government of
Japan sent Mr. Sadanori Yamanaka,
Ambassador
Extraordinary,
on special mission to .attend the
ceremonies on 18 April 1980 celebrating the independence of Zimbabwe.
At that time Mr. Yamanaka
presented the President of Zimbabwe with a letter
informing him of Japan’s official recognition of Zimbabwe. It is aiso a measure of the regard in which we
hold Zimbabwe that my delegation has asked to participate in the present deliberations.

111. ‘For its part, Zimbabwe can make an important
contribution
to the world community
through its participation in the United Nations. Zimbabwe has already
begun to play an important
role in the affairs of
southern Africa. It has joined with other States in the
region to promote economic development.
And it is
participating,
together with the other front-line States
and the five Western nations and others, in efforts to
find a peaceful solution to the vexing problem of
Namibia.

117.

My delegation

heartily endorses the decision
to recommend to the General
Assembly the admission of Zimbabwe to membership
in the United Nations. We believe that this step is
most appropriate now that Zimbabwe has assumed
its rightful and important place as an independent
nation in the world community.
We are confident that
Zimbabwe will make a valuable contribution
to the
work of the international
Organization.

just taken by the Council

112. Equally important to the cause of world peace
is the contribution
that Zimbabwe has already made
and,continues
to make by its example. As the Members of the United Nations seek solutions to the
pressing;political
and economic problems that confront
the ‘nations of the world,. we should see Zimbabwe as
a beacon light. Its unique experience signals to us all
that swords can be turned into ploughshares,
and
enemies can join as brothers to work towards a
common good.

118. Zimbabwe is a country of tremendous potential.
If its people, in a spirit of national ,reconciIiation,
are united in building their nation, its possibilities
will be boundless. My country fulIy recognizes the
importance of Zimbabwe and is prepared to co-operate
to the best of its abilities with Zimbabwe’s nationbuilding efforts.

113. The’ PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative ,of Japan,. to whom the Council has
extended an. invitation under rule 37 of the provisional
12

119. The recent ‘visit to Japan of Zimbabwe’s Deputy
Prime Minister
and Minister
for Foreign Affairs~,
Mr. Simon Mzenda, has greatly contributed to mutual
understanding and to the consolidation of friendly and
co-operative relations between our two countries. My
delegation is looking forward to working with the
delegation of Zimbabwe in the United Nations.
. ,‘Y,
120: The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Romania, to whom the Council has
extended an invitation under rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure. I therefore invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
121.

Mr.

from

French):

today there is’ no force capable of halting the achievement of the aspirations of peoples ‘to freedom and
national independence.
In this regard, it can-be said
that the victory-of ‘the Zimbabwean people, a further
success for progressive and revolutionary
‘forces,
is an inspiration to the struggle of all oppressed peopl&
and encourages the national liberation movements ‘in
southern Africa ‘and elsewhere, as well as ill .those
foties struggling against the imperialist
pdlicy of
domination.
Today more than ever, recognition
of,
and full respect for, the imprescriptible
right of every
people to a free and independent development, respect.
for its sovereign will to organize its life in accordance
with its own interests and w’ith no foreign interferentie’;
represent the keystone in the establishment
of ire+
relations among States. The whole development
of
international
life ‘proves that.the promotion of a poliby *
of mutual understanding
and ’ peaceful co-operation
among States, achievement
of .the security of all
nations and the establishment
of a lasting peace
throughout the world depend upon the acceptance and
implementation
of this important rule by all States,

MARINESCU
(Romania) (intervretation
Mr. President, first of’all, I should like
to address my cordial thanks to you and to the members of the Security Council for granting me the privilege of taking part in this truly memorable meeting.
The ,Romanian delegation is most pleased to see it
presided over by an eminent personage in the.United
Nations and a prestigious representative of the Govemmerit-of the Philippines, a country with which Romania
has the most friendly relations. It is fortunate indeed
that one of the illustrious signatories of the Charter
should be presiding over these discussions of a brilliant
manifestation
of the right of peoples to self-determination--one
of the fundamental
principles
of the
United Nations and of the contemporary
international
order.

126. The people of Romania, which itself has experienced lengthy struggles against foreign domination
in defence of its identity and for its national and social
liberation, naturally has followed the heroic struggle-of
the people of Zimbabwe with deep sympathy and
solidarity. In the spirit of its unswerving policy of
solidarity with the struggle of all peoples for national
independence,
Romania
has accorded multilateral
support to the liberation
movement
of Zimbabwe
throughout
its heroic struggle-morally,
politically,
diplomatically
and materially-so
that its just cause
might triumph. The firm support of my country for the’,
struggle of the Zimbabwe people has found its most
eloquent expression in the many meetings and discussions hetd at Bucharest and in various .African
countries between the President of Romania, Nicoltie
Ceausescu, and the leaders of the liberation movement
of the’zimbabwe
people. These meetings have led to
relations of mutual respect and friendly co-operation
between our two peoples and the documents signed
on those occasions have heightened the international
political and diplomatic prestige of the Patriotic Front
of Zimbabwe and contributed
to the strengthening
of its authority as the legitimate representative of the
people of Zimbabwe.

122. The special meaning of this meeting of the Council derives from the fact that it was convened to mark
an event of historic importance
in the life of the
Zimbabwean
people-the
crowning of a long and
difficult struggle for the achievement of its unshakable
desire to live and develop as a free and independent
nation.
123. Our’ admiration
for the victorv of the Zimbabwean people .is all the greater since, because of
its heroism, its resolve and its political maturity, it has
written a glorious page in the annals of the historic
movement of national liberation
which in a single
generation has completely changed the political face
of the world and, of course, of the United Nations.
124. The President of the Socialist Republic of Romania, Nicoiae Ceausescu, in the message he addressed
on behalf of the people of Romania last April to the
Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, Robert Mugabe, warmly
hailed Zimbabwe’s proclamation
of independence as
an historic event of decisive importance in the life of
the people of Zimbabwe and one which had farreaching implications for the African continent and for
international
affairs, while at the same time representing an outstanding
contribution
to the general
cause of peace, detente, independence
and cooperation among peoples.

127. The establishment
of -diplomatic’ ” relations‘
between Romania and Zimbabwe from the very first
day of that newly independent African State’s existence opens vast prospects for fruitful multilateral
co-operation
between. our two countries. The”Zim-.
btibwean people, now as in the future, particularly in
the new stage of national reconstruction
and the
building of a new life of freedom and independence,
can rely on the full support of the Romanian people.
The Romanian Government is convinced that friendly,
co-operative relations between our two countries will
continue to develop without let or hindrance to the
advantage of both and in the interests of-peace and

125. The victory of the Zimbabwean people, without
doubt, confirms yet again the unquestionable
fact that
13

to demonstrate its commitment
and dedication
lofty ideals expressed by the Charter.

progress throughout the world, on the basis of the
principles of full equality of rights, respect for national
independence
and sovereignty,
non-interference
in
each other’s internal affairs, and mutual advantage
-principles
which are the very basis of Romania’s
foreign policy.

to the

133. It gives Egypt great pleasure to reafftrm its
unreserved support for the application of Zimbabwe
for membership in the United Nations. My delegation
welcomes the recommendation
of the Security Council in this respect. Egypt is firmly convinced that the
sister African State of Zimbabwe is peace-loving, that
it accepts the obligations contained in the Charter and
that it is able and willing to carry out those obligations.
We therefore sincerely hope that Zimbabwe
will
assume as soon as possible its rightful place amongst
other Members of the Organization,
as it has already
acquired its well-deserved place among the members
of OAU. Egypt is deeply convinced that the admission
of Zimbabwe to the Organization
will not only constitute a significant step towards the fulfilment of the
universality
that is one of the main objectives of the
United Nations, but that it will also enable the Organization to benefit from the positive contributions of that
new African State to the construction
of a more
prosperous and just world order. In this regard, my
delegation listened with interest to the proposal made
by the representative of Tunisia, namely his country’s
support for the inclusion of a new agenda item at the
special session of the General Assembly to be held
next month, and my delegation would like to declare
now its full support for this proposal.

128. In supporting today the application
of Zimbabwe for membership in the United Nations, Romania wishes to pay a tribute to the political wisdom of
the leaders of the Patriotic Front, who, while engaged
in armed struggle, did not hesitate to go to the people
with the movement’s programme. As is well known,
during the general elections in February, the patriotic
forces won a dazzling victory; the people of Zimbabwe thus categorically
expressed by their votes
what they had amply demonstrated on the battlefield:
their choice and their unswerving determination
to
exercise their inalienable right to free and independent
development.
129. I avail myself of this opportunity
to express
also the admiration
of the Government
and people
of Romania at the spirit of unity which inspired the
patriotic
forces in their struggle against colonial
domination
and racial inequities and which finally
won them a well-deserved victory. As was pointed
out by Prime Minister Robert Mugabe, that unity of
action among the patriotic forces will continue to
represent a safeguard for the achievement of the fundamental objectives of the people of Zimbabwe in this
new stage of the revolution-that
of reconstruction
and national reconciliation.

134. This historic occasion marks a happy ending to
the long and heroic struggle waged by the people of
Zimbabwe by force of arms and by peaceful means,
against colonialism
and racism. The victory of Zimbabwe is, indeed, a victory for Africa and also a victory
for all humanity, for freedom and justice all over the
world. It reaffirms the positive role of the United
Nations in support of self-determination,
freedom
and national independence for all oppressed peoples.

130. The admission of Zimbabwe as a Member of
the United Nations, which Romania most warmly
supports, is an event of historic significance in the
life of its people, of Africa and of the world. There is
no doubt that the presence of Zimbabwe as a Member
of the United Nations will strengthen the Organization’s authority and capacity to act in the common
endeavour to establish a better and more just world
based on relations of equality,
co-operation
and
mutual respect among al! States.

135. It is beyond doubt that the decision of. the
Security Council to impose sanctions against the racist
regime of Southern Rhodesia and the support of the
international
community
for the valiant peopIe of
Zimbabwe bolstered their determination
in their pursuit
of victory. Moreover, it was that international
support
which helped the patriotic leaders to forge ahead on the
road towards a peaceful settlement in their country,
thereby demonstrating
to the whole world their
courage and vision and reaffirming
that they were
determined
freedom
fighters as well as astute
statesmen.

131. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Egypt, to whom the Council has
extended an invitation under rule 37 of its provisional
rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
132. Mr. ELARABY
(Egypt): Mr. President, I should
like at the outset to express the gratitude of my delegation to you and to the members of the Security
Council for having made it possible for Egypt to
participate in this historic debate. It is, indeed, a great
pleasure to see you, a founding father and an original
signatory of the Charter of the United Nations,
presiding over the deliberations
of the Council. The
presence of a distinguished
and prominent
world
statesman of your calibre and unique diplomatic experience is the best assurance a Member State can offer

136. Africa will never forget ail the Governments,
institutions and individuals that provided support and
assistance to the people of Zimbabwe before independence. At the same time, my delegation appeals to
all of them to continue extending every possible
assistance to the new-born State to enable it to face
the great challenges of reconstruction
and deveiopment. Zimbabwe will need aid and assistance to dis14

142. The “Question of Southern Rhodesia” had been
pending before the General Assembly and the Security Council for many years. During those years ,an
illegal minority regime had tried to ignore the desire
of the vast majority of the population freely to express
its will in a democratic society. The resulting cycle of
violence left many observers, including those in the
United Nations, doubtful whether a peaceful solution
to this conflict would ever be reached. Even when
today we talk about Zimbabwe on a happy occasion,
we cannot forget the far too many victims of the war
and the suffering of their families.

charge its heavy responsibilities
and safeguard its
national unity. In this connection, I wish to state that
Prime Minister Mugabe of Zimbabwe has discussed
future co-operation between Egypt and Zimbabwe with
the Chairman
of the Egyptian
delegation
to the
seventeenth Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity held at
Freetown from 1 to 4 July 1980. During their extensive
talks, agreement was reached on the form of assistance that Egypt would be in a position to provide
to Zimbabwe.
137. Today as we rejoice for Zimbabwe, we cannot
forget our brothers in Namibia and the Palestinians,
who are still striving for their sacred right to selfdetermination,
freedom and independence.
We will
never be satisfied until they achieve their legitimate
aspirations.
We reaffirm once again our total and
unwavering support to them all and to all oppressed
peoples all over the world. We are confident that,
with the admission of Zimbabwe as a Member of the
United Nations,
the struggle of those oppressed
peoples will soon culminate in the complete eradication of colonialism and racism throughout the whole
world.

143. If manv other innocent lives have been spared
and further destruction avoided, that is due, above all,
to the sense of responsibility
of those leaders who
gave the people of Zimbabwe the opportunity to shape
their own future freely and peacefully at the ballotbox rather than through further fighting and killing.
144. On this occasion I want to pay a tribute to the
British Government
for its courageous initiative and
for its able leadership in the negotiations at Lancaster
House as well as during the’ transitional period. We
owe respect also to the leaders of the front-line States
and to the leaders of the Commonwealth
who, through
their decisions at the Meeting of Commonwealth
Heads of Government
held at Lusaka from 1 to
7 August 1979, set the stage for the negotiating process.

138. In conelusion, and as Zimbabwe is about to join
the United Nations, we look forward to working
closely and co-operating fully with its representatives
for the benefit of Africa and of the international
community as a whole.

145. But I should like, above all, to congratulate
Mr. Robert Mugabe, who, through his decisions, contributed considerably
to the success of Lancaster
House and whose Government
has received an
unequivocal mandate to represent the people of Zimbabwe through the free exercise of its right to selfdetermination.

139. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of the Federal Republic of Germany
to whom the Council has extended an invitation under
rule 37 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

146. The Government
of the Federal Republic of
Germany has always supported the efforts to arrive at
a negotiated settlement to the Rhodesian conflict and
it thinks that the recent developments in that country
should encourage the efforts to achieve peaceful solutions to conflicts in southern Africa and, in particular,
promote the current endeavours to bring about independence for Namibia through free and fair elections
under United Nations control. To underline
our
commitment
to the principle of free self-determination,
the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. HansDietrich Genscher, was happy to attend the independence celebrations in Salisbury, to establish diplomatic
relations on the first day of independence
and to
open a politicai dialogue with the freely elected Government of Zimbabwe. In the meantime
considerable
progress has already been made in intensifying
the
relations between the two countries in the political,
economic, cultural and other fields, and the official
visit to Zimbabwe of another member of the Federal
Government, Minister Rainer Offergeld, was successfully concluded only a few days ago.

140. Baron von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of
Germany):
Mr. President,
it gives me particular
pleasure to see you-one
of the founding fathers of
the Organization and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of a great State Member of the United Nations, with
which my country enjoys close and cordial relationspresiding over this debate of the Security Council.
The application
for membership
of newly independent Zimbabwe, a non-aligned country, indeed testifies
to the vitality and undiminished
importance of the
United Nations, to which you have so actively contributed throughout
the 35 years of its existence.
I should like also to pay a tribute to Mr. Alghrd of
Norway, who guided the Council through the busy and
difficult month of June.
141. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for having given me this
opportunity
briefly to express my Government’s
satisfaction about a development
which will find its
logical conclusion in the admission by the General
Assembly of Zimbabwe as a Member of the United
Nations.

147. My
increasing
15

Government
and mutually

therefore
beneficial

looks forward to
co-operation with

express all their admiration for the past and the experience of that .,yqung State, which will now become a
Member of the United Nations,.and .pledge their total
friendship and future co-operation.

independent
Zimbabwe, and my,. delegation here in
New. York and I myself look fqrward to working
togeth,er with our future .colleagues~from,Zimbabwe
in
joint endeavours to further the aims, and the principles
of the, United Nations.
‘,. ,

153. In conclusion, we express the ‘hope ,that the
Security Council, .which has today welcomed the
liberating ,struggle of the people of Zimbabwe, will
redouble its efforts to promote the speedy and genuine
independence of .the Namibian
people. That lshould
be one of the priority tasks of the, Council,:.all
the
more so since,. South Africa, ,while constantly defying
this organ and the decisions it has taken with regard
to the question of Namibia, has continued to intensify
its oppression. of the Namibian people and to multiply
its acts of aggression against neighbouring
African
countries.
,.
.
154. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have just received
letters from the representatives of Austraha, Pakistan
and Sierra Leone in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion. In accordance .with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent. of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote,. in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

.14g:,. ‘The PRESIDENT:
The next. &eaker
is the
representative of Algeria, in his capacity
._ as Chairman
of ‘the’ Arab Group of States, to whom the Council
has extended an, invitation under rule 37 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite himto take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
I49.

I&.

SEMI&II
(Algeria) (interpiefation
from
Mr. President, on behalf of Algeria and.on
behalf of the Arab’ Group, of which my country has
the honour to be ,Chairman for this month of July,
.I ,should like to thank you and all the, members of the
Council for having ,allowed me to participate in this
solemn meeting convened to take .a decision on Zimbabwe’s application
for membership
in the United
Nations; My delegation is particularly
happy to see
you presiding over this solemn meeting, for your experience:and
your wisdom have always been put at
the service of the .freedom of peoples and their right
to self-determination
and independence.
Indeed,
through your tireless personal efforts in..the service of
the United Nations,. in whose founding you participated
fully and which you have persistently
worked to promote,, you have contributed to fostering
decoionization
as: a whole, thus enabling the Organization to move closer to its goal of universality.
Your presence here as President of the Council is a
fitting tribute to the ideals which you have always
defended in the service of both your country and
,.
mankind as a whole.

.Frqch):

At the invitation of the President, Mr, Joseph
(Australia), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan) and Mr. GetagaKing (Sierra Leone) took the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.
.

155. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Pakistan, speaking in his capacity as
Chairman of the Islamic Group, to whom the Council
has extended an invitation under rule 37’ of the provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council tabie and to make his statement.,

150. In the atmosphere of tension prevailing today in
international relations, and while international
peace
and security are constantly threatened in many regions
of the world, particularly in the southern part of .the
African continent, today we nevertheless have some
grounds for satisfaction as we welcome Zimbabwe’s
application for membership in the United Nations.

156.. Mr.. AHMAD
(Pakistan):
My first word on
behalf of my delegation must be one of sincere felicitations to you, Mr. President, for my -delegation is
very happy to see you preside over this important
meeting of the Security Council. We hold you in great
esteem for your long diplomatic experience, ‘your outstanding qualities of statesmanship and your dedication
to the cause of the independence of all countries and
peoples in the world. I should also like to avail myself
of this opportunity
to express our appreciation‘to
the
representative of Norway, Mr. Algird, who presided
over the proceedings of the Council in the month of
June with great ability, wisdom and diplomatic skill.

151. Indeed, we cannot but bear in mind the sacrifices made by the people of that African country and
the heroic struggle it waged for more than 15 years
against the illegal regime of Ian Smith. The success
achieved by that people, and the political maturity of
its leaders have earned the respect and the admiration
‘of the whole world. ,The final victory won by the
Patriotic
Front has clearly demonstrated
that the
armed struggle,apd the political and diplomatic struggle
are’one and that the emancipation
of peoples always
triumphs over the forces of oppression and exploitation.
’

157. It is,a matter of great pleasure and honour for
my delegation,
in its capacity as Chairman of the
Islamic Group at the United Nations, to join other
representatives
in welcoming the brotherly country
of Zimbabwe to the Organization.

152. In welcoming today the adoption by the Security
Council of the resohttionrecommending
to the General
Assembly the admission of Zimbabwe to the United
Nations, the Algerian delegation and the Arab Group

158. It is indeed a momentous and historic occasion
for the free world to be joined today by a free country
16

whose people have broken the chains ofa cruel system
of human bondage. ‘The heroic struggle ofthe people
of Zimbabwe against colonial domination
and racial
discrimination
is a glorious chapter .i*) the struggle of
the peoples of the third world against the evil forces
of imperialism,
colonialism and alien domination and
to uphoi’d the fundamental human rights of freedom,
justice and equality. ‘Their struggle and their triumph
under the dynamic leadership of Mr. ,Robert Mugabe
‘will continue to inspire national liberation movements
in Africa and Asia and the struggle of countries in
the third world for freedom and dignity.
_.(
159.’ The valiant struggle of the people of Zimbabwe
also conclusively proves the irresistible trend of history
which ensures that the just struggles of peoples
inevitably will triumph. The forces of imperialism,
colonialism,
exploitation,
alien domination and racial
discrimination
which relentlessly try to obstruct that
trend of history are doomed to failure. I take this
opportunity
to reaffirm, on behalf of the members of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, our total
support for the just struggle of the peoples of South
Africa and Namibia
for self-determination,
against
all forms of racial discrimination,
apartheid
and
minority rule. We shall continue to.remain
in total
solidarity with all those oppressed peoples who are
engaged. in the heroic battle against the forces of
racial intolerance, exploitation and foreign oppression,
wherever and in whatever form those odious crimes
against human dignity, equality and freedom may be
manifested. Our stand is in accordance with the basic
principles of Islam, which uphold the dignity of all
peoples, irrespective of race, colour or creed.
160. My delegation takes this opportunity strongly to
endorse the recommendation
just adopted by the
Security Council for transmission
to the General
Assembly in favour of the admission of Zimbabwe as
a Member of the United Nations. It is our conviction
that the participation
of the brotheriy country of
Zimbabwe. will enrich the international
Organization
and will strengthen. the forces of peace, justice and
freedom.
161. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Sierra Leone, speaking in his capacity
as representative of the Chairman of the Organization
’ of African Unity, to whom the Council has extended
an invitation under rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
162. Mr. GELAGA-KING
(Sierra Leone): On behalf
of Sierra Leone and on behalf of the Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity, my delegation wishes
to express its gratitude for the invitation
that you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Security Council have extended to us to participate in the discussion
relating to the.admission of Zimbabwe to membership
of the United Nations. My delegation wishes also to
congratulate you, personally, Mr. President, on your

historic presence. here. You are‘not only a founding
father of the’ Organization but also one of those who
throughout the’years have endeavoured to ensure that
the right of self-determination
is not denied to colnnial
peoples. The fact that you are presiding over this
historic occasion makes it even more of an honour,for
my delegation to” have been invited to participate : in
the present meeting.
.. ,
163. In July this year, OAU, of which my President
is the current’chairman;
very warmly and’unanimously
admitted Zimbabwe as a member: The Prime Minister
of Zimbabwe was present in Freetown on that occa,sion. The euphoria-indeed,
almost hysteria-with
which he was greeted made it clear that he is one of
the most popular leaders on the continent of Afrida.
It therefore gives my delegation great pleasure to come
here this afternoon and warmly indorse the’decision
just taken by’the Council to recommend the admission
of Zimbabwe to the United .Nations.
2’.
-’
164. It is perhaps fitting for my delegation to’r&all
the efforts made by various bodies to achieve the result
we are witnessing today: the’Genera1 Assembly, the
Security Council,’ and perhaps most parti&ilarly
.the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard’to the
Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence
to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
because of the various resolutions’it
adopted on this
matter at its ‘session in Belgrade in April 1979. We
wish also to commend the British Commonwealth
for
the efforts it made at Lusaka, when it recommended
to the British Government
the course that Goveinment should take at Lancaster House. And of course
our appreciation goes also to the British Government
for the efforts it made at Lancaster House to bring an
end to the war and bloodshed in Zimbabwe.
165. I think our greatest praise ought to go to the
leaders of Zimbabwe and the front-line States, who
made so many sacrifices in pursuit of the dourse
of self-determination.
The fact that Mr. Mugabe has
shown such great statesmanship
after winning the
elections in Rhodesia so overwhelmingly
should not
be forgotten. There is a lesson to be learned from
this: that bloodshed could be stopped and many
innocent lives could be saved if only the parties on
the opposite sides of a question could come together
to discuss their differences.
166. The hour is late and we ‘shall therefore limit
ourselves to stating that we wish Zimbabwe well, we
look forward to welcoming it in the General Assembly, and we hope and trust that the lessons learned
in Zimbabwe will be applied in Namibia and the rest
of southern Africa.
167. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Australia,
to whom the Security
Council has extended an invitation under rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

168. .Mr. JOSEPH (Australia): I should like first to
thank you, Mr. President, and the members of the
Security’ Council for granting Australia the opportunity to participate in this meeting of the Security
Council today. I would also join others, General
Romulo, in expressing satisfaction that this meeting is
taking place under your guidance as President of the
Council. No one ,matches you in your unique experience and long history of participation
in the work
of the United Nations from its inception. You are a
distinguished
statesman of your own country and a
distinguished
spokesman for South-East Asia as a
whole.
169. The situation in Zimbabwe preoccupied
the
international community for over a decade and a half.
It formed part of a constellation of southern African
problems that continue to occupy the United Nations
today and that have brought suffering and hardship
to the peoples of the area.

my capacity as representative of the PHILIPPINES,
to make a statement on behalf of my country on this
occasion when the Security Council is recommending
that a free and independent, Zimbabwe should become
the 154th Member of the United Nations ,family of
nations.
176. This event is of .particular significance to the
international
community,
as it is to my country. The
story of Zimbabwe’s accession to full nationhood is a
modem epic, unmatched in the pain, the suffering and
the eventual triumph it represents for the people of
Zimbabwe, and many other communities
as well. It
is a saga in which all people stood to gain in the end,
for each time progress stopped short of the goal, all
of us suffered.
177. The international community has every cause to
celebrate this event. Former colonial countries rejoice
in it, but so must former colonial Powers. If this is a
victory of a national liberation struggle, it must also
count as an achievement, indeed a unique example, of
a former colonial Power coming back to set things
right, and, by the power it once wielded, to liberate
the peoples that were once its subjects. Credit for it
must therefore not be denied the United Kingdom;
to the distinguished and heroic list of participants in
this achievement must be added the names of Prime
Minister Thatcher and Lord Canington, both of whom
played such leading roles in bringing about the
Lancaster House Agreement.*

170. For many years the question of Southern Rhodesia-as it was known-appeared
intractable, defying
easy solution. But when change came, it came quickly.
The Commonwealth
Meeting at Lusaka last year was
followed by the long and intensive consultations
in
London, and finally elections and independence- in
Zimbabwe.
171. We believe a tribute should be paid to the
leaders of the new nation, and in particular to Prime
Minister Mugabe, for high statesmanship.
We think
a tribute should be paid also to the British Government
for its role, particularly
during the long days-and,
I might add, nights-at
Lancaster House; and also to
OAU, and especially to the front-line States, for the
support they gave at crucial stages in the negotiating
process.

178. We have many reasons to celebrate this event.
The United Nations has championed
the cause of
decolonizatinn
ever since it was fouqded. The fact
that today we usher i.n the 154th Member, 35 years
after the founding of the United Nations when there
were only 51 Members, is vivid proof that the United
Nations has not failed and that it has indeed accelerated
the decolonization
process. But progress has not been
easy. Since 1945 there have been far too many
instances of peoples becoming independent only .after
having paid a tremendous eost in lives and property,
threatening the peace, and leaving in its wake ruined
economies and crippled political institutions.
Indeed
Southern Rhodesia, now Zimbabwe, started out that
way.

172. It gives Australia pleasure now to join others
in supporting the application of Zimbabwe for membership in the United Nations. We hope that the success
achieved in relation to Zimbabwe will serve as an
inspiration for those working towards solution of the
other pressing problems in southern Africa.
173. Zimbabwe’s
independence
and its imminent
assumption
of a seat in the United Nations is a
euphoric occasion. But I would note that its problems
are not over. The task of rehabilitation
and national
development after years of conflict is just beginning.
The new nation needs generous help from the intemational community.
My own Government has recently
announced assistance of $US 11 million to Zimbabwe.

179.. For 75 years under colonial rule, Zimbabwe
became a problem 14 years ago, when a rebel regime
sought to establish white minority rule over a black
majority. For the past 10 years the country was in a
state of civil war. For 7 years, until recently, continuous warfare raged.
180. Who can forget those anxious years when it
appeared that Zimbabwe would fqrever remain a lost
cause? Who among the parties concerned, who among
all of us did not despair as the situation deteriorated
and began to embroil the neighbouring
States in an
internecine and racial war? As the attempts by the
international
community,
particularly
the African

174. We are confident
that Zimbabwe
has an
honoured role to play in the United Nations, and we
look forward to close co-operation with its delegation
in the years to come.
175. The PRESIDENT:
As there are no further
names on the list of speakers, I should now like, in
18

States, to resolve the issue in neaceful negotiations
went endlessly on-at Lagos, Dakar, Malta, Geneva,
Havana,
Oslo, through
Anglo-American
shuttle
diplomacy,
at the Lusaka Commonwealth
Meeting,
and finally in the Lancaster House Agreement in
London-who
did not harbour feelings of futility after
every event? As the number of Security Council resolutions grew, from resolution 216 (1965), through 448
(1979), to 460 (1979), and finally 463 (1980), who
among us did not begin to regard Zimbabwe as another
of those intractable problems which make the United
Nations so unpopular to some and so necessary to
others?

should be an augury. But to us the triumph of Zimbabwe is a tribute to the tolerance, the goodwill, and
the spirit of compromise and accommodation
shown
by the rival leaders in Zimbabwe and their followers,
by the leaders of the front-line States-of
Angola,
Mozambique
and Zambia-and
by
Botswana,
Nigeria and the United Republic of Tanzania,
in
accepting the good offices of the former colonial ruler,
through the instrument
they together worked out
among themselves, the Lancaster House Agreement.
Despite the disorder and the passion carried over from
years of civil war, the Agreement held firm in the‘end,
which attested to the sincerity and good faith with
which the leaders of the United Kingdom addressed
themselves to their task of mediation
and reconciliation. Thus, out of chaos emerged a new and vibrant
political entity in southern Africa: Zimbabwe, which
bids fair to become one of the most important nations
on this planet.

181. Success in Zimbabwe is, for those reasons,
all the more remarkable. That is why our congratulations to all who contributed
to Zimbabwe, and to
those who have kept it a success after the initial
flush of victory, must go beyond the ordinary. Zimbabwe is a tour de force in diplomacy and in the
primacy of reason. In the contemporary world, where
entropy in relations among States and between communities is the rule rather than the exception, Zimbabwe comes as a refreshing reversal of trends. We
have many lessons to learn from its example.

183. It is therefore with undisguised pleasure that
my delegation congratulates the leaders and people “.
of this new nation, the Secretary-General
and the
United Nations for the role they played in its emergence, and extends to Zimbabwe a most cordial
welcome and best wishes as it is about to join the :
United Nations as a full-fledged Member.

182. One of them is the power of the democratic
process to enforce justice and to effect a consensus
among bitterly antagonistic interests. Another is the
possibility of resolving conflict, not by the force of
arms but by means of fair and free elections. By those
means a people, no matter how unaccustomed it is to
having its wishes consulted, is able to determine who
should lead it and what should be the nature of its
political institutions. That fulfils the democratic ideal,
in which all parties have the opportunity
of putting
their case before the people, in a peaceful competition
for power. Zimbabwe before the elections demonstrated the immorality
of racism and, after the elections, its obsolescence, in a society where peoples of
all races, creeds and political beliefs can live together
in toleration because they need each other and because
the country needs all of them equally. That is a lesson
that should be of particular cogency to South Africa,
to whose leaders the recent events in Zimbabwe

184. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT
of
the Security Council. I note that the list of speakers
for this item has been exhausted. I therefore take it
that the Council has concluded its consideration of the
matter before it.
The meeting

rose at 2.05 p.m.

NOTES
’ See resolution 477 (1980).
2 See Southern
ference,
Lancaster

Rhodesia:
House,

Report
London,

of the Constitutional
September-December

Con1979.

Cmnd. 7802 (London, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1980).

19

:.

1

;

.:
.’ ..,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UhlTED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

NATIOSS

PUBLICAROSS

may bc obtained
your bookstore

from bookstores
or write

to:

United

and distributors
Nations,
Sales

SEPROCURERLESPUBLICATIOSSDESHATIONSUNIES

Les pub&&ions
des Nations
Units
sent en v.e@e dam les libsiries
dt$ositaires
du mondo entier. Informez-vour
oupm
de votre libraire
h : Nations
Unies, Section des venps.
K-w York .ou Gcntve.

ou

et tes sgences
adressez-vous

X3naumf
‘Opratus3a~srii
06aenrtHenHbrx
Waudt
~0~x0
rynmb B ~xsnx~bfx
sfarasssxax R areurcmax
so acex pafionax
x~rpci. Haeonrfre
cnpatiau
66 n3&aHHax
33
aanl~x
KmuKWOH
uaramne
xnx nntumre
no anpecy:
Opraux3~H~
06ae~s#rrennbrx
HamR.
CeKuux no nponae
n3xannfi.
Hbro-Rope
8tnx XeaeBa.
COMO

;

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las pubticaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Unidas. Seccidn de,Ventas.
Nueva York a Cinebra.

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en libredas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

_’

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00400

836146~Decemher

19x5-2.425
