S/PRST/2007/23

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 June 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5708th meeting of the Security Council, held on 28 June 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Sierra Leone”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
The Security Council expresses its warm appreciation to the President
and Chief Prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra Leone for their briefing
during the debate of the Security Council on 8 June 2007.
The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the Special Court
and commends the progress the Special Court has achieved. The Security
Council particularly notes the contribution of the Special Court to
strengthening stability in Sierra Leone and the subregion and bringing an end
to impunity.
The Security Council welcomes the commencement of the trial of
Charles Taylor on 4 June 2007 in The Hague following the adoption of
resolution 1688 (2006). The Security Council also congratulates the Special
Court on handing down its first trial judgement on 21 June 2007 in the AFRC
case.
The Security Council also acknowledges the Special Court’s progress
towards achieving its completion strategy (S/2007/338). The Security Council
underlines its expectation that all organs of the Special Court will do their
utmost to finish the work of the Court in accordance with the completion
strategy.
The Security Council urges the international community to continue to
support the Special Court as it moves into its final stage of work, including by
ensuring that the remaining fugitive indictee appears before the Court.
The Security Council in particular takes note of the Special Court’s
ongoing needs for financial support. The Security Council emphasizes the vital
need for further pledges of voluntary contributions in order to allow the
Special Court to complete its mandate in a timely manner; and asks all United
Nations Member States to consider making such pledges.
The Security Council also notes the other varied challenges facing the
Special Court as it works to fulfil its mandate, and urges States to consider

07-40213 (E) 280607

*0740213*

S/PRST/2007/23

supporting the Special Court by entering into appropriate arrangements with
the Special Court for witness relocation and enforcement of sentences.
The Security Council recognizes that further arrangements will be
needed to address residual matters after trials and appeals are completed,
including issues arising from long-term enforcement of sentences for
convicted persons, the future trial of any indictees remaining at large, witness
protection and the preservation of the archives of the Special Court.
Finally, the Security Council commends the important Outreach activities
of the Special Court in bringing its judicial work to the attention of the people
of Sierra Leone, and thereby contributing to the restoration of the rule of law
throughout the country and region.

2

07-40213
