A/57/PV.76

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-seventh session

76

th plenary meeting
Monday, 16 December 2002, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kavan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Santa Clara
Gomes (Portugal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 23 (continued)
United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage
Draft resolution (A/57/L.59)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will resume its consideration of agenda item 23,
entitled “United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly held a
debate on this agenda item at the 67th plenary meeting
on 4 December 2002. In this connection, the Assembly
has before it the draft resolution issued as document
A/57/L.59.
I give the floor to the representative of Egypt to
introduce draft resolution A/57/L.59.
Mr. Atta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt is pleased to introduce the draft
resolution contained in document A/57/L.59 on the
United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage. The draft
resolution refers to the conclusion of the United
Nations Year for Cultural Heritage, 2002, as set forth in
General Assembly resolution 56/8 in its previous
session.
The draft resolution stresses the need for the
international community to make every effort to

(Czech Republic)

promote and preserve humankind’s common cultural
heritage, whether tangible, intangible, natural or manmade. The draft resolution also stresses the need to
further the constructive efforts being carried out by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) in this area, as it is the
international organization most suited to protecting and
promoting the cultural heritage for humankind. The
draft resolution also calls upon the Director-General of
that organization to participate in the discussion of this
agenda item at the next session of the General
Assembly regarding the work of the organization.
The delegation of Egypt would like to thank all
the delegations that participated in the ample
discussions on this draft resolution. In particular, we
would like to thank the delegations that have sponsored
the draft resolution, including Bangladesh, France,
Indonesia, Madagascar, the Maldives, Mongolia,
Nicaragua, the Republic of Korea, the Russian
Federation, Thailand and Yemen.
In conclusion, I would like to comment on
something that has already been mentioned several
times. This draft resolution contains a number of
differences from the original text as submitted to the
Secretariat. They do not affect the general import of the
draft resolution. But, perhaps, require an explanation.
We would have liked to have been consulted, along
with the other sponsors, before those changes were
introduced into the draft resolution. Some of them
change phrasing agreed upon in previous documents of
the United Nations; others do not take into account the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-74401 (E)

*0274401*

A/57/PV.76

balance that was achieved in the text. That balance was
a compromise between the divergent positions that
were taken during the negotiations. We would therefore
like the following corrections to be made to the text.
In the fourth preambular paragraph, we would
like the word “these” to be replaced with the words
“host”, so that the phrase will read “host communities”.
In the same paragraph, the word “intensifying” should
be replaced by “enhancing” so that the phrase will read
“enhancing international cooperation”. Those changes
bring the draft text back into line with the outcome of
the Johannesburg Summit.
In operative paragraph 4, we would like the word
“possible” to be added after “explore”, so the phrase
will read “explore possible ways”, in order to reflect a
delicate compromise reached in the course of
consultations. We would also like the Arabic
translation to be revised, because we find many
discrepancies between it and the English text.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/57/L.59 as orally
corrected, entitled “United Nations Year for Cultural
Heritage 2002”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/57/L.59 as orally
corrected?
Draft resolution A/57/L.59, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 57/158).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 23?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 28 (continued)
Assistance in mine action
Draft resolution (A/57/L.53)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly debated this agenda item at the
51st and 52nd plenary meetings, held on 15 and 19
November 2002. I give the floor to the representative
of Denmark to introduce draft resolution A/57/L.53.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): On behalf of the European
Union and the other sponsors, I have the honour to
introduce the draft resolution on “Assistance in mine
action”, contained in document A/57/L.53. Since the

2

submission of the draft resolution, the following
countries have joined the list of sponsors: Afghanistan,
Albania, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guinea, Haiti, Kenya, Latvia, Liberia,
Lithuania, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique,
Nauru, New Zealand, Nigeria, Panama, Paraguay, the
Philippines, Poland, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan,
Suriname, Thailand, the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tuvalu, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen, Yugoslavia and
Zambia. That makes a total of 108 sponsors.
I have a small correction to operative paragraph
19 of the present draft. The word “or” should be added
in the third line, after “United Nations Development
Programme”. That line should read “supported by the
United Nations Development Programme or under the
auspices of the”. It was submitted in its present form
by mistake.
The draft resolution before us today reflects the
outcome of constructive consultations with interested
delegations. I would like sincerely to thank Belgium
for having conducted the negotiations on the draft
resolution on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union.
Bearing in mind the increasing need for
assistance in mine action, the importance of this draft
resolution — which addresses the vital issue of
assistance in mine action, at the international, national
and regional levels — is growing.
Allow me briefly to point out the main elements
of the draft resolution. The text recognizes the primary
role and responsibility of Member States in assistance
to mine action and the significant assisting role of the
United Nations in this field. It calls more specifically
on mine-affected countries to assume their national
responsibility in resolving the landmine problem, and it
appeals to donor Governments to increase, whenever
possible,
their
international
assistance
and
contributions.
The draft also underlines the humanitarian
imperative of mine action and the importance of
integrating mine-action activities into broader

A/57/PV.76

emergency

objective is to prevent mines from claiming new
victims and to help the survivors.

Consequently, the draft resolution encourages the
finalization of a United Nations emergency response
plan. The draft resolution recognizes that mine action
also includes activities in the broader context of
development aid. The draft notes with appreciation the
report of the Secretary-General and requests him to
review in 2003 the United Nations mine-action strategy
by seeking the views of Member States.

While Norway has just joined the consensus on
resolution A/57/L.53 on assistance in mine action,
there are various aspects of this resolution that we
would have liked to see improved. Allow me to
reiterate a few elements in this respect.

humanitarian
situations.

strategies,

especially

in

Finally, the draft resolution stresses the need to
convince non-State actors to halt immediately and
unconditionally new deployment of anti-personnel
mines, and it also requests the development of standard
reports on mine action programmes related to the scope
and impact of the mine problem, available resources
and capacities and the progress achieved in the field.
In view of the importance of assistance in mine
action and of the problem of mines and unexploded
ordnance in general, it is the hope of the sponsors that
this draft resolution will, as in previous years, be
adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/57/L.53, as orally
corrected.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.53, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/57/L.53, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 57/159).
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.

It is of great importance that available financial
and human resources be utilized in an optimal manner.
It is crucial that the primary responsibility for mine
action, including coordination, lie with the mineaffected countries themselves. This is imperative in
making mine action sustainable and effective.
For Norway, the mine-ban Convention is the
primary framework for mine action. The Convention
contains provisions not only for a total ban on
antipersonnel mines, but also on international
cooperation and assistance in mine action.
United Nations agencies, regional organizations,
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
and various non-governmental organizations all are
indispensable actors in humanitarian mine action.
The United Nations Mine Action Service has an
important role in securing the integration of mineaction issues in the work of the United Nations system
wherever it may be relevant. It is important, however,
to make a distinction between the Secretariat’s
coordinating and mainstreaming work within the
United Nations system, and the operative, field-based
mine action carried out by the United Nations and by
non-governmental organizations.

May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

It is within these areas that we would have
welcomed further improvements to A/57/L.53.
However, given the overall humanitarian importance of
mine action, we decided to join the consensus on this
year’s resolution.

Ms. Rodsmoen (Norway): Anti-personnel mines
remain a serious cause of human suffering in many
parts of the world. Humanitarian mine action is often a
prerequisite for peace and reconciliation and for
humanitarian assistance and development.

Mr. Amer (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation joined the consensus on draft
resolution A/57/L.53, entitled “Assistance in mine
action”. However, we would like to make the following
comments.

It is of great importance that we continue to
address the problems caused by anti-personnel mines
by maintaining our efforts on the ground and by
focusing on the humanitarian objectives of this work
and its practical implementation in the field. Our

First, the contents of the report (A/57/430) of the
Secretary-General were taken into consideration in the
drafting of the resolution. That report, despite the
useful information contained therein, is like previous
ones in that it focuses on recently planted mines,

3

A/57/PV.76

ignoring older ones such as those that plague many
States, including my country.
During the course of the Second World War,
millions of mines were planted in my country, and
thousands of people were killed. Those mines continue
to pose a threat to the people who live in the affected
areas; they contribute to the destruction of property and
impede expansion of agricultural fields.
Secondly, my delegation warned of the problems
emanating from those mines and drew the attention of
the Secretary-General to that problem. We also
expressed the hope that the United Nations would
accord the necessary attention to older mines. In fact, a
mission sent by the Organization to Libya confirmed
that millions of mines were planted in Libya by the
Allied and Axis forces. Regrettably, the report
submitted to this session, like previous ones, focuses
only on recently planted mines. My delegation would
therefore like once again to reiterate how regrettable
we consider that approach to be. We hope that that
shortcoming will be avoided in the future, particularly
in the framework of the mine-clearance strategy for the
period 2001-2005, when attention would hopefully be
focused on clearing old mines, which, like those that
have recently been planted, cause injury and property
damage.
Thirdly, one of the paragraphs in the report refers
to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on their Destruction. Although we believe
that that Convention constitutes one of the fundamental
pillars for international action in this area, we did not
join it for many reasons, in particular because it
ignored the very important aspect of the security of
large States that cannot otherwise protect themselves.
Furthermore, the Convention makes no provision
whatsoever with regard to the legal responsibility of
colonial States to clear the mines that they planted in
the territory of other States. My delegation hopes that
the States parties to the Convention will try to
overcome those shortcomings so that the universality
of that Convention can be achieved.
Mr. Wang Lei (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
delegation of China joined in the consensus on draft
resolution A/57/L.53, entitled “Assistance in mine
action”. China fully understands the humanitarian
concerns of the international community regarding the
indiscriminate injury to innocent civilians caused by

4

anti-personnel landmines. China supports international
efforts to address that problem. For that reason, China
ratified the amended landmines Protocol to the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW),
and strictly abides by it.
We believe that the indiscriminate use of
landmines and the ineffectiveness of post-war
demining efforts are cause for serious humanitarian
concern. Such concerns can be addressed in two ways.
First, we should prevent the indiscriminate use of
landmines and ensure the universal and effective
implementation of the amended landmines Protocol to
the CCW. Secondly, we should actively demine those
deployed landmines that are not in conformity with the
provisions of the amended landmine Protocol. In recent
years, China has been actively engaged in international
demining assistance with a view to helping
mine-affected countries and to alleviating their
suffering. In the past two years we have donated
demining
equipment
to
seven
mine-affected
countries — Angola, Cambodia, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Mozambique, Namibia and Rwanda. The Chinese
Government also plans to donate demining equipment
to Lebanon. China sent a demining expert team to
Eritrea for on-site demining training so as to help that
mine-affected country to build on and enhance its
demining capacity. In November this year, China sent
another demining expert team to Afghanistan to
investigate the situation there.
The Chinese Government would like to continue
to cooperate in exchanging experience with interested
countries
and
international
organizations
on
humanitarian demining assistance and to make further
contributions to international demining action.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 28?
It was so decided.

A/57/PV.76

Agenda item 38 (continued)
The situation in Central America: procedures for the
establishment of a firm and lasting peace and
progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom,
democracy and development
Draft resolutions (A/57/L.20/Rev.1,
A/57/L.27/Rev.1)
Reports of the Fifth Committee (A/57/645,
A/57/646)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held a debate on this agenda
item at the 47th and 50th plenary meetings on 11 and
14 November 2002.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution
A/57/L.20/Rev.1 is contained in document A/57/645.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution
A/57/L.27/Rev.1 is contained in document A/57/646.
I give the floor to the representative of Mexico to
introduce draft resolution A/57/L.27/Rev.1.
Mr. De Alba (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for the delegation of Mexico to introduce, on
behalf of the sponsors, the draft resolution on the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala
(MINUGUA), contained in document A/57/L.27/Rev.1.
In addition to the countries appearing in the revised
text of the draft, which we are introducing today, I
would like to inform the Assembly that the delegations
of El Salvador, Slovenia and Ireland have also joined
the list of sponsors.
On 29 December 1996, 36 years of internal
conflict ended in Guatemala with the signing of the
Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace. That
Agreement was the result of a six-year negotiating
process under the auspices of the United Nations, and
provided for a series of political, military, legislative,
social, economic, agrarian, ethnic and cultural
measures, which included a broad national agenda for
peace.
Since then, as a result of the decision of the
parties, the United Nations has played a fundamental
role in the peace process, verifying compliance with
the commitments undertaken in the Agreement. The

presence of MINUGUA has been very positive. The
parties and Guatemalan society have recognized that
the United Nations, through that Mission, has
contributed a degree of certainty and trust to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, as shown by
the long list of sponsors of the draft resolution. The
draft resolution that we are introducing today makes
reference to previous General Assembly resolutions
and relevant reports of the Secretary-General, and to
reports of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Guatemala (MINUGUA). It highlights progress
achieved in the peace process, as well as challenges
remaining, and refers to the responsibility of the parties
and of Guatemalan society as a whole to make a
national effort to ensure that the peace process will be
irreversible. The draft also refers to the importance that
the international community has granted to the
fulfilment of the pending commitments within the new
timeframe through the end of 2004. It also asks the
international community to provide financial support in
order to strengthen national capacity.
The draft proposes that an extension of the
MINUGUA mandate be authorized for one additional
year, from 1 January 2003 to 31 December 2003, in
accordance
with
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations. Additionally, in the draft the door is
left open for a possible extension of the mission’s
mandate through the end of 2004, taking into account
the request made along these lines by the Guatemalan
Government and civil society, in view of the fact that at
the beginning of this year there will be a new
Government. Therefore, the draft welcomes the
intention of the Secretary-General to carry out
consultations with regard to those requests with
interested Member States, aiming at the consolidation
of the peace process after 31 December 2003.
I would like to make a last-minute technical
correction to the draft resolution. I am referring to a
correction related to the dates set for the next meeting
of the Consultative Group for Guatemala, which
appears in operative paragraph 8. I understand that the
meeting, which is referred to in this paragraph, has
been postponed to June or July. Hence, please replace
the words “for March 2003” with the words “for the
middle of 2003”. In addition, I wish to say that in
submitting the draft resolution to the Secretariat, my
delegation submitted English and Spanish texts
simultaneously, but the draft under consideration lists
only English as the original language.

5

A/57/PV.76

We have also noted that some modifications were
made in the Spanish text, and they were done without
the knowledge of the co-sponsors. We would therefore
ask the Secretariat to review this question and to make
the corresponding adjustments.
Finally, let me point out that Guatemala has been
a successful experience for the United Nations. The
parties have provided an unequivocal proof of their
commitment to the peace process. As has already been
said, considerable progress has been achieved, but
there are still challenges ahead. The sponsors therefore
trust that this draft resolution will receive unanimous
support in the Assembly.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolutions A/57/L.20/Rev.1
and A/57/L.27/Rev.1 as orally corrected.

just taken with the adoption of resolution
A/57/L.27/Rev.1 with the oral amendment introduced
by Mexico.
Our appreciation is directed, first of all, to our
Mexican colleagues, who coordinated the consultations
on the text reflected in this resolution; secondly, to the
countries that form part of the friends of the
Guatemalan peace process, which joined Mexico in this
endeavour; thirdly, to all countries which co-sponsored
the resolution; last but not least, to all Member States
of this plenary, who have not only approved the
extension of MINUGUA’s mandate for another year,
but have also left the door open to consider a positive
response to our request that the presence of the United
Nations be extended until the end of 2004, in order to
be present during the first year of the new Government
that will take office as of January of that year.

We turn first to draft resolution A/57/L.20/Rev.1,
entitled “The situation in Central America: procedures
for the establishment of a firm and lasting peace and
progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom,
democracy and development”. I should like to
announce that since the publication of the draft
resolution, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/57/L.20/Rev.1: Belize, Canada, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama. May I
take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/57/L.20/Rev.1?

For our part, we reiterate our political
commitment to move ahead with the action
contemplated in the peace accord, and to cooperate
with the United Nations in the next phase, in which the
functions of MINUGUA will gradually be transferred
to national entities. We will also cooperate with the
Secretary-General in responding as required to the
consultations referred to in paragraph 25, in order to
determine the exact date of MINUGUA’s final
withdrawal from Guatemala.

Draft resolution A/57/L.20/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 57/160).

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 38.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/57/L.27/Rev.1,
entitled “United Nations Verification Mission in
Guatemala”, as orally corrected. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/57/L.27/Rev.1 as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/57/L.27/Rev.1 as orally
corrected was adopted (resolution 57/161).
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Last 11 November, I addressed this Assembly to make
a substantive presentation in favour of extending the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Guatemala (MINUGUA) for the year 2003. In addition,
I reiterated the request of President Alfonso Portillo of
Guatemala, presented in this same Hall, with regard to
considering the further extension of the mandate until
the end of 2004. The only purpose of my statement
today is to express our appreciation for the decision

6

Agenda item 168
International Year of Rice, 2004
Draft resolution (A/57/L.58/Rev.1)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines to introduce draft
resolution A/57/L.58/Rev.1.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): On behalf of the
sponsors, I have the honour to introduce the draft
resolution entitled “International Year of Rice, 2004”,
contained in document A/57/L.58/Rev.1. At this point,
however, I wish to point out a typographical omission
in the title of the draft resolution. In that regard, the
year “2004” should be added to the title of the draft
resolution after the words “international year of rice”

A/57/PV.76

so that the title reads “International Year of Rice,
2004”.
First of all, I wish to thank all the delegations that
contributed to the formulation of the draft resolution
before us. The draft resolution, which is an offshoot of
a draft resolution adopted by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in
November 2001, is straightforward, declaring 2004 the
International Year of Rice. It also invites the FAO to
facilitate the implementation of the International Year
of Rice in collaboration with Governments and other
relevant organizations of the United Nations system, as
well as non-governmental organizations.
By declaring 2004 the International Year of Rice,
the sponsors of this draft resolution believe that
impetus will be provided for promoting various
activities related to the production and consumption of
rice as well as recognition of the inter-relationship
between rice and the alleviation of hunger, malnutrition
and poverty. According to the FAO, more than 800
million people in the world suffer from hunger and
malnutrition. Most of them live in areas that are
dependent upon rice production for food, income and
employment — hence the urgent need to heighten the
level of awareness of the importance of rice.
Finally, I wish to announce that, since the
publication of draft resolution A/57/L.58/Rev.1, the
following countries have joined the list of sponsors:
Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Cuba, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Fiji,
Gabon, Grenada, India, Indonesia, Japan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Mali, the Marshall Islands,

Mauritania, Myanmar, Nauru, Nicaragua, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Togo, Viet Nam and Zambia. In that regard, we all seek
the General Assembly’s adoption of draft resolution
A/57/L.58/Rev.1 by consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/57/L.58/Rev.1, as orally
corrected.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/57/L.58/Rev.1, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/57/L.58/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted (resolution 57/162).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 168?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The President: I would like to make an
announcement regarding the consideration of the
reports of the Main Committees to the General
Assembly.
In the morning of Wednesday, 18 December
2002, the General Assembly will consider the reports
of the Third Committee. In the morning of Friday, 20
December 2002, the General Assembly will consider
the reports of the Second Committee.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

7
