S/2000/992

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 October 2000
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Sierra Leone
I. Introduction
1.
By his letter dated 20 September 2000 (S/2000/886), the President of the
Security Council informed the Secretary-General that the Council had decided to
send a mission to Sierra Leone from 7 to 14 October. The terms of reference of the
mission are annexed to that letter.
2.
Following consultations among the members of the Security Council, it was
decided that the composition of the mission would be as follows:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock, head of mission)
Bangladesh (Ambassador Anwarul Karim Chowdhury, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997)
concerning Sierra Leone)
Canada (Ambassador Paul Heinbecker)
China (Ambassador Wang Yingfan)
France (Ambassador Yves Doutriaux)
Jamaica (Ambassador Patricia Durrant)
Mali (Ambassador Moctar Ouane)
Netherlands (Ambassador Peter van Walsum)
Russian Federation (Ambassador Andrei Granovsky)
Ukraine (Ambassador Volodymyr Yel’chenko)
United States of America (Ambassador James B. Cunningham)

II. Activities of the mission
3.
Prior to the departure of the mission, the Security Council met informally with
United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and representatives of
Member States contributing military or civilian police personnel to the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). The purpose of these meetings was to
hear a broad range of views on the situation in Sierra Leone and in the subregion.

00-69132 (E) 161000
`````````

S/2000/992

Members of the Council also received briefings on the military and security
situation in Sierra Leone as well as on the programme for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees wrote
letters to the mission before departure.
4.
The mission left New York on 7 October and visited Guinea (8, 9 and 12
October), Sierra Leone (9-12 October), Mali (12 and 13 October), Nigeria (13 and
14 October) and Liberia (14 October). The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ambassador Oluyemi Adeniji, met the mission members at Conakry and
travelled with them to all points except Monrovia. In Guinea, the mission met with
President Lansana Conté and members of the Guinean cabinet. The mission also met
with members of the diplomatic community in Guinea and received a briefing from
the representative of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR).
5.
In Sierra Leone, the mission held extensive discussions with the Special
Representative and senior civilian and military personnel in UNAMSIL. Members of
the mission visited various locations where UNAMSIL is deployed — Lungi, Port
Loko, Rogberi Junction, Masiaka, Mile 91, Kenema and Daru as well as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration facilities and camps for internally
displaced persons and child combatants. The mission held meetings with President
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah and senior government officials, with members of the
Commission for the Consolidation of Peace, and with representatives of political
parties, civil society, United Nations agencies, international non-governmental
organizations and members of the diplomatic community.
6.
In Mali, the mission held discussions with President Alpha Oumar Konaré,
current Chairman of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
and with senior representatives of ECOWAS countries. In Nigeria, the mission met
with President Olusegun Obasanjo and senior members of his Government, with the
Minister of Defence and senior defence personnel, as well as with the Executive
Secretary of ECOWAS, Lansana Kouyaté and representatives of ECOWAS. Finally,
the mission met in Monrovia with President Charles Taylor and received a briefing
from the Representative of the Secretary-General in Liberia, Felix Downes-Thomas.

III. Findings of the mission
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
7.
In accordance with its terms of reference, the mission spent much of its time
with UNAMSIL discussing the ways to ensure the full application of the Security
Council resolutions on Sierra Leone and the implementation of the measures taken
by the Secretary-General to enhance the effectiveness of UNAMSIL. In this regard,
the mission found that UNAMSIL had begun to make marked progress after the
setbacks and pressures caused by the attacks by the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) against peacekeepers and renewed fighting in May.
8.
In the field the mission was impressed by the military professionalism and
dedication of the peacekeepers on the ground. The mission was particularly
impressed by the excellent work done by UNAMSIL battalions, often using their

2

S/2000/992

own resources, to improve the lives of the people living in their area of operation. In
addition to their important peacekeeping tasks, United Nations troops and observers
have been voluntarily refurbishing or even starting schools, providing medical
assistance, setting up orphanages, sharing food and water with the population,
repairing roads and other infrastructure and — to a limited degree — helping to
prepare ex-combatants for integration into the economy. In the view of the mission,
contingents should be provided with the means to continue this important work
through quick impact projects financed through the Trust Fund for Sierra Leone. In
addition, it would be useful to deploy more civilian affairs and human rights officers
to the areas where UNAMSIL units are established.
9.
Members of the mission noted that different contingents had different
perceptions of the mandate and tasks of UNAMSIL. To some extent, this stems from
national perceptions, but it may also be linked to a lack of precision in elements of
the mandate itself. In the view of UNAMSIL, it is for the leadership of the mission
to streamline these perceptions into a common view of its mandate and tasks, for
example, through regular internal briefings and training programmes.
10. The mission received briefings from UNAMSIL on the implementation of the
measures taken by the Secretary-General to enhance the effectiveness of UNAMSIL,
as recommended by the assessment team which visited the mission area from 31
May to 8 June 2000. In this regard, UNAMSIL stated that most measures
recommended by the assessment team had been implemented on the ground and
that, as a result, considerable progress had been made with regard to communication
and coordination within the mission, as well as with United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations. The mission considered, however, that there were
still significant shortcomings in a number of areas. It was evident that, in certain
cases, implementation of the recommendations of the assessment team had taken
place in name but had yet to become reality. The key areas to be addressed are the
continued efforts needed to achieve full integration with headquarters, better
coordination of the logistic effort and the arrangements for contingent-owned
equipment. The mission can confirm that progress is being made. Some areas,
however, not least the equipment of troop contributors require action by United
Nations Headquarters and the troop contributors themselves. The so-called wet-lease
arrangements clearly also need review.
11. The withdrawal of the Indian contingent from UNAMSIL obviously
constitutes a serious loss. These very professional soldiers have made an important
contribution to UNAMSIL and to civilian life in their areas of deployment.
Members of the mission consider that their replacement should be carried out
without leaving a security vacuum that could be exploited by RUF. Freedom of
movement on the road from Kenema to Daru would facilitate the handover to
incoming battalions but would raise the numbers required in that area.
12. The mission noted that the civilian components of UNAMSIL have also made
important strides in their work with regard to coordination with their military
colleagues. They are understaffed, however. Their staffing should be brought up to
authorized levels so that they can contribute fully to the overall work of UNAMSIL,
in particular in the areas of human rights, public information and civil affairs.
13. There was general agreement among the mission’s interlocutors that the
strength of the force needed to be increased in order to deploy in strength
throughout Sierra Leone, including the border with Liberia and the diamond-

3

S/2000/992

producing areas. According to several senior military officers in UNAMSIL, this
could be done under the terms of the current mandate of UNAMSIL. Other senior
defence interlocutors, including the Nigerian Minister of Defence, argued for a more
robust mandate. President Obasanjo, as well as Mr. Kouyaté, emphasized that
ECOWAS countries stood ready to provide the necessary troops. In the case of
Nigeria, such troops could include those units currently being trained and upgraded
through the bilateral assistance of the United States of America, although the
Nigerian Minister of Defence informed the mission that these units might be used
for other purposes, as well as to relieve or augment the number of units currently
serving in UNAMSIL, or as part of a mission authorized by ECOWAS. At the same
time, the Government of Nigeria was working to procure the necessary equipment to
bring its units in UNAMSIL to the required levels of equipment and support.
However, this was a slow process which required significant resources.
14. In this regard, President Obasanjo informed the mission that he had made it
clear to RUF and its supporters that he was prepared, if necessary, to send Nigerian
troops to take over the diamond zones in Sierra Leone. The death of any soldier
would, however, be taken extremely seriously by Nigeria. He believed that any such
deployment of Nigerian troops would require air cover.
15. President Taylor said that the best way forward would be to revisit the Lomé
Agreement. In addition, he felt that a government of national unity should be set up
after President Kabbah’s term expires. Security in Sierra Leone should be the
responsibility of UNAMSIL only. ECOWAS troops should deploy into the diamond
areas as soon as possible; it was not necessary to wait for the new troops that were
being trained with the assistance of the United States of America. It was important
that UNAMSIL stay neutral, only using force when provoked. Once UNAMSIL was
deployed, all armed groups in Sierra Leone, including the army, should be disarmed
and demobilized. In due course, ex-combatants should be able to apply for the new
Sierra Leonean army.
16. Mr. Kouyaté provided members of the mission with a comprehensive
assessment of the situation in Sierra Leone and the region. In the view of ECOWAS,
the situation in Sierra Leone required a continuation of the two-track approach of
military pressure on RUF and, at the same time, a dialogue to convince them to
demobilize and cooperate. The alternative to this approach would be military action
to seize control of RUF-held territory. To implement the two-track approach, it
would be necessary to increase the strength of UNAMSIL, to which end the
ECOWAS member States would be ready to contribute troops. With regard to the
second, political track, there was a need to establish and maintain a dialogue with
the RUF leadership.

Sierra Leone
17. During the mission’s meeting with President Kabbah, he and members of his
cabinet presented the views of the Government on the areas covered by the terms of
reference of the mission. The political aim of the Government was to establish and
maintain a free, democratic, independent and united country that was politically and
economically stable and sustainable. To achieve these aims, the Government
intended to work closely with UNAMSIL and its regional partners.

4

S/2000/992

18. The Government expressed its full support for the draft resolution on
UNAMSIL (S/2000/860) and expressed the hope that UNAMSIL would soon
receive further well-trained and well-equipped troops, as well as additional
command, planning and support elements. The Government would be prepared, with
international assistance, to extend democratic and civil administration structures
across Sierra Leone. In this regard, it has recently passed legislation and established
a government body to fight corruption.
19. The Government briefed the mission on its ambitious plan for the training and
equipping, with international assistance, of its armed forces. The aim of the
Government was to develop, within a short period, a capacity to extend security
more broadly across the country and to exert strong military pressure on RUF. This
would depend, to a large extent, on the Government’s ability to sustain and support
its troops and to provide the necessary leadership. In this particular briefing,
members of the mission noted that the Government appeared to place relatively
greater emphasis on military pressure on RUF rather than on pursuing a political
process. The Government’s approach clearly depended strongly on the continued
presence of UNAMSIL in the country. The Government had also developed plans to
incorporate the Civil Defence Force into a territorial defence force which would
serve as an auxiliary to the army. Mission members commented that this would
require careful political and military coordination.
20. The Inspector-General of Police briefed the mission. The rehabilitation of the
civilian police in Sierra Leone, starting virtually from scratch, was hampered by a
serious lack of resources, infrastructure and lack of access to RUF-held areas.
However, some progress had been made towards an accountable police force
operating on the basis of community policing. The Sierra Leonean police force was
working closely with the UNAMSIL civilian police and human rights component.
21. While visiting locations outside Freetown, members of the mission were struck
by the deep desire of Sierra Leoneans to lead a normal life in peace and by their
commitment to that objective. There also appeared to be a need for the Government
in Freetown to establish stronger links with regional and local government structures
in areas to which it had access. In Freetown, the mission met with leaders of the 17
political parties in Sierra Leone, the professed desire of which for national unity was
not matched by concrete ideas to develop this in practice.

Revolutionary United Front
22. The mission heard a range of views on the current strength and intentions of
RUF. The prevailing analysis was that RUF is divided into several groups: it was not
certain that its commanders would respect the political leadership of the newly
appointed interim leader of RUF, Issa Sessay. Many interlocutors felt that a
significant portion of the rank and file of RUF would be willing to disarm but were
not allowed to do so by their commanders, who often used brutal methods, including
execution, to prevent fighters, including children, from leaving.
23. Most of the mission’s interlocutors, including those at the most senior levels,
had no doubt that President Taylor exercised strong influence, even direct control,
over RUF. In the assessment of many, the main objective of RUF was to maintain
control of the diamond-producing areas. Some suspected a continuing latent
ambition to seize power by force, although most believed that the imprisonment of

5

S/2000/992

Foday Sankoh had dulled this aspiration and that the presence of UNAMSIL was
serving as a deterrent. However, recent redeployments of RUF within Sierra Leone
were reportedly linked to incursions into Guinea with the aim of creating instability
there. Few doubted that rebels might attempt to take advantage of any power or
security vacuum in the west of Sierra Leone.
24. The mission was told of a number of recent contacts with RUF by regional
leaders, the ECOWAS secretariat and the UNAMSIL military leadership, as well as
contacts by UNAMSIL patrols in the field. Most of the mission’s interlocutors,
including regional leaders, considered that contacts with RUF should be stepped up
while fighting remained at a low level, with a view to establishing a proper
dialogue.
25. President Obasanjo did not conceal his view that President Taylor, with whom
he would ideally wish to cooperate, was the most difficult factor in the region and
exercised control over RUF. It would be important to use a mixture of dialogue (not
negotiations, President Obasanjo said, but discussions to build their confidence) and
the show of credible force to make RUF demobilize and cooperate with a view
towards peace. This would require the transformation of RUF into a political party,
for which it would need assistance. In his view, members of RUF would be ready to
disarm. To help maintain contact with RUF, President Obasanjo suggested that
UNAMSIL establish a small liaison office in Monrovia. This deserves consideration.
26. President Obasanjo informed the mission that he had recently been in touch
with RUF. Although the interim leader, Issa Sessay, was present, “Colonel” Gbao
and Gibril Massaquoi had been the main spokesmen. RUF had indicated that it
would disarm after ECOWAS troops within UNAMSIL were deployed into the
diamond areas.
27. In President Taylor’s view, most members of RUF wanted peace and its new
leadership was prepared to allow the deployment of peacekeepers into its areas and
to return United Nations weapons and equipment. President Taylor said that he
would be ready to facilitate a meeting to obtain a ceasefire, which could be held at
Bamako or Abuja. Following a ceasefire, UNAMSIL, preferably ECOWAS
contingents, would be expected to deploy into RUF areas and disarm its combatants.
Since RUF had already formed a political party, it should now be encouraged to
follow the political path. However, the bulk of the former political leadership was in
jail. Therefore, a rapid investigation was needed to determine who was liable for
prosecution.
28. In this regard, Mr. Kouyaté said his contacts with RUF indicated that it might
be ready to commence a political dialogue. However, it claimed that this would only
be possible if the political cadre of RUF were released from prison in Freetown and
if funds were made available for their travel to a venue outside Sierra Leone for
discussions. Mr. Kouyaté and others made clear that the participation of Foday
Sankoh could not in any way be considered. ECOWAS believed that the release of
prisoners could not be a condition for talks since RUF had designated an interim
leader. Furthermore, Freetown would be the best place to hold meetings. ECOWAS
was considering organizing a meeting of the Joint Implementation Committee set up
under the Lomé Agreement. It was also hoped that ECOWAS would soon reconvene
its committee on a ceasefire for Sierra Leone, which would work towards the
earliest possible conclusion of a formal ceasefire agreement.

6

S/2000/992

29. It was the understanding of the Government of Sierra Leone that the Lomé
Agreement would require a review, in particular with regard to the participation of
RUF in government or public office. Despite the briefing mentioned in paragraph 19
above, the Government overall appeared to remain committed to a two-track
approach. This would include maintaining strong military pressure on RUF through
the progressive deployment of the Sierra Leone Army and through the presence of
UNAMSIL. At the same time, the Government indicated that it would keep open the
possibility of contact with RUF, as well as of RUF participation in the political
process in due course after it had disarmed and demobilized completely. Also, the
Government did not preclude the participation of RUF ex-combatants in the new
armed forces of the country, which are being created and trained with international
assistance.
30. The view was firmly and frequently expressed within Sierra Leone that the
cause of many of the country’s problems lay in the support provided to RUF by
President Taylor, motivated partly by his own political and security concerns and
partly by his interest in profits from diamonds mined in Sierra Leone. The majority
of the mission’s interlocutors in Sierra Leone appealed to the international
community to make every effort to dissuade President Taylor from supporting RUF
and causing unrest in the subregion. President Taylor later vigorously denied these
activities (see para. 43 below).
31. The mission visited several demobilization camps and held discussions with
representatives of the National Commission on Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration and the National Commission for Resettlement, Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction on the programme of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Members of the mission concluded that the programme was a vital element in the
peace process. They noted, however, that there was considerable room for
improvement in the management and execution of the programme, in particular in
the area of reintegration. The absence of viable reintegration plans and programmes
had led to the overcrowding of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
camps, which was compounded by the large numbers of dependants that
accompanied ex-combatants. Members of the mission suggested enhancing the role
of UNAMSIL in the programme, within the limits of its mandate and bearing in
mind the Government’s ownership of the programme.

Elections
32. President Kabbah informed the mission of his intention to organize elections
towards the end of 2001. His present term would expire in February 2001 and,
according to the Constitution of Sierra Leone, could be extended by parliament for
six months. At the same time, various elements of Sierra Leonean society, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations, as well as several of the
mission’s interlocutors in the region, expressed serious doubts that the environment
in Sierra Leone would permit the holding of free and fair elections. Many therefore
preferred to see “peace before elections”. In this regard, President Obasanjo
informed the mission that some Sierra Leonean contacts had expressed to him the
need for a three-year transitional government before elections could be held.

7

S/2000/992

Regional dimensions of the crisis
33. From the outset of the mission, when the members were briefed by the
diplomatic community and United Nations agencies in Conakry, it became clear that
the impact of the conflict in Sierra Leone on the situation in the region was
increasing alarmingly. The mission heard from the Presidents whom they met the
unanimous message that they were deeply disturbed by the deterioration and were
keenly aware of the risks posed by a further spillover of the conflict in Sierra Leone,
in particular to Guinea. In their meetings with the mission, the President and
Government of Guinea showed deep concern about the attacks from Liberia and
Sierra Leone, which had led to the deaths of hundreds of Guineans. In the view of
President Conté, echoed subsequently by President Obasanjo, the destabilization of
the subregion was being caused by Liberia, with the complicity of others in the
region. He denied that Guinea had ever supported Liberian dissidents and he
requested that the international community take steps to dissuade President Taylor
from this course of action. In his view, there should be no negotiations with the
rebels; the best approach would be to defeat them militarily.
34. President Conté welcomed the decision in principle of ECOWAS to deploy
troops on his borders, but noted that resource constraints would hamper the
implementation of that decision. Guinea therefore suggested that the United Nations
assist in their deployment. The establishment of a buffer zone would be an
alternative. When asked which role the Mano River Union could play in the conflict,
the President answered that it was of little value when two of its member States
were in conflict with the third.
35. President Obasanjo suggested that bilateral assistance in providing security
along the borders could come from Nigeria and Mali, which would require support
from the United Nations. ECOWAS was considering placing observers on the
border, as well as a maritime contingent. This could perhaps also be done by the
United Nations. He had counselled President Conté to give priority to internal
reconciliation. It was vital for the international community to support Guinea since a
breakdown in that country would have disastrous results.
36. Within Guinea, the recent statements issued by the Government had generated
negative sentiments towards Sierra Leonean and Liberian refugees in the country,
the majority of whom had been absorbed without difficulty into Guinean society.
The presence of refugees within its borders and the potential influx of additional
refugees in the future was clearly putting a heavy strain on the scarce resources
available for humanitarian assistance. UNHCR supported the relocation of refugees
away from the border, at the request of the Government of Guinea, which would
require resources as well as a favourable political environment in Guinea. In spite of
these pressures, President Conté assured the mission that he would do his best to
provide protection and security for refugees and humanitarian workers.
37. The Government of Sierra Leone, for its part, was deeply concerned that the
conflict was now destabilizing the subregion, with serious humanitarian as well as
political and economic consequences. They asked for outside assistance to cope with
the movements of refugees and internally displaced persons. They also asked for
Security Council assistance in strengthening the Mano River Union and its
institutions in order to enhance its cohesiveness and the security of its member
States.

8

S/2000/992

38. President Konaré stressed that a regional approach needed to be taken in
addressing the conflict in Sierra Leone, which also affected Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone. In this regard, he proposed that three steps be taken urgently, namely,
(a) the establishment of a broad-based partnership involving the United Nations,
ECOWAS, the Government of Sierra Leone and major players within the
international community, which should formulate and implement a coordination
strategy for the subregion aimed at promoting Governments’ observance of
democratic principles and the rule of law, as well as regional integration; (b) the
international community should assist in improving the capacity of ECOWAS to
address subregional and regional issues, such as the proposed regional investigation
into the illegal trade in Sierra Leonean diamonds; and (c) ensuring the close
involvement of the political parties and civil society in the peace efforts in Sierra
Leone and other countries in the subregion. President Konaré feared that, should our
collective efforts fail, the region would be at the mercy of an “internationale” of
destabilization.
39. President Konaré announced three important initiatives being taken by
ECOWAS to lower tensions between the Mano River Union member States, namely,
(a) the stationing of an ECOWAS political representative in Freetown; (b) the
convening in Abuja, on 17 October, under the auspices of President Obasanjo, of a
meeting aimed at clarifying the mandate of the Committee of Six on a ceasefire
prior to its dispatch to Freetown to obtain a ceasefire agreement between the
concerned parties; and (c) the convening in Freetown on 23 and 24 October of a
meeting of the Joint Security Committee of the Mano River Union at the ministerial
level. President Konaré also announced the forthcoming dispatch of a technical
assessment team to look into the deployment of ECOWAS observers along the
border between Guinea and Sierra Leone, as well as the deployment of observer
teams to various capitals in the region. He requested that international assistance be
provided to ECOWAS in these efforts. He stated emphatically that no problem in
West Africa could be solved without Nigeria, whose presence in any ECOWAS force
was essential. Nigeria should be an active driving force in the region, rather than a
regional policeman.
40. Mr. Kouyaté said that the extension of the conflict from Liberia to Sierra
Leone and now Guinea was of great concern to ECOWAS member States. Any
further extension had to be stopped, which was why ECOWAS had tried to
strengthen the Mano River Union. However, there was little or no confidence among
the leaders in the Union.
41. Mr. Kouyaté informed the mission of the preparations by ECOWAS to
implement its decision to deploy military personnel to the Guinean borders. A small
verification team would shortly be dispatched to the area to investigate the
accusations and counter-accusations made by Guinea and Liberia. A team of five
Malian and five Nigerian officers would thereafter travel to the region to make an
assessment of the situation on the ground and of the logistic requirements for a
substantial deployment. In view of the limited capacity of ECOWAS, international
financial and logistical assistance would be needed to deploy and maintain a force
on the ground. It was obvious that no force would be able to completely seal off a
1,000-kilometre border in difficult terrain. The purpose of the deployment of troops
at the border would be to deter any incursion by armed groups and thus contribute to
stability in the subregion. It would be important to consider how the envisaged
ECOWAS presence would coordinate its activities with UNAMSIL.

9

S/2000/992

Diamonds and arms
42. Many of the mission’s interlocutors conveyed their concerns about the links
among the armed groups operating in the country, the trade in illegally mined
diamonds and the influx of weapons into the region. In this regard, the certificate-oforigin regime for rough diamonds that had recently been established by the
Government of Sierra Leone would be an important first step towards curbing the
contribution of the diamond trade to the instability of the region. The mission was
informed that the ECOWAS regional inquiry to investigate the trade in illegal
diamonds had yet to be convened and the hope was expressed that the inquiry would
cooperate closely with the United Nations panel of experts on this issue.
43. Mr. Kouyaté reminded the mission that ECOWAS had adopted a moratorium
on small arms, which would benefit from further support from the Security Council.
Obviously, the ECOWAS moratorium could not by itself stop the arms flow, and the
supporting action of arms manufacturers and weapon-exporting countries would be
essential. When asked by the members of the mission, President Taylor said that his
Government was not involved in the smuggling of diamonds and arms and that
Governments accusing Liberia of this should come forward with the evidence that
supported such accusations. Members of the mission made clear to him the feelings
in the region on this matter and warned that the instability and isolation of Liberia
could increase if its activities went beyond its legitimate security interests.

Humanitarian aspects
44. The Government of Sierra Leone wanted UNAMSIL to ensure that all parties
to the Lomé Agreement observed their obligation to allow the necessary freedom of
movement for the delivery of humanitarian assistance. The humanitarian community
in Sierra Leone voiced serious concern about the lack of access to the RUF-held
areas, which was depriving many Sierra Leoneans of vital support. This was further
compounded by the lack of food in these areas, since few people had been able to
raise crops in the current farming cycle. With regard to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, some non-governmental organizations
considered that rebuilding communities would help to create incentives for fighters
to give up their arms and return home. The mission could not otherwise gauge the
humanitarian situation at first hand, but it was clear from the reports they heard that
the situation remained extremely serious, especially for women and children.
45. As for the situation in Guinea, the mission gained the clear impression that
urgent action would be required by the international community to deal with the
presence and movements of refugees and internally displaced persons throughout the
subregion. The Government of Guinea had developed a plan to relocate Sierra
Leonean refugees away from the border area, for which it would need assistance. It
would be important for United Nations agencies to continue to develop a common
approach to the humanitarian problems in the region.
46. Guinea assured the mission that it would continue to host and shelter refugees
from Sierra Leone in particular, and that it was taking measures to ensure the
security of humanitarian workers. However, President Conté considered that all
refugees should be screened to identify troublemakers. He called for international
assistance for the repatriation of those able to return home, for the movement of

10

S/2000/992

refugees to camps away from borders and for assistance for Guinean internally
displaced persons.

Special Court
47. The Government of Sierra Leone referred to the need for an effective
information campaign to explain to the public the limits of the powers of the Special
Court and the delay in the commencement of its operations. The Government
considered that the Court should have powers under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations so as to ensure that it had sufficient authority to try any
individual under international and domestic law, including the requirement upon
third countries to surrender persons subject to the jurisdiction of the Court. The
Government also indicated that it preferred to appoint a co-prosecutor rather than a
deputy prosecutor.
48. The Government encouraged the Security Council to expedite its decision on
the Special Court so that trials could start in a reasonable time (i.e., six months),
since the Government could not hold suspects indefinitely. In the view of President
Kabbah, the United Nations should ensure adequate funding and material support for
the Special Court, to be provided from assessed contributions, in collaboration with
the Government. In general, the Government would be content to abide by the
decision of the Security Council on the Court, including on temporal jurisdiction.
49. Several of the mission’s interlocutors, in particular non-governmental
organizations and civil society, stressed the negative impact of the establishment and
jurisdiction of the Court on the minds of ex-combatants who could be more reluctant
to come forward to disarm for fear of prosecution. The Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, they considered, would be a better alternative for the many child
combatants still with RUF. Clear criteria and an effective information campaign,
reaching out to this vulnerable group, would be essential to explain the limits of the
Court’s jurisdiction and the alternative systems available.
50. The possibility that children could be prosecuted by the Special Court was the
subject of animated debate in Sierra Leone and there appeared to be no prevailing
view. In the view of the Government of Sierra Leone, the Court should prosecute
those child combatants who freely and willingly committed indictable crimes. On
the other hand, non-governmental organizations and United Nations agencies,
especially those engaged in the protection of children, favoured excluding those
under the age of 18 years. In Lungi, the mission heard a passionate appeal from a
14-year-old ex-combatant, on behalf of his fellows, not to try any children. Members
of the mission made it publicly clear that the purpose was to indict only those
persons who bore the greatest responsibility.

IV. Conclusions and recommendations
51. The complexity of problems in Sierra Leone and its neighbours represents an
extraordinary challenge, which requires extraordinary action. Since the eruption of
the current phase of the crisis, Sierra Leone has been the focus of sustained
international attention. The Security Council, other parts of the United Nations
system, ECOWAS, the international financial institutions, individual donors and

11

S/2000/992

international non-governmental organizations are all heavily engaged. Each can do
and is doing much to address the different aspects of the crisis and its underlying
causes. The ideas, energy, commitment and resources are there, but some of the key
actors continue to work in unharmonized and, in certain cases, competing directions.
Among the Government, ECOWAS and UNAMSIL, and in each of them, we found
different perceptions of the reality on the ground, and of policy objectives and the
strategy and means necessary to meet them.
52. The mission concluded that the highest priority must be given to the
coordination of a comprehensive strategy with clear objectives. Only when all
stakeholders — the Government and people of Sierra Leone, the region and the
international community — act together through an agreed and interlocking
approach will the latent potential for the country and the region to emerge from the
current crisis be fulfilled. Our first recommendation, therefore, is for the
establishment of a United Nations-based mechanism for overall coordination
(see para. 55 below).
53. The mission assigns a similar priority to intensifying the momentum of the
peace process. Military measures to enhance security in the country and on its
borders should be pursued urgently: those intent on continuing the rebellion must be
effectively deterred. The current tentative indications of RUF interest in dialogue
must, however, be thoroughly and quickly explored. The mechanism for this must
take account of a variety of views within RUF, a variety of political actors and a
variety of potential channels. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral might wish to give high and immediate priority to the coordination of
active contacts, liaising in particular, beyond UNAMSIL itself, with Presidents
Kabbah, Conté, Konaré, Obasanjo and Taylor. He should keep the Security
Council informed.
54.

A comprehensive strategy requires action on the following core elements:
(a) Peace process. Most of the fundamental principles underlying the
Lomé Agreement remain valid. While a return to the status quo ante is not
envisaged, the conclusion of an effective ceasefire and the withdrawal of RUF
from key areas of the country, in particular the diamond fields, as stipulated in
the Agreement, must remain key objectives. A renewed dialogue both with
RUF leadership and with commanders and combatants at the local level should
be pursued immediately, using the levers and channels with the greatest
potential both in the region and in the country. The latest efforts by ECOWAS
to resume dialogue with RUF through the Joint Implementation Committee
deserve the support of the Security Council and should be coordinated with the
Government of Sierra Leone, with the advice of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. The process should, inter alia, cover an early
ceasefire throughout the territory of Sierra Leone, agreed arrangements
for withdrawal, the return of all seized UNAMSIL weapons and
equipment, and the opening up of humanitarian and other access in the
north and east of the country. The mission carefully noted suggestions that
RUF might now be prepared to permit UNAMSIL deployment into the
diamond-producing areas, and thought that this required further exploration, in
accordance with the concept of operations set out by the Secretary-General in
his report (S/2000/832). The peace process should also focus on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in order to attract full participation by ex-

12

S/2000/992

combatants in a revived and better funded disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme (see below). This will, however, also require
guarantees from RUF that their cadres can enter it freely and without
intimidation;
(b) Special court. In the context of the peace process, the Security
Council and the Sierra Leonean authorities will need to reflect carefully before
taking any final decisions on the scope of the Special Court (see paras. 47-50
above). The right balance must be struck between the requirements of justice
and the need to minimize any potential disincentive to entering the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process that the threat of
prosecution may represent — especially to child combatants. The mission is
not otherwise making any direct recommendations on the establishment of the
Special Court, since this requires further discussion by the Security Council.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission will be an essential instrument in
the wider reconciliation process;
(c) Military aspects. The military track remains an indispensable
element of the peace process. Only a sustained and effective military
instrument, with the capability to extend its reach throughout the country and
following clear political and military objectives, can maintain pressure on RUF
and create incentives for dialogue and disarmament. To meet these
challenges, UNAMSIL must be strengthened in terms of numbers,
effectiveness and capability, as recommended by the Secretary-General
(see S/2000/832), taking advantage of the offers of further troops from,
inter alia, ECOWAS countries. Strong regional involvement on the ground is
as critical to the long-term success of the United Nations peacekeeping
presence as is strong regional political leadership. At the same time, both
within UNAMSIL and internationally, including present and potential troopcontributing countries, there needs to be a complete and thorough
understanding of the stance, tasks, mandate and concept of operations of
UNAMSIL, and how they work to meet the wider objectives of the
Government and people of Sierra Leone, the region and the international
community. The combination of firm, proactive peacekeeping, within the
flexibility authorized by the resolutions, and the implementation of our broader
recommendations can exert a significant impact on a rebellion, many members
of which are looking for a road to life without conflict;
(d) Regional dimension. No lasting progress can be made in Sierra
Leone without comprehensive action to tackle the current instability in the
West African region, in particular in the Mano River Union member countries.
Regional leaders were clearly of the opinion that President Taylor’s
relationship with RUF was a key to the situation in Sierra Leone, and that
continued action was necessary to persuade him to use his influence to
positive, rather than negative, effect. Illicit trafficking in diamonds and arms,
the proliferation and encouragement of thuggish militias and armed groups,
and the massive flows of refugees and internally displaced persons resulting
from their activities must be addressed directly (the forthcoming report of the
panel of experts is expected to provide concrete recommendations on
diamonds and arms, and ECOWAS is implementing a well-prepared small
arms moratorium). The region, through ECOWAS, is showing encouraging
willingness to take the lead, under its current Chairman, in undertaking

13

S/2000/992

specific action in these areas. The international community as a whole must be
prepared to act in urgent support, both through material assistance for regional
security initiatives and by exerting pressure on those most responsible for
fomenting instability for selfish advantage. In this specific context and to help
the wider objective of supporting capacity-building within the region, the
Security Council and individual Governments should look positively at
what they can do to support the decision by ECOWAS to prepare for and
deploy an ECOWAS observer force on the borders of the three Mano
River Union member countries, in coordination with UNAMSIL. The
Government of Guinea in particular needs encouragement and support to
provide access and protection for humanitarian personnel and aid. The
Secretary-General should be requested to comment on these regional aspects in
his reports to the Council on UNAMSIL. The disturbing situation in Côte
d’Ivoire may also need to be watched;
(e) Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. A thorough
overhaul and reorientation of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme is required. Effective management of the programme
and development of the reintegration and rehabilitation elements in particular
are vital, for example, through quick impact projects and stimulation of
economic activity. Ex-combatants must be processed through the system more
quickly and better provision made for their dependants. The Security Council
should give early consideration to whether the balance of responsibilities
in the programme among the Government, the World Bank, UNAMSIL
and bilateral agencies can be improved, following the publication of the
report of the assessment team sponsored by the World Bank. The United
Nations should encourage the further cooperation of civil society and nongovernmental organizations in making reintegration a reality;
(f) Role of Government. The primary responsibility for the resolution
of the conflict must rest with the Government, Parliament and people of Sierra
Leone. No coordinated strategy for the country can be taken forward unless the
Government and the people of Sierra Leone themselves feel a sense of
ownership of the process and demonstrate the political will to achieve genuine
national reconciliation. The Government, with sustained international
assistance, can do more to develop and communicate its vision for taking the
peace process forward, as well as its strategic planning for economic and
social development. Equally, the region and the international community
should ensure that the Government of Sierra Leone is consulted at every level
of planning and coordination on the future of the country, to help develop this
sense of ownership, contribute to economic development, and build capacity
and institutions countrywide. The country faces daunting problems in these
areas, and the lack in particular of political cohesiveness and of political and
administrative structures outside the capital is an alarming consequence of the
conflict. Advice and financial help on a communications and public
awareness strategy would be especially useful;
(g) Human rights and humanitarian assistance. There is growing
evidence of hunger and disease in areas to which humanitarian organizations
have no current access. The mission recommends that UNAMSIL and
ECOWAS explore with RUF the possibility of access under conditions of
adequate security for a needs assessment to be conducted in the areas

14

S/2000/992

under its control, and for safe access for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance thereafter. Abuses of human rights, including rape, physical abuse
and extortion, remain widespread, with women and children particularly
vulnerable to assault. All components of UNAMSIL, including the military,
should accelerate its efforts to work with the Government and civil society to
develop an environment of respect for human rights. A high priority should be
to raise the awareness in Sierra Leonean society of the need for a concerted
conciliation process. The current vacant human rights posts at UNAMSIL
should be filled as soon as possible, and military units reminded of their
obligation, within the mandate, to protect civilians, something which is not
always happening. The proposed Human Rights Commission should be
established as soon as possible, in cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes should be targeted towards protecting the
rights of women and children. The promised Commission on War-affected
Children should be established, and the international community should
be encouraged to support and assist in the assessment of the needs of the
juvenile justice system. The international community should also assist by
providing child protection and advocacy experts to serve as required on
the staffs of the Special Court and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission.

Overall coordination
55. Together with efforts to develop a comprehensive strategy, there must be an
effective, sustainable coordination mechanism in the region to drive and implement
it. Current efforts are praiseworthy but inadequate. Consultation on important
developments and initiatives is incomplete, and partnership is often more an
aspiration then a reality. Further thought should be given to the best format and
participation for an appropriate coordination mechanism. It is clear that, at a
minimum, the Security Council and the Secretariat, ECOWAS, UNAMSIL
troop-contributing countries and the Government of Sierra Leone need to
consult through some form of continuous structure rather than simply a series
of meetings held at regular intervals. The leadership of ECOWAS is displaying
energy and vision, but the organization itself — by its own admission — lacks
sufficient resources and expertise to carry forward and implement its initiatives,
such as the proposal to place ECOWAS military observers on the borders. As a key
first step, the mission recommends an immediate package of international
assistance to help the ECOWAS secretariat to develop its capacity, including
the placing of UNAMSIL liaison staff at ECOWAS headquarters.
56. These are tough messages and demanding proposals, but Sierra Leone is a
challenge that the United Nations and the international community as a whole
should gather the collective will to meet. It is a small country, rich in natural
resources — not the least of which are its resilient and hopeful people, who have
been let down too many times by their own leaders and by influences and
circumstances beyond their control. We owe it to them to do our utmost together to
unlock the doors to the peace, stability and development that they so desperately
yearn for and deserve. The Security Council and the international community as a

15

S/2000/992

whole can provide much of the focus and resources needed to help realize that
vision; we must continue to show the commitment and resolution to deliver it.
57. Members of the mission pay tribute to the energy, selflessness and courage of
all those working on the ground to bring Sierra Leone its peace and sustained
stability. The Special Representative and his team and large numbers of UNAMSIL
headquarters and field staff, as well as the offices of the United Nations
Development Programme in the region and the United Nations Office in Liberia,
proposed and executed an impeccable programme for the mission and earned its
deep gratitude. The mission expresses the warmest thanks to all those, from heads of
State downwards, in five countries, who looked after it with such generous
hospitality. The service of the crews of the Royal Air Force of the United Kingdom
who flew them safely and comfortably for 17,000 kilometres was especially
appreciated. Finally, 11 Ambassadors humbly acknowledge that they could not have
accomplished their week’s work without the skilful, resourceful and intelligent
support of the Secretariat and companion teams.

16
