S/PRST/2012/21

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 October 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6844th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 October 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Sierra Leone”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its warm appreciation to the President
and Prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra Leone for their briefing to the
Security Council on 9 October 2012.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong support for the Special Court
and commends the progress the Special Court has achieved (S/2012/741). The
Security Council particularly notes the contribution of the Special Court to
strengthening stability in Sierra Leone and the subregion and bringing an end
to impunity.
“The Security Council congratulates the Special Court on the completion
of the trial proceedings in the case of Charles Taylor on 30 May 2012. The
Security Council takes note of the commencement of appellate proceedings in
the case of Charles Taylor and the projected schedule for the completion of
those appellate proceedings by 30 September 2013.
“The Security Council also acknowledges the Special Court’s progress
towards completion. The Security Council underlines its expectation that all
organs of the Special Court will do their utmost to finish the remaining work
of the Court, including any contempt cases, in accordance with the completion
strategy.
“The Security Council commends the important outreach activities of the
Special Court in bringing its judicial work to the attention of the people of
Sierra Leone and Liberia, and thereby contributing to the restoration of the
rule of law throughout those countries and the region.
“The Security Council commends the Special Court for the important
contribution made to international criminal justice concerning the crimes
within its jurisdiction, namely, crimes against humanity, serious violations of
Article 3 common to the Geneva Conventions and of Additional Protocol II,
and other serious violations of international humanitarian law, as well as
certain crimes under Sierra Leonean law, and recognizes its work in the areas
of women, peace and security, and the protection of children affected by armed
conflict, including through its outreach and witness support programs.
12-54010 (E) 091012

*1254010*

S/PRST/2012/21

“The Security Council recognizes the need to address residual matters
after the closure of the Court, including the supervision of the enforcement of
sentences for convicted persons, the protection of witnesses, and the
preservation of the archives of the Special Court. In this regard, the Security
Council welcomes the Agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Sierra Leone on the Establishment of a Residual Special Court
for Sierra Leone.
“The Security Council urges the international community to continue to
support the Special Court as it moves into its final stage of work.
“The Security Council in particular takes note of the Special Court’s
ongoing and urgent need for financial support. The Security Council
emphasizes the vital need for further pledges of voluntary contributions in
order to allow the Special Court to complete its mandate in a timely manner.
The Security Council calls upon Member States to contribute generously to the
Special Court and for the implementation of the Agreement establishing the
Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone, and encourages the Secretary-General
to cooperate with the Registrar of the Special Court in order to find practicable
solutions to address the needs of the Residual Special Court in the most
efficient and effective manner.
“The Security Council will continue to offer strong support to the Special
Court as it nears the completion of its mandate and to the Residual Special
Court as it commences its functioning.”

2

12-54010
