, .-

UNCIL

th

MEETING:

22 NOVEMBER

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l974)

.. ....,. .... .... ..... .., ...... ... .. ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning
the application of the People’s Republic of Angola for admission to
membership in the United Nations (S/12234) . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . , , , .

1

S/PV. 1974

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . ..) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJiciul Records of fhe Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
crnd
Decisions of the Security
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1974th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. Jorge Enrique ILLUECA

(Panama).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l974)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application of the
People’s Republic of Angola for admission to
membership in the United Nations (S/12234)
The meeting was called to order crt 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The ngendcr was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning
the Application
of the
People’s Republic of Angola for membership in
the United Nations (S/12234)

1. The PRESIDENT
(interprctcrtion from Spcrnish):
I wish to inform members of the Security Council
that I have received letters from the representatives
of Cuba, Egypt, India, Madagascar,
Mauritius,
Mozambique, Sri Lanka, Yugoslavia and Zambia in
which they ask to be invited to participate in the
deliberations of the Council on the application of the
People’s Republic of Angola for admission to membership in the United Nations. I therefore propose, if
there are no objections and with the consent of the
Council to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the Chartel
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
2. In accordance with the usual procedure, I invite
the aforementioned representatives to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the understanding that they will be invited to take
a place at the Council table when they wish to address
the Council.

22 November

1976, at 3 p.m.

At the invitntion of the President,
Mr. A/m&n
(Cuba),
Mr. Abdel Megrlid (Egypt),
Mr. Jnipnl
(India), Mr. Rabet&ikn
(Mnd~gnscar),
Ms. Romphrtt
(Mauritius),
Mr. Lobo (Mozcrmbique),
Mr. Kartaknrattle (Sri Lanka),
Mr. Petri6 (Yugoskwicr)
rind
Mr. Siyolwe (Znmbin) took the places resen*ed for
them nt the side of the Couwil chnmher.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion
from Spnnkh):
The first speaker is the representative of Mauritius,
who wishes to speak on behalf of the current Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). I accordingly invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
4. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius):
I have requested
permission to participate in this meeting of the Security
Council, both as the representative of Mauritius and
as the representative
of the current Chairman of
OAU, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, Prime Minister
of Mauritius.
5. My delegation considers it a privilege to appear
here today and to speak in support of the admission
to membership in the United Nations of the People’s
Republic of Angola. It is the most fervent desire
of the Prime Minister of my country that the torch
of independence
will continue to shine forth in
southern Africa and that the valiant people in Angola
will be able to crown their conquest of independence
by being admitted to the United Nations.
6. Our fraternal support for the struggle of the
People’s Republic of Angola is well known and the
position of OAU on the application of the People’s
Republic of Angola for membership in the United
Nations has been clearly endorsed by members of that
organization
in resolutions adopted by the Council
of Ministers and at the Thirteenth Assembly of Heads
of State and Government held at Port Louis, Mauritius,
in July 1976.
7. The OAU considers that it is the right of all peoples
to safeguard and consolidate their hard-won independence and sovereignty, as well as their territorial
integrity, and, in the case of the People’s Republic
of Angola, the OAU Assembly considered that the
veto cast by the United States against the admission
of Angola to the United Nations constitutes a violation
of the spirit of the Charter and a complete disregard
of the principle of universality.

.

_/’ ;,p,
2’
,,~’ I_ 1:

8. The long struggle of the Angolan people against
colonialism has now entered the annals of history,
and those galltint people has deservedly merited the
right to take its place in this important forum of the
international community. The United Nations has, in
resolutions adopted by its various bodies, always
supported the right of colonial countries and peoples
to accede to independence. Angola has fought a long
and bitter struggle to throw off the shackles of
colonialism, and the sacrifices made by the people of
Angola have finally resulted in freedom and independence after a long and agonizing period of time.
Finally, a responsible Government is devoting itself
to the healing of wounds brought about by that bitter
passage in the history of Angola and is devoting itself
to constructive tasks of building for the future and
taking its rightful place in the international community.
The People’s Republic of Angola has expressed its
fiim and total support for the Charter of the United
Nations whose obligations it has accepted. Article 4
of the United Nations Charter specifically states:
“Membership
in the United Nations is open to
all other peace-loving States which accept the
obligations contained in the present Charter and, in
the judgement of the Organization, are able and
willing to carry out these obligations.”
9. The People’s Republic of Angola has manifestly
demonstrated its ability and willingness to comply
with the provisions of Article 4. The recognition that
Angola has received, not only in Africa and the third
world but also in the socialist and Western countries,
overwhelmingly demonstrates that that country has
satisfied the conditions required by international law
and principles.
10. On 22 April, in its application for membership
in the United Nations, the President of the People’s
Republic of Angola officially stated that the People’s
Republic of Angola “accepts all the obligations contained in the Charter of the United Nations and
solemnly undertakes to fulfil them.” [S/12064, ~HVXJ.V].
11. The OAU is totally convinced that that country
has not only demonstrated its faithfulness to the lofty
principles contained in the Charter but has also
manifested a concerted desire to achieve their implementation in the face of any threat. The United
Nations would, with the admission of the People’s
Republic of Angola, acquire in its ranks a Member
State which is a firm supporter of the struggle for
peace, international security, mutual understanding
and friendship among peoples. I am sure that the
People’s Republic of Angola would, like all other
Member States, endeavour faithfully to carry out the
ideals embodied in the Charter.
12. Most of the countries represented here in this
chamber have fought long struggles to attain independence, whether in the recent past the wounds of
which are still being bound up or decades or centuries

ago. We should not lose sight of the fact that most of
our countries began their independent existence as
fragile and tenuous sovereign States and that, with
time, past wounds have been healed and many of us
are now in a position to make a positive contribution
to the well-being of the peoples of the world. We
should not lose sight of our collective heritage and, in
a spirit of co-operation and understanding, we should
extend all assistance and friendship to newly independent countries and admit them to our ranks in
order to assist them to bring about the reconstruction
which is so important to the well-being of the inhabitants of all countries of the world.
13. On behalf of my own country, Mauritius, and on
behalf of OAU, I call on the great country of the
United States of America, which was the first to wage
a struggle for independence from a colonial Power,
to extend a hand of friendship and co-operation to
the new country of the People’s Republic of Angola,
At a time in history 200 years ago, when the United
States had declared its independence, it found itself
alone and without allies at a most crucial period in its
history. It was an African country which first extended
a hand of friendship and recognition to that infant
Republic; that country was Morocco. Today, Africa
calls upon the United States, in a spirit of reciprocity,
to make the same gesture and to extend the same
goodwill to the People’s Republic of Angola, one of
the most recent countries in Africa to accede to independence today. We appeal to the United States to
manifest the same spirit of magnanimity and to assist
the admission of the People’s Republic of Angola to
the United Nations with the same kind of friendship
and understanding that Africa extended to it at the
time of its greatest need.
14. The independence to which Angola has acceded
signifies one of the most dramatic and decisive chapters in the history of the liberation of Africa from
foreign domination and, in recognition of that intense
struggle and human sacrifice, we strongly support the
admission of the People’s Republic of Angola to the
United Nations and are convinced that that admission
would help to build a better world for all mankind in
a spirit of mutual respect and co-operation.
15. I am now in possession of the report of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members, which
was distributed only a moment ago. I am happy to
note that the United States does not wish to stand in
the way of Angola’s admission to the United Nations,
although the United States delegation is not able to
support the draft resolution which has been circulated.
I shall await the United States explanation to decide
whether or not I need to make any further comments,
16. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (i/ltPlprercrfiolI~on?
F~P/KIIL’
The Security Council is again seized of the question
of the admission of the People’s Republic of Angola 10
membership in the United Nations. This application
for admission, which was formulated by President

Neto as.far back as 22 April 1976 [S/12064], has not so
far been favourably considered by the Council, which
has been seriously handicapped by the abusive and
incomprehensible exercise of the right of veto,
17. Since I I November
1975, when the Angola
people, urlited behind the Movimento
Popular de
Liberta@o de Angola (MPLA), proclaimed its independence, tht People’s Republic of Angola has
been faced with painful problems which have been
artificially
created by international
imperialism,
which has always been ready to pounce in order to
prevent the Angolan people from becoming a free and
independent State. The young Angolan State has had,
since its inception in 1975, to surmount a whole series
of crises which imperialism
and some mistaken
puppets have brought about to try to bring the Angolan
people down on their knees. Today, the Angolan
people-endowed
with great courage and a lofty sense
of sacrifice-is well able daily to deal effectively with
any manoeuvres and any plots ingeniously devised
against it.
18. Since its great victories of this year over international imperialism and its supporters, the racist and
backward forces in Pretoria in particular, the Angolan
people has remained vigilant in its struggle. The
efforts made to date to solve the main problems
inherited from colonialism
and the imperialist
war
imposed on that people are golden chapters in the
history of that heroic people.
19. Imperialist propaganda, very cleverly fabricated
and disseminated by the imperialist press, is designed
to deceive international public opinion concerning the
situation in the People’s Republic of Angola,

the true situation
live.

in which the valiant people of Angola

22. My delegation sincerely regrets also the position
adopted last June by the People’s Republic of China.
The Chinese people is a lucid and moderate people,
and we hope that a closer analysis of the situation
will make it possible for them better to analyse the
situation, in a way more in keeping with the aspirations of the Angolan people and of all the peoples
of the African continent.
23. The Angolan authorities have proved that they
are determined to build their country in total independence and within the framework of the policj,
of non-alignment.
24. The admission of Angola to the United Nations
would be more than giving justice to the Angolan
people in order to encourage it in its struggle to build
its own country in concord and union. My delegation
sincerely hopes that this time the Council will decide
unanimously to recommend the admission of Angola
to the Organization.
25. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): The
achievement
of independence by the fraternal
people of Angola on 11 November 1975, was a joyous
and long-awaited event for the Libyan Arab Republic
and for all peace-loving peoples and countries in the
world. Moreover, it is a matter of great satisfaction
for the United Natipns, since it represents a positive
step forward towards the attainment of one of the
basic foundations of its Charter, namely, “to develop
friendly relations among nations based on respect for
the principles of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples”.

20. It is clear today that the Angolan people is now
better organized within the framework of MPLA, has
been able to solve a number of important problems
and has the present situation well under control.
The Angolans have the future of their country in their
hands. The imperialist Powers and the reactionary,
obscurantist and anti-nationalist
forces, which have
tried everything possible, now know that the Angolan
people is ready to make every sacrifice to keep the
People’s Republic of Angola independent, non-aligned
and free.

26. The people of Angola bravely and victoriously
waged a long and valiant struggle against the
colonialist and racist Powers. They sacrificed incalculable numbers of lives and resources in the pursuit
and achievement of independence and freedom. The
brotherly African country, Angola, has given a new
strength and revitalized hope to all peoples still
honourably
and gloriously struggling against the
pernicious forces of colonialism,
imperialism and
occupation.

21. Bearing in mind all of the foregoing, it is obvious
that all peoples who love justice and peace must
irrevocably condemn any delaying tactics and dishonest manoeuvres designed to tarnish the reputation
of the Angolan people, which has freed itself thanks
to international solidarity, which has withstood the
test of time. These delaying tactics and dishonest
manoeuvres have thus far prevented, directly or
indirectly, the admission of the People’s RepubIic of
Angola to the United Nations as a full Member. My
delegation condemns the unjustified, abusive use of the
veto by the United States, the reasons advanced for
which can in no way withstand a serious analysis of

27. We are still witnessing numerous obstructions
and mancuvres plotted and carried out by abstruse
forces, to impede this young sovereign State from
rebuilding its social and economic sectors-exploited
and abused by the long period of colonialism-and
from reconciling and uniting its people, despite the
many sacrifices and lengthy struggle of the people of
Angola to achieve their independence and freedom,
and despite the faithful commitment of the Angolan
State to the lofty and noble principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, and from establishing friendly
relations and co-operation with most of the nations
of the word.

28. Moreover, these pernicious imperialist, and racist
forces persist in threatening and waging open war
against the Angolan people to the extent that they
bought mercenaries to carry out their illegal and
bloody acts of aggression. These mercenaries
unleashed a wave of terrorism where men, women and
children were targets for their evil intentions. This socahed initiative of buying what can only be described
as one of the lowest forms of life-mercenariesconstitutes an inhuman offence against social morality
and a violation of the dignity of the human person.

as the sole legitimate authority representing the people
of Angola and its aspirations for complete emancipation and unity. We have extended our unlimited
and unconditional political and material support to
the Government, and the people of Angola in their
noble struggle against all forces of imperialism
and
racism and in their immense efforts to rebuild and
develop their country.
34. In our opinion, it is high time that, taking into
consideration the heroic background of the struggle of
the fraternal people of Angola, the international
community seriously considered the’admission of the
People’s Republic of Angola to the United Nations,
thereby enabling that country to play its rightful role
in the activities of the Organization.

29. We were spectators to the active connivance on
the part of the racist regime in South Africa, which
committed acts constituting piracy and hooliganism,
by attacking the sovereignty of Angola and its people,
via Namibia, in the name of an already tainted and
outdated ideal-colonialism.
In its inherent arrogance
and hatred for the people of Africa, the racist regime
in South Africa has made every effort and taken every
opportunity to carry out its plans for the “final solution” for the African people, whether they be in South
Africa, Namibia or Angola. The success of the racist
rkgime in South Africa, like the racist Zionist entity
in occupied Palestine, says a great deal about the
moral and spiritual vacuum of our age; internationally,
they are both playing cards steeped in fresh blood.

35. The Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of the Non-Aligned
Countries, in its
resolution NAC/CONF.S/S/Res.lS,
appealed “to all
States Members of the United Nations to support the
application for membership., , by the People’s Republic of Angola to the United Nations”.’
36. The admission of Angola not only would be a
gesture of admiration on the part of the international
community for the courageous and fearless struggle of
the Angolan people and its effort to stabilize and
develop its country but also would contribute to the
achievement of the principle of universality, which is
so precious to the United Nations.

30. The colonialist and imperialist Powers persist in
the creation of new obstacles in order to prevent the
Angolan people from taking part in and playing its
natural role within the international community.

37. Article 4 of the Charter states that

3 I. The people of Angola, through their indomitable
courage and unyielding determination, and with the
solidarity of African and peace-loving countries, was
able to overcome all forms of aggression and harmful
manceuvres aimed at keeping the peoples of Africa
under eternal subjugation in a desperate .attempt to
contain and stop the rising tide of national liberation
and social revolution,

“Membership
in the United Nations is open to
all other peace-loving States which accept the obligations contained in the present Charter and, in the
judgement of the Organization, are able and willing
to carry out these obligations.”
Angola has accepted and is willing to carry out and
uphold the five conditions stipulated in the aforementioned Article of the Charter as being necessary
for admission to the United Nations: first, the applicant
must be a State; secondly, it must be a peace-loving
State, thirdly, it must accept the obligations of the
Charter; fourthly, it must be able to carry out those
obligations; and, fifthly, it must be willing to do so.
The peace-loving State of the People’s Republic of
Angola has demonstrated faithfully in words and by
deeds its desire to join the international
Organization and has pledged to accept and carry out the
obligations of the Charter. Any attempt to forge other
conditions necessary for admission to the United
Nations other than those stipulated in the Charter
is an unforgivable transgression and a’flagrant violation of the spirit and the letter of the Charter, It
is undoubtedly also a self-defeating maneuvre.

32. Since its independence in 1975 the young
African State of Angola has demonstrated its faithful
adherence to the basic principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and accomplished outstanding
achievements in the furtherance of its economic and
social development and in eliminating the heavy burden
of the prolonged period of colonial exploitation; it has
also made tangible contributions to the cause of world
peace and security and to co-operation with all peaceloving countries throughout the world.
33. Angola is a fully fledged member of OAU and
has participated in numerous international forums,
conferences and meetings, such as the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries held at Colombo last August. Angola
has been accorded de jh/re recognition by more than
two thirds of the States Members of the United
Nations. The Libyan Arab Republic was one of the
first countries to recognize the Government of MPLA

38. The contention that Angola does not meet the
requirements for membership as set forth in Article 4
of the Charter owing to the presence of foreign troops
4

is both irrelevant and unjustifiable and not worthy of
serious consideration
by the Council. Moreover, it
Presents a distortion of the conditions set forth in
Article 4 of the Charter.

recognition of their awesome and,courageous struggle
to rebuild, develop and unite their country and would
contribute to the achievement of peace and stability
in the African continent.

39. A few months ago a permanent member of the
Security Council flaunted this irrelevant and unjustifiable argument, thereby abusing its veto privilege
and preventing the admission of Angola to the United
Nations. A .few days ago another great country, the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, was prevented from
being admitted to membership in the Organization as
a result of the negative vote of a permanent member
of the Council. This trend of dictatorship by a
privileged,
individual
State Member of the United
Nations has on countless occasions over a period of
many years obstructed the efforts of the Council to
remedy the unjust and harsh conditions of the
struggling peoples of Africa and Palestine.

44. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Five months ago the
Council considered the application of the People’s
Republic of Angola for membership in the Unit&d
Nations [1931st or?d 1932nd meethgs]. At that time
the Council was unfortunately unable to make a
positive recommendati,on on the application because
of the negative vote cast by a permanent member.
45. Today the Council has before it again. a report
of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the application of the .People’s
Republic of Angola for membership in the United
Nations. My delegation is pleased to observe that on
this occasion the Committee recommends to the
Council that it adopt ,a draft resolution recommending
to the General Assembly the admission of the
People’s Republic of Angola to membership in the
United Nations.

40. It is the appropriate time for the Organization
seriously to review this policy of obstructionism and
abuse of the veto privilege, which only results in
frustrating
the achievement
of the principle
of
universality, is against the spirit and the letter of the
Charter and has indisputably diminished the credibility
and effectiveness of the Organization.

46. We are heartened by that recommendation
since it represents a fitting tribute to the valiant people
of Angola, who, .after a long and arduous struggle,
vanquished the Portuguese colonialists and the South
African racists, who had vainly sought to frustrate the
desire of the Angolan people to choose for themselves
the course of their own future. The victory of Angola
has written finis to the long chapter of Portuguese
colonialism in Africa.

41. My delegation respectfully urges all members of
the Council to keep those factors in mind when
exercising their right to vote on the draft resolution
contained in document S/12234. This draft resolution
was introduced by my delegation during the deliberations of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members at its 57th meeting; it was sponsored by
Benin, Guyana, Italy, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United
Republic of Tanzania and my own delegation-that
of the Libyan Arab, Republic. It reads as follows:

“Ntr\li/rg extrmined the application
Republic of Angola for admission
Nations [S//2064],

47. Angola today is a member of OAU, an organization which resolutely champions freedom in Africa
and elsewhere. Angola actively participates also in the
work of the non-aligned movement, of which it became
a full member earlier this year, and serves as a member
of the Co-ordinating Bureau of that movement. Angola
is recognized by many States Members of the United
Nations.

of the People’s
to the United

48. My delegation is fully satisfied that the application of the People’s Republic of Angola for membership in the United Natians conforms with the
requirements of Article 4 of the Charter. Guyana is
as convinced now as it was in June that the People’s
Republic of Angola is fully qualified for membership
in the United Nations. We believe that, as a Member
of the United Nations, the People’s Republic of
Angola will make a valuable contribution to the fundamental goals and objectives of the Organization. It
will particularly
enrich our deliberations and our
decisions regarding the final liquidation of colonialism,
and thus make a significant contribution to strengthening international peace and security.

“Reco/l?/l~entl.s to the General Assembly that the
People’s
Republic
of Angola be admitted
to
membership in the United Nations.”

The draft resolution is very simple; it contains one
operative paragraph; and we hope that the members
of the Council will vote for it unanimously.
In conclusion, we earnestly believe that the
admission of Angola to the United Nations would
constitute a positive step forward for both the great
people of Angola and the United Nations and for
international peace and security as a whole.

42.

49. Guyana, which has ties with Angola that antedate the recovery by Angola of its independence last
November, eagerly looks forward to welcoming the
People’s Republic of Angola as a full and active

43. The admission would be an honest gesture
towards the brotherly people of Angola, a gesture of
5

55. I invite the representative of Mali to take the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be
invited to take a place at the Council table when he
wishes to address the Council.

member of the international community. We pledge
our fullest co-operation with Angola when it takes its
rightful place in the United Nations. We are therefore
extremely honoured to be among the sponsors. of
draft resolution S/12234 recommending the admission
of the People’s Republic of Angola to membership
in the United Nations.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Kante,
representative
of Mali, took the place resewed j31
him at the side of the Comcil chauzbes.

50. When the Council considered Angola’s application for admission in June of this year, the representative of Benin made a most mature and prophetic
statement. With the kind permission of my brother
from that country, I should like to recall the
observation he made at that time. Speaking on 23 June
in explanation of his vote, the representative of Benin
said:

56. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (itlterpretationfr’orn
Xussiatz): The position
of the Soviet Union on the question of the admission
of the People’s Republic of Angola to the United
Nations is very well known. It was stated in detail
during the general debate at the thirty-first session
of the General Assembly by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Soviet Union, Mr. Gromyko. He said:

“At least, let us hope that [Angola’s] admission
is simply postponed to a later date.” [1932nd
/netting,

‘&We have all witnessed the failure of the attempt
to stifle with the help of arms the young independent
State of the People’s Republic of Angola. If there
are still Governments which would impede the
exercise of its legitimate right to participate in the
work of the United Nations, they stand to gain
nothing by that action; they stand only to lose.
Angola will without any doubt take its lawful and
proper place in this hall.“*

posrr. 210.1

51. My delegation, which will clearly vote in favour
of the draft resolution, is confident that the decision
we take today will confirm that prophecy.
52. The PRESIDENT (itltPl’pl.L’fNti(~I1~ot)l Spnnish):
I wish to inform the members of the Council that this
afternoon I have received a letter from the representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic and the
United Republic of Tanzania which reads as follows:

57. In the Soviet-Angolan joint statement of 14 October 1976, it is stated that the Soviet Union condemns
the efforts to impede the admission of the People’s
Republic of Angola to membership of the United
Nations and resolutely supports Angola’s application
for admission to the United Nations, which has
already received the support of two thirds of the countries of the world, in particular at the thirteenlh
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity and the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries at Colombo.

“We have the honour to request that, in the
course current consideration by the Council of the
application of the People’s Republic of Angola for
admission to membership of the United Nations an
opportunity be given to the representative of the
People’s Republic of Angola, Mr. Elisio de Figueiredo, to present his Government’s views on the
matter” [S//2236].
53. In view of the request by those three members
of the Council that the representative of the People’s
Republic of Angola be given an opportunity to present
his Government’s views on the item on the Security
Council’s agenda, I propose, with the consent of the
members of the Council, to invite the representative
of the People’s Republic of Angola to make his
statement at the appropriate time.

58. As has already been indicated by other members
of the Council, this is not the first time that the Council has considered the question of Angola’s admission
to membership in the United Nations.
59. The People’s Republic of Angola is a young
independent State of Africa. Only a year ago it
liberated itself from colonial domination. It has already
made known its wish to become a Member of the
United Nations. That is a very natural and legitimate
aspiration on the part of a young independent and
peace-loving State whose just cause has received the
support of all the progressive peoples in the world.
Angola has a very legitimate desire to exercise all
the rights of membership in the United Nations and,
together with other Members of the Organization,
to struggle for the achievement of the lofty principles
and purposes of the United ‘Nations,

54. The PRESIDENT
(intc,rp~erntio,l.f,‘o,l? Sprrnisl7):
I should like also to inform the members of the
Council that I have received a letter from the Permanent Representative of Mali in which he asks to
be allowed to participate in the discussion, in conformity with the relevant Article of the Charter.
Accordingly,
if there are no objections, I propose
to invite that representative to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with
Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

60. Unfortunately, some obstacles having nothing to
do with the requirements laid down by the Charter for
6

membership of the Organization have been placed on
the path of the admission of large independent States
of Africa and Asia, such as the People’s Republic of
Angola and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The
negative position of a permanent member of the
Council has, as in the past, closed the doors of the
United Nations to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

when independent Angola is building a peaceful life,
when it is restoring what was destroyed during the war
of liberation by the foes of the Angolan people, the
people of Angola, as before, feels the fraternal
solidarity of the socialist States. It enjoys the friendly
support of all the progressive forces of our planet.
64. As was indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, Comrade Brezhnev, to the
twenty-fifth Congress ofthe Party, speaking of Angola:

61. The successful liberation struggle of the people
of Angola against the aggression of South Africa and
the victory achieved in that struggle by the People’s
Republic of Angola were welcomed with rejoicing by
the peoples of Africa and the peoples of the world.
The Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries which took place at
Colombo in August 1976 in its Political Declaration”
congratulated the Government and people of Angola
for their heroic and victorious struggle against the
South African racist invaders and their allies. It also
commended the Republic of Cuba and other States
which had assisted the people of Angola in frustrating
the expansionist and colonialist strategy of the South
African racist regime and its allies. The Colombo
Conference condemned the actions of those who
blocked the admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola to membership in the United Nations, considering that an inadmissible
interference ‘in the
domestic affairs of Angola. It called upon all the nonaligned States and States Members of the United
Nations to give their support to the application
of
the People’s Republic for membership in the United
Nations.

“As soon as it was born, that progressive State
became the object of foreign intervention. This was
the work of imperialism
and of South African
racists, sworn enemies of independent Africa, and of
those who took upon themselves the unseemly role
of their helpers. That is why the struggle of Angola
in defence of its independence met with the support
of progressive forces throughout the world, and the’
success of that struggle became yet another
indication that the aspirations of peoples to freedom
cannot be broken by anyone.”
65. Having victoriously completed its war of liberation, the Angofan people, under the leadership of
MPLA, has begun the building of a new life. The
success of the Angolan people is linked to the support
and help the young Republic is receiving from the
progressive independent States of Africa and from the
countries of the socialist community.
66. In speaking at a meeting of Soviet-Angolan
solidarity in Moscow on 8 October, the President of
the People’s Republic of Angola, Comrade Agostinho
Neto, said:

62. That appeal was heard in the general debate of
the thirty-first session of the General Assembly, when
almost 80 Member States unconditionally
supported
the speedy admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola to its rightful place in the world Organization.
The participants in the general debate stressed that
the immediate admission of Angola would to be a
considerable extent contribute to the implementation
of the principle of universality; it would enhance the
prestige and strengthen the authority of the United
Nations. In consonance with reality, they indicated that
the People’s Republic of AngoIa meets all the
requirements for membership in the United Nations.
It is a peace-loving and independent State recognized
by more than 100 States of the world. It can carry
out and wishes to carry out the Charter obligations
related to membership in the Organization,
which
is clearly shown by the application of the President
of that country to the United Nations [S/12064,
Cl MCX]

“The victory of the Angolan people is the victory
of all the progressive forces in the world. We are
well aware that without the help of the Soviet
Union, of Cuba and of other socialist countries,
our victory over the forces of imperialism would
have been considerably complicated.”
67. A year has elapsed since the day when the flag
of independence was hoisted over Luanda. Almost
one half of that year was used to repel the armed
intervention
of the united forces of colonialism,
racism, international
imperialism and local reaction.
The People’s Republic of Angola is taking a very
special place among the independent States of the
African continent. It is in the immediate proximity
of racist Rhodesia and racist South Africa. It is in
precisely that region that the colonialists, the racists
and their protectors are trying to block the African
peoples’ efforts to institute equitable social systems
and to liberate countries still under colonial domination. But the peoples of the African continent have
shown that they are capable of taking care of the
remnants of colonialism and racism.

*

63. The firm and clear position of the Soviet Union
on the question before the Council is a practical
expression of the determination
of our country to
support the national liberation movement, the antiimperialist struggle of the people to strive consistently
to eradicate the hotbeds of colonialism which impede
the normal development of international relations and
the further strengthening of world peace. Today,

68. The aggressive intents against Angola have not
yet become part of the archives, but we are convinced
7

!
/

that the’valiant people of Angola will inflict a crushing
defeat upon them.

security, mutual
among peoples.

69. At the reception in honour of Comrade Neto ‘in
Moscow, Comrade Brezhnev said:

73. The delegation of the USSR welcomes
and
congratulates the representatives of the People’s
Republic of Angola who are in this Council chamber.
We cannot doubt that between our delegations to the
United Nations relations of fruitful co-operation will
exist which will serve to implement the lofty purposes
of the Organization.

“The events in Angola have again confirmed the
great truth of our times that the determination of a
people to defend its freedom multiplied by international solidarity is an invincible force.”

understanding

and co-operation

74. On behalf of my delegation, I call upon the
members of the Security Council to give unanimous
support to the application of the People’s Republic
of Angola fdr admission to membership in the United
Nations.

70. A sovereign country, the People’s Republic of
Angola has already been admitted as a full member
of OAU. It is also an active participant in the nonaligned movement and an active participant in various
international
organizations. The first steps of the
People’s Republic of Angola in the international arena
convincingly show it is following a policy based on the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
People’s Republic of Angola is guided by the aims and
principles of the Charter. It pledges to co-operate
closely with other peace-loving States in efforts aimed
at strengthening international peace and security. It
pledges to give full support to the United Nations and
to contribute to its increased efficiency and to the
strengthening of international peace and security.

75. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): On this occasion my
delegation will not dwell on the past history of the
application of the People’s Republic of Angola for
membership in the United Nations. However, I want
to make it quite clear that, in the opinion of my
Government, the positive decision which I am confident the Security Council will be able to take today
is long overdue.
76, Since the very first days of the independence
of Angola, Sweden has enjoyed excellent relations
with that country, as indeed have many other States
Members of the United Nations, We are convinced
that the People’s Republic of Angola will play an
important and constructive role in the United Nations,
The delegation of Sweden is looking forward with
great expectations to our co-operation
with the
Angolan delegation in the various organs of the
United Nations.

71, The Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of
Angola are linked by strong ties of friendship and
mutual understanding. The recent visit to the Soviet
Union of the President of the People’s Republic of
Angola, Comrade Neto, formed a very solid foundation for the further strengthening of the process. The
discussions in Moscow and the meetings and talks of
the Soviet and Angolan leaders at the highest level
have formed a new strong impulse which makes it
possible to strengthen and to develop the manysided relations between our States and peoples. The
friendly meeting of Comrades Brezhnev and Neto,
the signing of an agreement on friendship and cooperation between the USSR and the People’s Republic
of Angola, the agreement on co-operation among the
parties .of our countries, and the Soviet-Angolan
Declaration-all
have demonstrated the historic
significance of the many-sided relations between the
first country of socialism and the forces of national
liberation in the cause of strengthening the peace and
security of peoples and the liquidation of colonialism
and national domination.

77. The admission to the Uni hed Nations of the
People’s Republic of Angola would mean that one of
the most dramatic and decisive chapters in the history
of the liberation of Africa from foreign domination
had been closed. The dismantling and the elimination
of Portugal’s colonial empire was achieved after
many years of intensive struggle and human sacrifice.
There were those who for a long time believed that
the colonial system could be perpetuated against the
will of the people. They have been proved wrong.
The victory of the independence struggle in GuineaBissau, Mozambique
and Angola has become a
source of inspiration and hope for those peoples in
southern Africa that still suffer under political oppression. That development has also meant a serious
setback for the minority r5gime in South Africa, whose
attempts to prop up the Portuguese colonialists failed
completely. The position of the remaining minority
regimes in southern Africa has been severely shaken.

72. The delegation of the Soviet Union expresses
its cqnviction that, in admitting to the Organization
the People’s Republic of Angola, we shall be taking
an important step towards the completion of the
revolutionary process of the liberation of peoples from
the colonial domination and colonial subjugation which
have lasted for so many centuries. The admission of
that country will also contribute to the implementation of the principle of the universality of the Organization. We are firmly convinced that the Organization will gain in the People’s Republic of Angola a
strong advocate of the struggle for peace, international

78. The armed intervention
of South Africa in
Angola demonstrated how desperate the minority
rBgime has become. It also showed that it realizes
how vulnerable it has become. Time is now running
out for white minority rule in Rhodesia and in Namibia,
8

and South Africa itself is hard pressed from within.
Oppressed men and women in South Africa are
intensifying their resistance to the system of racial
discrimination and oppression, a system which cannot
survive for long.

incumbent on the Members of the Organization:
the
duty to give support to the struggle .of peoPlesy
including those of southern Africa, against domination
and foreign oppression, so as to achieve and consgiidate theirfreedom and their national independence’

79. The admission into the United Nations of the
People’s Republic of Angola will serve as an inspiration
to those in southern Africa who still have to achieve
their freedom from oppression and will strengthen
the forces within the Organization that work for
freedom, justice and equality in southern Africa.

86. We are convinced that the admission of Angola
to the United Nations and its participation
in the
activities of the Organization will have a positive
impact on the evolution of the situation in’ southern
Africa and on the just solution of problems in that
region, in conformity with the rights and the legitimate
aspirations of ail the peoples in that part of the world.

80. The Swedish delegation urges members of the
Council to support the draft resolution contained in
document S/12234. Sweden will warmly welcome the
People’s Republic of Angola to membership in the
United Nations.

87. The decision to recommend the admission
Of
Angola to the United Nations would be an act
consonant with the rights of ail the peoples which
love peace and which wish to be represented in this
international forum. A new step would thus be taken
today towards the complete universality
of the
Organization,
which obviously is one of the most
important conditions for its effective functioning.

81. Mr.

DATCU (Romania) (interpretntion
~?um
I should like to express the hope and the conviction of my delegation that the Security Council
will today adopt the draft resolution presented by nine
States, including Romania, in accordance with which
the Council would recommend
to the General
Assembly the admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola to membership iti the United Nations.

French):

88. In this connexion, we hope that reason and
justice will in the near future prevail equally with
regard to the admission to the United Nations of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

82. A positive decision would repair a grave injustice
committed against the Angoian people, which wants
with ail its heart to be a Member of the Organization
and to work here with other nations for the good of
mankind as a whole. Such a decision would redound
to the credit of the Security Council and of the Organization as a whole.

89. In conclusion,
I want to welcome here the
presence in this chamber of the delegation of the
People’s Republic of Angola, and the Romanian
delegation on behalf of the Romanian Government
and people, expresses most cordial wishes’ for theit
success. We are happy to think that in the very near
future we may have a chance to co-operate closely
here in the United Nations with the representatives
of a new State Member of the United Nations, the
People’s Republic of Angola.

83. We want to stress once again what Romania and
other members of the Council affirmed during the
debate in June, when we said that Angola definitely
met ail the conditions laid down in the Charter for the
admission of new, Members to the Orga,nization.

90. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation is very pleased to give its full support to
the application of the People’s Republic of Angola fat
admission to membership in the United Nations.
1 wish to reiteEate what we said last June when the
Council was seized of the same matter: that the
People’s Republic of Angola fully meets the requirements fdr admission as provided in Article 4 of the
Charter.

84. The Romanian people has followed with feelings
of friendship, sympathy and goodwill the struggle that
the Angolan people so valiantly waged for more than
a decade against the policy of domination and colonial
oppression, in an effort to achieve its liberty and its
national ‘independence.
During that struggle, in a
spirit of militant solidarity, Romani;! gave that people
its matCrial, political and diplomatic
support. My
country has welcomed with deep satisfaction Angola’s
accession to independence and has established close
and friendly relations of co-operation with that young
African State. Romania took a firm stand in favour of
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of that country and called for the withdrawal of the
forces of South Africa which had committed acts of
aggression against the Angolan territory.

91. The United Republic of Tanzania has always
supported the just struggle of the Angolan people
against colonialism and imperialism to achieve seifdetermination
and independence. Tanzania has been
part of that liberation struggle in the former Portuguese
colonies in southern Africa and, indeed, in the rest of
Africa, for we believe that our own independence
is
in jeopardy so long as some parts of Africa are not
free. For us, the liberation war in Angola was crucial,
for Angola constituted the last and largest Portuguese
colony in Africa, and not only that: freedom fat
Angola brought free Africa face to face with the
Fascist, racist rkgimes of southern Africa, the greatest

85. By recommending the admission of Angola to
membership in the United Nations, the Security
Council would fulfil one of the fundamental duties
9

obstacle to human justice and dignity on the continent
of Africa.

draft resolution will be adopted by the Council and
that subsequenlly the General Assembly will decide
to admit Angola to membership in the Organization
at its present session. Angola’s admission to membership will mean an even closer approach to universality of the Organization-one
of its fundamental
principles-and
will, indeed, be a most welcome
development.

92. Imperialist manceuvres to create a client buffer
State between free Africa and the racist upartlzeid
regime have failed, and that failure was not achieved
without great sacrifices and sufferings on the part
of the Angolan people. When it seemed that covert
imperialist actions would not succeed, it became
necessary for the racist trpalth~ili rtgime to employ
its machinations in acts of naked aggression against
the Angolan people. Thanks to the co-operation of
friendly States, the racist aggression was repulsed by
the greater vigour and determination of a freedomloving people.

98. The Government
of Japan recognized the
People’s Republic of Angola on 20 February 1976,
In his congratulatory message to Mr. Agostinho Neto,
President of the People’s Republic of Angola, the
Prime Minister of Japan stated: “The Government
and people of Japan sincerely hope for the nation’s
reconstruction and development and ardently wish to
promote friendship and co-operation betweeli the two
countries.” I should like to take this opportunity to
reaffirm that the Government
and people of Japan
will continue to develop and strengthen their friendly
relations with the Government and people of Angola in
every possible field, both within the United Nations
and outside it.

93. The Angolan people had to fight not only against
Portuguese colonialism but also world imperialism.
When Angola was about to become independent and
escape from the clutches of Fascist Portuguese colonialism, the interests of world imperialism were at
work. The seeds of confusion and chaos planted among
the Angolan people did not germinate to become
mature plants; instead, they withered. Now the
Government of MPLA is in full control in spite of
repeated acts of aggression by the racist trpartheid
rkgime of South Africa against the Angolan people
and neighbouring independent States. The People’s
Republic of Angola now needs our support and
assistance in the reconstruction of that country and in
nation-building prqjects.

99. Mr. VINCI (Italy): The position of my country
on the item under consideration is well known: Italy
had advocated and worked in favour of the earlier
application of Angola for admission to membership
in the Organization.
100. When the Security Council, in June this year,
considered the application of the People’s Republic
of Angola for membership in the United Nations,
my delegation lent its full support to the Angolan
request. We welcome now the step undertaken by
three African Member States in order to have the
application reconsidered by the Council, since it
comes at a time when the prospect of a positive
conclusion has much improved.

94. Having said this, my delegation is left with no
doubt that the draft resolution in document S/12234
on the application of the People’s Republic of Angola
for membership in the United Nations will be voted
for by all members of the Council, in view of the fact
that the People’s Republic of Angola is fully qualified
and fully meets the requirements provided in Article 4
of the Charter.

101. I hardly have to specify that we have always
believed that the People’s Republic of Angola has all
the prerequisites of a Member State pursuant to the
Charter. Its admission, in our view, will prove an
asset to the United Nations, as it will enhance that
universal representation
which embraces all the
different political and economic systems existing in
the world. Moreover, I think we should always bear in
mind that the more frequent and variegated are the
contacts taking place within the framework of the
United Nations and its associated bodies, the better
it is for the affirmation of the main principles and
purposes contained in the Charter.

95. Mr. ABE (Japan): My delegation has consistently
advocated the admission of the People’s Republic
of Angola to membership in the United Nations. We
already pronounced our whole-hearted support in the
Counc’il when Angola’s application was debated last
June. Regrettably, however, the application was not
approved by the Council at that time. Now the Council is again seized of the application of that country
for renewed consideration.
96. My delegation, in examining Angola’s application, is glad to reaffirm that it has,full confidence in
Angola’s willingness and ability to carry out the
obligations incumbent on Member States under the
Charter. In the view of my delegation, the People’s
Republic of Angola is qualified for membership in the
Organization under Article 4 of the Charter.

102. We very well know, on the basis of our own
experience, that the involvement
of an increased
number of countries in the work of the United Nations
system has helped, and helps, to a great extent, to
overcome misunderstandings
and difficulties, and to
promote better understanding and co-operation among
countries. I would also like to add that, at a moment
when the problems of the African continent are at

97. My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution contained in document S/12234 when it is put
to the vote. We very much hope that this time the
10

I
I

the centre Of WOldd attention and at the centre of the
attention of the Organization, the admission of Angola
is most timely. 11 will indicate in a tangible way the
permanent place which these problems occupy in the
mind of the Council, and how close we around this
table feel lo the countries which belong to OAIJ.

President of the People’s Republic of Angola has
declared that the Government of,Angola has declared
that the Government of Angola accepts all the obligations contained in the Charter and solemnly undertakes to fulfil them.

103. Speaking again for my country, I need only
recall once more that Italy was among the first to
recognize the People’s Republic of Angola and to
establish with it diplomatic
relations, as well as
mutually fruitful co-operation based on the strictest
respect for the principle of non-interference in each
other’s internal affairs. Rome was the first Western
capital to which the Prime Minister of Angola,
Mr. Lop0 do Nascimento, has paid a most gratifying
official visit, thus providing us with an opportunity
for a highly useful and interesting exchange OFviews
at the highest level, laying the ground for further
initiatives in our bilateral co-operation.

108. AS has already been pointed out, the people of
Angola waged a bitter, difficult and protracted struggle
against Portuguese colonialism with determination,
courage and unity, and they strove with valour for
the common goal of freedom and accession to independence under circumstances of great difficulty,
internal discord and external intervention: My country
believes that the people of Angola have a great role
to play, both materially and morally, in the final
triumph of the struggle for independence and human
dignity which is gathering strength in southern Africa.
We are also certain that, with admission to the United
Nations, the People’s Republic of Angola will be
fortified in its efforts aimed at achieving rapid economic
development and political progress for the country,

104. We are therefore looking forward to adding to
the friendly relations already established on a bilateral
basis the possibility of working together with Angola’s
representatives in this world forum. I hardly need to
draw attention, in this regard, to the important role
the People’s Republic of Angola has to play along with
the other front-line countries, in the process aimed at
bringing about a peaceful transition towards majority
rule in the area of southern Africa.

109. The People’s Republic of Angola is a country
of the third world, and we are confident that, as a
Member of the United Nations, it will uphold and
support the just causes of the third world and promote
unity and solidarity among peoples and Governments
of the third world.
110. Bearing in mind these considerations, my
delegation has supported the application of Angola in
the Committee on the Admission of New Members.
and will vote in favour of the draft resolution which
is now before us recommending admission of the
People’s Republic of Angola to the United Nations.

10.5. For all these reasons, my delegation has decided
to become a sponsor of the draft resolution contained
in document S/12234, and commends it to the unanimous approval of the Council. We are looking forward,
at the same time, to welcoming the People’s Republic
of Angola as a new Member of the Organization.

111. The PRESIDENT
li/zte,p~~ttrtion jj.0117 Spu,cr,zi,rh]: The next speaker is the representative of India,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

106. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): Speaking at the 1932nd
meeting of the Security Council on 23 June this year,
which unfortunately did not resl.llt in positive’action by
the Council on the application of the People’s Republic of Angola for admission to the United Nations, the
representative of Pakistan, Mr. Iqbal Akhund, had
expressed the hope that circumstances would enable
the Council to reconsider thk application in time to
permit the People’s Republic of Angola to take its
due and rightful place as a full Member of the United
Nations by the time the thirty-first session of the
General Assembly convened. We, therefore, welcome
the initiative taken by the three African members of
the Council, the representatives of Benin, the Libyan
Arab Republic and the United Republic of Tanzania,
in requesting the Council to give renewed consideration to the application of the People’s Republic of
Angola for admission to the United Nations.

112. Mr. JAIPAL (India): The Charter of the United
Nations regards the process of decolonization and the
attainment of independence by Non-Self-Governing
Territories as one of the principal objectives of the
Organization. It is, in fact, much more than an
objective: it is an obligation placed upon all Member
States, some of which have a greater degree of
responsibility than others. The concept inherent in
the Charter is that peoples under colonial rule should
be prepared for independence under United Nations
supervision, and that, on attaining independence,
they should have their own representation in the
United Nations. This has been realized in the cases
of most peoples under colonial domination, but there
are some striking exceptions, and Angola is one of
them.

107. It is the view of the Government of Pakistan
that the ‘People’s Republic of Angola, as an independent and sovereign country, fulfils all the qoalifications and conditions laid down in the Charter for
Further, the
membership
in the Organization.

113. While Angola was administered as a part of
Portugal, its people were indirectly represented in the
United Nations, howsoever inadequately, by the
representation of Portugal. That was the legal situa11

for the admission of an applicant State and that the
Security Council in taking decisions is governed by
Article 27 of the Charter. At the same time, the
Security Council, under Article 24, acts on behalf of
all the Members of’the United Nations in discharging
its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of
international
peace and security, a responsibility
which was conferred on the Security Council by the
Members of the United Nations. We suggest therefore that the Security Council would best fulfil its
primary responsibility by making it possible for the
United Nations actually to represent the world as it
is and not as some would like it to be.

tion, in terms of the Charter and the old Constitution
of Portugal. But when Angola regained its independence, its people became entitled to have their own
representation in the United Nations. That has not
yet come about, however. It is strange indeed that
the people of Angola should have had indirect representation in the United Nations through Portugal but,
on attaining independence, should find that they are
denied their own representation in the United
Nations,
114. Such a situation does violence to the principles
and purposes of decolonization, because independence
and membership in the United Nations are objectives
of the Charter. There is surely something odd about a
procedure for the admission of new Members which
results in the denial of membership to some decolonized Territories. This could not have been foreseen
by the founding fathers. It follows, therefore, that in
such cases there ought to be a voluntary suspension
of the use of the veto by the permanent members of
the Security Council. Quite apart from those considerations,
Angola fulfils the requirements for
membership prescribed in Article 4 of the Charter.

119. In the context of the foregoing arguments, both
general and specific, my delegation considers that
Angola is entitled to be admitted to the United
Nations and is also entitled to receive the favourable
recommendation of the Council.
120. The PRESIDENT
(interprefrrtioo
front Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Egypt,
I invite him to take a place at the Council
and to make his statement.

table

121. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): May I be
allowed at the outset to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council
for having made it possible for us to participate in this
debate today.

115. A number of States which have not yet established diplomatic relations with Angola would not allow
that fact to come in the way of admitting Angola to
United Nations membership. Neither that fact nor the
fact that bilateral relations between Angola and some
States are not yet normal is truly relevant to the
question of the admission of Angola to the United
Nations.

122. We have asked to be allowed to take part in
the discussion of this important question which is
before the Council so as to reaffirm our unreserved
support for the application for membership in the’
United Nations of the People’s Republic of Angola,
Egypt, as well as other African countries and members of the non-aligned movement, firmly believes
that the sister African State,of Angola should immediately assume its rightful place amongst the other
peace-loving nations in the Organization, just as it has
acquired its well-deserved place among the members
of OAU and the non-aligned movement. The resolutions adopted in this respect by both the thirteenth
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity and the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries speak best of the overwhelming
support that the People’s Republic of Angola enjoys.
The application for membership which is before the
Council is not only supported by the vast majority of
the international
community
but also supported
and welcomed by practically
the overwhelming
majority of the Members of the United Nations.

116. Unfortunately, such irrelevant facts have in the
past militated against the admission of some applicant
States. There is, of course, the notorious case of even
a permanent member of the Security Council having
been denied its rightful representation for over 20
years. We should like to think that those cases belong
to the past and that we are now entering a new phase
in which the so-called veto would not be employed
either as a form of punishment or as a form of pressure
for achieving national objectives.
117. The purposes of the United Nations which are
set out in Article 1 of the Charter are best served
by promoting the universality of membership of the
Organization. Indeed, the open character, that is to
say, the universality of United Nations membership
is actually stipulated in Article 4; and an application
for membership is to be decided in accordance with
the criteria established in Article 4. What is important
to note in Article ,4 is that whether or not an applicant
State is able and willing to carry out its obligations is
for the Organization as a whole to judge. It does
not seem proper, therefore, that any one Member
should impose its own judgement on the entire
Organization.

123. We are deeply convinced that the admission to
membership in the Organization
of the People’s
Republic of Angola will not only constitute a significant
step towards the fulfilment of genuine universality in
the United Nations-which
is an eminently desirable
objective of the Organization-but
will also enable the
United Nations to benefit from the positive contri-

118. I realize, of course, that in terms of the Charter,
a recommendation of the Security Council is essential
12

bution of that new African State to the solution of
important problems that are before the United Nations.
124. We all know how the peace-loving people of
Angola, who were subjected for centuries to foreign
domination
and exploitation,
had to endure an
extremely complex course of struggle until they
achieved their sacred goals of liberation and national
independence. Many of them have given their lives
for the cause of full freedom, genuine independence
and unity. There is no doubt whatever that the People’s
Republic of Angola, after having endured a long and
protracted struggle, has all the necessary qualifications
to enable it to carry out the obligations placed upon
States Members of the United Nations
by the
Charter.
125. During the short period of time since the
proclamation of its independence, the young Republic
of Angola has already been recognized by more than
two thirds of the independent States Members of the
United Nations. The support for Angola’s application
for membership is increasing day by day. The decision
to be taken by the Council on this question will be the
consecration of that ever-increasing support.

members of the Council for giving my delegation an
opportunity to participate in this important debate on
the application of the People’s Republic of Angola
for membership in the United Nations. We are particularly gratified that we have been given this opportunity, for we share with Angola a certain historical
link which perhaps is unknown to many members of
the Council. Sri Lanka, or Ceylon as it was known
in those days, saw in the year 1505 the Portugese as
the first European settlers to set foot on our shores.
And it was unfortunate, from the point of view of
our Angolan brothers, that while in 1635 the Portuguese
colonizers left our island shores 130 years after they
arrived, before they could dominate the entire island,
it took the Portuguese settlers and colonial masters
450 years or more to leave the territory of Angola
and the other African territories of Portugal. We
therefore take special pride in associating ourselves
with what the Council is discussing today, not for
the first time.
131. Secondly, I speak today before the Council
not only as the representative of my own country,
but as the representative of the current Chairman of
the Group of 86 Member States of this Organization
which belong to the group of non-aligned countries.
Angola, since its independence and liberation from
Portugal, has been an active member of that group.
And indeed at the Conference of Heads of State or
Government of those 86 nations held in my country’s
capital, Colombo,
in August of this year, Angola
was elected to be a member of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of that group. We. therefore take double
pleasure is speaking this afternoon in support of the
application made by the People’s Republic of Angola
for membership in the Organization.

126. Since the proclamation of the independence
of the People’s Republic of Angola, my Government
has taken particular satisfaction in the development of
brotherly relations with the Young Republic. And,
now, as it is about to join the Organization, we are
looking forward to working in close and brotherly cooperation with its representatives in our endeavour to
achieve the common goals and aspirations of the
peoples of Africa for the benefit of the international
community as a whole.
127. It is t,herefore with a deep sense of gratification
that the delegation of Egypt looks forward to the
adoption of draft resolution S/12234 by the Council
recommending the admission of the People’s Republic of Angola to membership in the United Nations.
The Security Council’s action will thus for ever mark
the history of the African liberation struggle, and it
will give me great pleasure to welcome the new sister
State into the fold of the Organization and to wish it,
on behalf of my Government, a new era of prosperity
and peace.

132. I do not wish to repeat what has been heard
over and over again this afternoon about the qualifications which are necessary before an applicant can be
recommended by the Council to the General Assembly
for admission to the Organization.
Article 4 of the
Charter clearly lays down these conditions, and it is
our firm conviction that the People’s Republic of
Angola satisfies all the five main conditions for
recommendation
by the Council to the General
Assembly for acceptance as a Member of the United
Nations.

128. We should also like to express our conviction
that, with the admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola as a Member of the United Nations, the
struggle of the peoples of Africa will soon culminate
in the complete eradication of colonialism,
in all its
forms, throughout Africa and the whole world.

133. We just wish to say this: at the Conference of
Heads of State or Government at Colombo in August
this year, the question of the independence of Angola
and Angola’s admission to the United Nations was
discussed. At the conclusion of that Conference,
resolution
NAC/CONF.S/S/Res.
15 was adopted,
which in paragraphs 2 and 3, states that the Conference:

129. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtrrtiotl
,fi*ofri Spa+
ish): The next speaker is the representative of Sri
Lanka. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

“2. Ctrlls on all member States of the nonaligned movement to support collectively Angola’s
application for membership to the United Nations:

130. Mr. KANAKARATNE
(Sri Lanka): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, and through you the other
13

“3. Urgrntls uppmls to all States Members of
the United Nations to support the application for
membership submitted by the People’s Republic
of Angola to the United Nations.“’

139. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion
front Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Zambia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

134. Echoing this sentiment, the Prime Minister of
my country, when she addressed the General Assembly
on 30 September this year, in her capacity as Chairman of the non-aligned group of countries, reiterated
our belief in the principle of universality of membership of the Organization. In calling for the admission
of the People’s Republic of Angola to membership,
she stated the following:

140. Mr. SIYOLWE
(Zambia): The Zambian delegation is grateful to the Security Council for allowing
us to participate in this meeting regarding the application of the People’s Republic of Angola for membership in the United Nations. Mr. President, we are
pleased that the meeting is taking place under your
presidency. We appreciate the positive and active role
your great country, Panama, has played and continues
to play in the Council with regard to African questions.

“A primary requirement
for the strengthening
of the United Nations is the universality of its
membership. We cannot but express dissatisfaction
and dismay at the continued denial, by the use of the
veto, to nations which are qualified in every way
and have won the recognition of more than two
thirds of the membership of this Organization, of the
opportunity to share in its endeavours.“4
135. It is for these reasons that my delegation
sincerely hopes that the draft resolution contained in
document S/12234 on the recommendations
of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members will
be unanimously supported by the Council.

141. Zambia attaches a great deal of importance to
this meeting. We sincerely hope that this will be the
last time the Council will be deliberating on the
question of Angola’s application
for membership.
To us, it is urgent that Angola should be admitted
as a Member of the United Nations. We therefore
urge the Council to make a speedy and appropriate
recommendation to the General Assembly for Angola’s
admission during this current session.
142. In my delegation’s opinion, the Council should
have recommended the admission of Angola to the
United Nations the very first time the Council considered its application, It was qualified then, as it is
now, for membership in the Organization. Regrettably,
for domestic reasons, a permanent member of the
Security Council found it expedient to veto Angola’s
application. Thus, for reasons totally alien to the
Charter of the United Nations, Angola was deprived
of its right of membership and the United Nations was
deprived of yet another opportunity to move closer
to the fulfilment of the much cherished principle of
universality.

136. I should like to say, in this context, that we
derive some degree of satisfaction from paragraph 4
of that report, in which we understand that the
representative of the United States of America, a
permanent member of the Security Council whose
negative vote prevented the admission of the People’s
Republic of Angola to membership in June this year,
is quoted as having stated:
“The United States delegation is not able to
support the draft resolution but does not wish to
stand in the way of its adoption by the Committee on
the Admission of New Members. We will want to
explain our position in the Security Council.“

143. Article 4 of the Charter is unambiguous.
It
explicitly states that membership is open to all peaceloving States which accept the obligations contained
in the Charter. That is the sole requirement
for
admission to the United Nations. Anything else is
extraneous. Angola has accepted the obligations of
membership in the United Nations as laid down in the
Charter. Indeed, the irony of history is that countries, such as South Africa, which blatantly show
contempt for, and act contrary to, some of the mo.st
sacred provisions of the Charter are Members of the
United Nations. The membership of such countries
serves only to erode the authority and prestige of the
Organization.

137. We are ail, I am sure, anxiously waiting foi
the explanation of the representative of the United
States. But it is our delegation’s hope, as indeed
it has been the hope expressed around this table
earlier, that the present draft resolution submitted
by the Committee on the Admission of New Members
will ,be carried unanimously by the Council.
138. We wish to welcome our brothers from Angola.
We are convinced that they will not only fulfil the
obligations placed on them by the Charter as new
Members, but also that their contribution
to our
deliberations and to our actions in helping to maintain
international peace and security and in contributing
to the continuous progress and welfare of mankind
will be as great as will be their gain from joining the
international brotherhood.

144. An overwhelming
majority
of States have
recognized the right of Angola to membership in the
United Nations. Individually
and collectively, those
countries have repeatedly advocated Angola’s admission without undue delay. As is well known, Angola
has been admitted to OAU and the non-aligned
movement. The thirteenth Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
14

Unity’ at Port Louis, and the Fifth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned
Countries at Colombo, were eloquent in their statements on the urgent need for Angola’s admission to
the United Nations.

determination
and concern to preserve its independence, not to adhere to blocs but to become part
of the movement of the non-aligned countries. The
admission of the People’s Republic of Angola to the
ranks of the non-aligned countries was a mark of
appreciation of its independent policy, its fight for
decolonization and against racism and its acceptance
of and dedication to the principles of the Charter,
which are the root of the activity and actions of the
non-aligned countries.

145. Angola is a neighbour of Zambia. Our two
countries and peoples have a common destiny. We in
Zambia desire for Angola what we desire for ourselves, namely, peace, security and national economic
and social development. The Party, the Government
and the people of Zambia will continue fully to
co-operate with the People’s Republic of Angola.

151. Today Angola, together with the other front-line
States, is playing an outstanding role in the struggle
against racist regimes in southern Africa, which
threaten the independence and territorial integrity’ of
neighbouring and other independent African countries.
Precisely because of its policy of independence,
Angola was the victim of aggression by the racist South
African rigime, and the Council was compelled to take
measures to protect that African country from that
aggression.

146. Angola was born out of a protracted liberation
struggle. Today it faces the major challenges of
national reconstruction and the yearning of its people
for decent living, after many years of deprivation,
reckless exploitation and oppression by Portuguese
fascism. Angola today needs the good will and
co-operation of the international community.
In our
view, its membership in the United Nations would be
a step forward in this direction.

152. The People’s Republic of Angola emerged from
the struggle against the former colonial system of
Portugal. Its liberation constitutes an important step
towards the final liquidation of colonialism and racism.

147. The accession to independence of Angola a
year ago, and indeed that of Mozambique,
opened
up a new chapter of particular significance in the
unfinished task of liberating the whole of southern
Africa. Everything must be done to strengthen the
hard-won independence of these countries so that
they can play their full part in the struggle for the
liberation of Namibia and Southern Rhodesia and the
destruction of the evil system of apartheid
in South
Africa. To talk of the admission of Angola to the
United Nations and to talk of assistance to Angola by
the international community is therefore to talk of the
need to hasten the liberation of our troubled region of
southern Africa. My delegation is confident that the
Security Council will not be found wanting in this
regard.

153. For a number of years Yugoslavia supported the
struggle of national liberation movements in all former
Portuguese colonies. Yugoslavia is maintaining very
friendly and extensive relations with all these countries and primarily
with the People’s Republic of
Angola. We supported the resistance of the people
of Angola against the aggression of South African
racists, knowing that victory over the racists was
important to the young State of Angola, to the whole
of free Africa as well as to millions of Africans in
Zimbabwe, Namibia and in South Africa itself who still
live under the yoke of colonialism and racism.
IS4. From the very outset, Yugoslavia believed
that Angola should be admitted to United Nations
membership without delay. The admission of an independent country to the United Nations, especially of a
newly liberated country-that
is, a country and a
people that have conquered their freedom by defeating
colonialism-is
a natural continuation of the struggle
for the final emancipation of that country from colonialism. We are, moreover, firmly convinced that the
spirit of understanding and support for the process of
emancipation and independence will prevail this time
in the form of a positive recommendation
by the
Council for the admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola to the United Nations as another step towards
the universality of the world Organization, and towards
peace and international co-operation based on equal
rights,

148. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spa/tish): The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
149. Mr. PETRIC (Yugoslavia): The Security Council
is meeting for the third time in order to recommend
the admission of the People’s Republic of Angola to
the United Nations. It seems that the moment has
come for the Council to recommend the admission of
Angola to the Organization unanimously.
150. The People’s Republic of Angola fulfils all the
conditions laid down by the Charter of the United
Nations for the admission of new Members. Angola is
an independent country recognized by OAU and by the
vast majority of the international community. It is a
country pursuing a peaceful foreign policy based on full
respect for the principles of the Charter. In its
Constitution
Angola has translated into law its
dedication to these principles as well as its firm

155. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprefation
from Spunish): The next speaker is the representative of Madagascar. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
15

156.

group of African States the unity and coherence of
which were somewhat threatened at one point,
Fortunately, there was a fundamental development
in the situation after the decisive victory of MPLA,
to which the, credit is due for having safeguarded
the unity, territorial integrity and identity of Angola
and for having obtained the withdrawal of the South
African invasion forces-although
the latter are still
a source of constant danger, from bases located in
Namibia, where these troops are illegally stationed.

Mr.

RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (interpwFrench): Mr. President, I wish at the
outset to thank you for having been good enough,
with the consent of the members of the Council, to
authorize my delegation to participate in the Council’s
work, during its reconsideration of the application of
the People’s Republic of Angola for admission to
membership in the United Nations. My delegation is
all the more grateful because this is the second time
this month that we have been given the privilege
of addressing the Council. Our statements on the
applications of Viet Nam and Angola for admission
to the United Nations are justified simply by our
conviction that these important questions are more
than a mere formality,
that they have a direct link
with the normalization
of the political situation in the
regions concerned and, as such, are of the greatest
interest to the Organization, whose task it is to maintain
and strengthen international peace and security.
rutiorl fro/n

161. Today the independent Luanda Government
exercises effective and full control-and
we emphasize
the words “effective” and “full”-over
the whole of
Angolan territory. It has normalized its relations with
all the neighbouring African countries and is recognized
by the majority of the States Members of the United
Nations. Last March Angola became a full member of
OAU, and it has since been admitted to several
specialized agencies and has been invited to participate
in international conferences organized by the United
Nations. Its active and growing participation
in
international life has led to its being elected a member
of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries, as was noted by the representative of
current Chairman of the movement.

157. The admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola to membership in the United Nations will
undoubtedly mark the end of one of the most spectacular and decisive chapters in the history of Africa’s
liberation from foreign exploitation and domination.
It will also consecrate and crown the efforts and
sacrifices made for many long years by a people
seeking its political identity, its freedom and its independence.

162. The confidence which those countries and
international organizations have in the People’s Republic of Angola is a reality that the United Nations
has no right to ignore and that no selective or unilateral interpretation of the Charter or of the facts
can render inexistent. Justified less by the sympathy
inspired by the suffering endured by the Angolan
people than by the recognition of its will for peace,
its will to accept the principles of n -alignment and
to follow a line of conduct in keep]
\ g with international morality, ‘that confidence represents more
than a formal juridical act noting that this new Republic
meets certain recognized standards of international
law.

158. That consecration could have been achieved
much earlier if an obstruction, as ill-timed as it was
unjustified, had not emerged to deny the recognition
by the Organization
of Angola’s independence,
proclaimed on 11 November 1975. That obstruction
was based on arbitrariness, the purpose of which was,
against all common sense, to ensure the denial by the
international community of the right of the people of
Angola to free themselves from colohialism, imperialism and capitalist subjugation, or to ensure that the
United Nations would go back on the political undertaking it had assumed to recognize the legitimacy of the
struggle waged by that people, with so much courage
and dedication, until its final victory over all the.
elements opposed to true independence and national
unity.

163. It is in, that spirit that we support the application of the People’s Republic of Angola, which
would have been accepted long ago if our intentions
had been better understood and had not been taken
to be a desire for confrontation.
Far from seeking
any short-term political advantages, we haye only
sought and seek to enrich the Organization with the
experience and contributions that the Angolan people
can rightly bring to our work. We believe, indeed,
that the full participation of all States in the activities
of the United Nations is the best way for the international community to achieve its objectives of peace,
security, justice and prosperity-objectives
that are
the keystone of all human undertakings.

159. That obstruction, which we denounced when
it was raised, emerged because the very fact of the
independence of the Angolan people was challenged
-and appears still to be challenged-and was called
into question following a sovereign political decision
taken by the leaders of the nascent Republic to unify
the country, defend its territorial integrity, stand firm
against South African aggression, supported by imperialist and capitalist reactionary forces, and define by
itself and for itself its political and economic future
in the ideological framework of its choice.

164. My delegation is convinced that the People’s
Republic of Angola, which is well acquainted with the
price of independence so dearly acquired, will long
carry, in spite of efforts to rebuild the country,
the scars of a war of colonial reconquest, but it will

160. The Angolan people was not the only people
to suffer the traumatic effects of that aggression.
The confusion it brought in its wake affected the
16

be a true and strong champion of the principles
Charter.

of the

failing once more to meet the deep hopes and sincere
expectations of the world. My delegation is much more
convinced that the application of the People’s Republic
of Angola for admission to membership in the United
Nations will be unanimously judged fair and reasonable because MPLA knew how to conduct its struggle
and to follow the correct course in order to respond
to the demands and fulfil the sacred aspirations of the
great people of Angola.

165. The representative of Angola expressed the
following when he addressed this Council on 23 June
1976: “I like to think that the United Nations exists
to promote justice, peace and security throughout
the world”. [1932nd meeting, par’a. 2831. To that
profession of faith, the United Nations should reply
with a manifestation of its own loyalty to its principles
and accept the request for admission of the People’s
Republic of Angola, whose peace-loving Government,
desirous of justice and social progress, accepts all the
obligations of the Charter and undertakes to respect
them.

171. We do not believe there is anyone here who
does not recognize the sacrifices made by the people
of Angola under the leadership of MPLA.
We are
absolutely sure that the people of Angola rejoice at
the recognition of their sacrifices so far given by OAU,
by the non-aligned countries and by many nations
bilaterally. We believe that the attitude of the Council
today cannot be inconsistent with .what the United
Nations passionately advocated and stood for many,
many years until Portuguese colonialism
crumbled
and withdrew from Angola. So, in our view, the
victory of the people of Angola is a victory for the
international community.

166. The PRESIDENT
(interpret&m
from
Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Mozambique. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make a statement.
167. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique): Mr. President, at’the
outset allow me to seize the opportunity on behalf of
the peoples, Governments and delegations of GuineaBissau, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe and
Mozambique to express appreciation to you and to all
members of the Council for having granted us this
opportunity to speak on the application of the People’s
Republic of Angola for admission to membership in
the United Nations.

172. Our delegations are therefore convinced that
the victory of the people of Angola in the struggle
against Portuguese colonialism backed by international
imperialism would not have been achieved so soon had
it not benefited from the determined and concerted
efforts of the people and countries which did not
support the Fascist Portuguese colonialism but stood
by MPLA from its inception. We are sure that the right
of the people of Angola to become a full Member
of the United Nations will not be jeopardized,
for
they fought for nothing else but to retain the right to
represent themselves and their interests everywhere.
They fought for peace and security in the world.

168. In the name of the delegations of Guinea-Bissau,
Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe and my own
delegation, I should also like to express to you,
Mr. President, the distinguished representative of a
friendly country, Panama, and a respected diplomat,
our happiness at seeing you in the presidential chair
of the Council for this month. Your experience and
integrity plus the wisdom of ill the other members
of the Council assure that the work of this meeting
will attain the ultimate goal and consequently will be
crowned with complete success.

173. The experience of Angola in the struggle for
independence, peace, justice and progress is already
known by a great part of humanity, for it forms part of
the common heritage of’all and the history of the
peoples. The admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola to the Organization would provide the young
State with one more forum in which to contribute its
experience,

169. The world has its eyes focused on this meeting
of the Council on Angola’s admission to full membership in the United Nations. The fact that the world’s
eyes are on all seated around this Chamber is an
indication that the world has not lost its faith in the
values, attributes and high sense of responsibility
of all the components of the Council in cases such
as the one under consideration today. The world
still has faith in the members of the Council,. in the
way you will exercise your wisdom and your exemplary
sense of justice, which should always prevail over any
ill feeling, in the discharge of the high responsibility
entrusted to the members of the Council as guardians of
the fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter.

174. Though colonialism is dying, the truth is that in
various parts of the globe peoples are still being held
under foreign domination. The Organization
has an
important role to play in the application of the principle
of self-determination
and independence
in those
areas.
175. The experience of Angola is an important contribution in the strengthening of the role of the United
Nations in the development.of the struggle of people
still under the yoke of foreign domination.
On the
other hand, there are places where the fundamental
rights of the people are still being trampled by a Fascist
Government. Here also, the experience of Angola is
a valuable contribution for the consolidation
of the

170. My delegation is among those which believe that
the Council’s endeavours will not fail today. We feel
that because we see none here who may like to
lead this important organ of the United Nations into
I7

one week after the application of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam, is undoubtedly not a mere matter of
chance. It is, in effect, because of your integrity
and, particularly, because of that political commitment
which is so characteristic of you as a militant of the
third world that the African Group and the nonaligned countries have been particularly concerned
that these two matters, which are of such great
moment to them, should come before the Council
at a time when you had assumed the presidency,
You may rest assured that the object of this demonstration of confidence is not only your eminent personality
but also your well-loved country, Panama, with which
my country, Mali, as my delegation would particularly
like to emphasize, shares aspirations to justice’and a
similar destiny.

role of the United Nations in developing the struggle
of peoples oppressed by tyrannical rCgimes.
176. We struggled side by side with the people of
Angola; we faced the same enemy, which was
supported by the most powerful and imperialist
nations. So we believe that Angola’s request for admission to full membership in the United Nations means
it will ,give full co-operation and make its contribution
to peace and to the creation of conditions which
would enable that country to initiate friendly relations
with all peoples and States in order to build a new
world in which there is harmony, respect and international security.
177. This is the second time the Council has met lo
consider an application for membership in the United
Nations by the People’s Republic of Angola. We
sincerely think that the reasons and arguments that
were capriciously put forward here at rhe first meeting
will now be found to be outdated, unfair and unreasonable.

183. This debate which began today in consideration
of the application of the People’s Republic of Angola
for admission to the United Nations gives my delegation an opportunity to welcome the sister delegation
of Angola, led by Mr. de Figueiredo.

178. We believe that the admission of Angola today
would not in any way mean the defeat of any nation.
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country
once said; “It is only a question of reconsidering
an opinion in order to bring it more closely into
harmony with the process of history and the sacred
goals of the United Nations”.

184. My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to proclaim the courage and heroism
of the militants of MPLA, those ardent patriots who
have carried the flame of Mani a-N’gola, Zinga and
other immortals who have written the finest pages in the
history of the Angolan resistance to colonial domination. My delegation would like to pay tribute to the
valiant people of Angola for the exceptional contribution they have made in the struggle being waged by
Africa to liberate itself from the colonial yoke and from
the oppression of racist minorities.

179. My delegation believes that the People’s Republic of Angola possesses all the necessary prerequisites
and fulfils the conditions laid down by the Charter
for membership in the United Nations,

185. The victory won by MPLA, led by our brother
Agostinho Neto, over the colonialist forces and those
of their racist henchmen is a victory not only of
militant Africa but also of all peace-loving and justiceloving peoples which throughout
the world are
struggling for the liberation of mankind. Therefore it
should be seen in the context of the world revolution
which is being carried forward and which has already
shaken the foundations of the old order typified,
as it was, by exploitation
and oppression of the
weakest by the strongest.

180. We are here today to reaffirm our conviction
that the People’s Republic of Angola should be
admitted to the United Nations as a full Member. We
should like to associate the voices of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique, the Republic of GuineaBissau and Cape Verde and Sao Tome and ,Principe
with those most prominent voices that have made it
categorically clear that there is nothing which shows
that Angola is unfit for membership in the United
Nations. We endorse the application, and we categorically state that the People’s Republic of Angola
deserves the right to be seated as a full Member of
the United Nations in accordance with the most
noble principles of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Charter of the United Nations.

186. The Government of the People’s Republic of
Angola, under the enlightened guidance of i!s leader,
Mr. Agostinho Neto, after having liberated the coufitry
and foiled a plot that was hatched against the Ango!an
people through puppet intermediaries,
has devoted
itself to organizing life in that country and to ensuring
the security of its population. The young People’s
Republic of Angola has never ceased to affirm itself
and to make its presence felt since its proclamation
of independence on 11 November 1975. It is recognized
today by almost all Governments
of the world,
including its immediate neighbours. It is a member of
OAU and of the non-aligned movement. Thanks to its
are daily
dynamism,
its weighi and authority
increasing in those organizations.

181. The PRESIDENT
(interpr’ettrtion /$/II Sprr/lis/f): The next speaker is the representat’ive of Mali,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table,
and tc make a statement.
182.

Mr.

KANTE
(Mali) (intwprctc~tion
fkm
President, the fact that the Security
Council’s consideration of the application of the
People’s Republic of Angola for admission to the
United Nations is occurring under your presidency,

Frenc~/~): Mr.

18

187. The Government of Mali considers that the
popular Government
of Agostinho
Neto, which
proclaimed in the Constitution of Angola its devotion
to the Charter of the United Nations and to those of
OAU and the non-aligned movement, does not need
any introduction here. The President of the People’s
Republic of Angola, further, forcefully reaffirmed
those commitments
in a fetter dated 22 April fast
addressed to the Secretary-General
[S//2064]. The
foreign policy of his Government is based on the
principles of peaceful coexistence. Furthermore, the
long liberation struggle the Angofan people waged
with so much resolve against the Fascist regimes of
the notorious Safazar and Cae‘tano, during which so
many of its best sons heroically gave up their fives-is
that not something which derives its legitimacy from
the Charter itself?

191. Mr. President,
I cannot conclude without
thanking, through you, the members of the Council
who have authorized my delegation to participate in
this debate on the admission of the People’s Republic
of Angola to the United Nations.
192.

The PRESIDENT
(iufcJrprc'/rrtion
,fiwn
SpunAt this point I should like to make a statement
as the representative of PANAMA.

is/?):

193. The delegation of Panama expresses its special
gratification at the decision of the Committee on the
Admission of New Members to recommend to the
Security Council the adoption of the draft resolution
contained in document S/f2234 recommending
to
the General Assembly the admission of the Peopfe’s
Republic of Angola to membership in the United
Nations.

188. Furthermore, the People’s Republic of Angola
has since its proclamation actively contributed to the
efforts made by the Organization to liberate Southern
Rhodesia, Namibia
and South Africa from the
domination of the racist minorities of Pretoria and
Salisbury. Many of the Members of the Organization
would be unable Lo present such a record, which
goes far beyond the obligations deriving from Article 4
of the Charter. That is why the rejection on 23 June
1976 [1932,rt/ meeting] of its first request for admission to the United Nations, ‘because of the veto cast
by the Government of the United States, was disapproved of by the international community as a whole.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate its thanks to those Members of the Security
Council that supported the candidacy of the People’s
Republic of Angola at the meeting of 23 June.

194. We find that it is a positive fact that the United
States, in the Committee, set aside its opposition to
the admission of Angola to the Organization.
It is
our hope that that gesture will presage new and consistent steps in the promotion of the principles and
purposes of the United Nations by that country.
195. In spite of the geographical fact of the distance
that materiaffy separates us from it, Angola already
has historical and cultural ties with the Latin American
countries and those ties will inevitably become stronger
day by day.
196. The admission of Angola as a Full member of
the family of the Unitetf Nations will mark the cufmination of another great day in the history of liberation.
In our view, this represents significant progress
towards the final goal of the total cfecofonization of
southern Africa which will be achieved when l/plprrr?hcid is brought to an end and when self-determinition
and majority government are achieved in Zimbabwe,
Namibia and Azania, so that those countries may
occupy their rightful place in the concert of independent States.

189. We are informed that this time the Government
States will forgo the exercise of its
right of veto against the Angofan Government’s
request for admission. If this is confirmed at the end
of the debate, my delegation would take it into
account and regard it change of attitude on the part
of the United States Government as a response to
the appeals made to it, including that made by
Colonel Charles Samba Cissokho; Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Co-operation of my country, in the toast
he pronounced as President of the African Group
on 8 October last on behalf of the member States
of OAU to the Secretary of State, Mr. Kissinger.
of the United

197. Latin America-and
in this case I am referring
to the countries which won their independence from
Spain in the nineteenth
century-was
not long
recognizing its cultural identity and, once the wounds
of the struggle for emancipation
were healed, in
establishing new ties of fraternal friendship with the
mother country. The modern Forms of Angofan culture
have the same origin as ours, and this historical
fact, whatever may have been the mistakes of the past,
leads Latin Americans and Africans of Portuguese
or Spanish language to speak in harmony in the
debate on the major world problems.

190. The admission of the People’s Republic of
Angola to the United Nations, which will shortly be
confirmed by the votes in the Council, will reinforce
not only the universality of the Organization but aIso
its authority and its. weight. Furthermore,
it will
constitute a major victory for all those who are working
throughout the world to bring about the advent of the
new era based on peace, justice and progress for all,
which we so eagerly await. It will mark the end of
arbitrary rule, which is tfle reign of force over reason
and law.

198. In referring to our cultural and linguistic ties,
I am not Forgetting either the geographic or the
economic and social realities. I speak thus merely
to emphasize the fact that the solidarity and cohesion
we need in the political struggle to achieve full
19

independence and sovereignty are rendered easier and
more effective by the fact that the necessary exchange
of views will to our ears resound with echoes of
fraternal unanimity.
199. This is an appropriate occasion to recall that
the struggle against colonialism institutionalized
by
Latin America in the Amphictyonic Congress of
Panama in 1826 has, with the passage of time, been
reflected in the great Latin American revolutions
whose purposes have coincided with the ideals
proclaimed by the non-aligned countries at Bandung in
1955, at Belgrade in 1961, at Cairo in 1964, at Lusaka
in 1970, at Georgetown in 1972, at Algiers in 1973,
at Lima in 1975 and at Colombo in 1976.
200. The admission of Angola to membership in the
United Nations will be one more reason for the countries of the third. world to work, as San Martin said to
Bolivar in 1822, to merge the interests of our peoples
“so that a solid prosperity may make it possible for
them to enjoy the benefits of their independence”.

of Angola that still resists domination by the regime
in Luanda. The fact that that rCgime depends heavily
on Cuban forces for the maintenance of its security
casts doubt on the degree of popular support which it
can command within the country.
206. It is clear that the Cuban army, a foreign, nonAfrican force, is waging a bloody and difficult guerrills war in three separate areas of Angola. We have
heard disturbing reports that those Cuban occupation
forces have been carrying out military assaults on
undefended villages and towns in Angola. Those
reported attacks include the killing of refugees, the
burning of villages arid the slaughter of the people’s
main source of food and livelihood:
their cattle.
Reportedly, several thousand Angolans have fled
from this recent onslaught across the border into
Namibia. We continue to believe that there is
absolutely no justification for such a large foreign
armed presence in an African State.
207. The re’al victims of this policy are, of course,
the people of Angola, who have borne the weight of
14 years of colonial war and almost two years of civil
war, with no end in sight. Even now there are an
estimated 700,000 Angolan refugees and displaced
persons.

201. That is the statement I wished to make as the
representative of Panama.
202. Speaking now as PRESIDENT, I should like to
inform members that some delegations have requested
to speak in order to explain their position before the
voting.

208. Nevertheless, the United States has followed a
consistent policy of support for African solutions to
African problems and respect for the role of OAU.
The Organization of African Unity has formally recommended United Nations membership
for Angola,
and OAU members have asked us to facilitate Angola’s
entry. For the reasons I have enumerated earlier,
we cannot, in good conscience, vote in favour of the
Angolan application for membership in the Organization. In this case, however, out of deference to
African views, we will not oppose the application.

203. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (interpretmtion
from
Chine.s~): On 23 June last [ihid.], when the Security
Council
was considering Angola’s application for
admission to membership in the United Nations, the
Chinese delegation stated its principled position on
this question, pointing out that, as we were firmly
against providing social-imperialism with a pretext for
prolonging its acts of aggression and interference
in Angola, we had decided not to participate in the
_ vote on the relevant draft resolution. Today, after
nearly five months have elapsed, it can be clearly
that there is no fundamental change in the situation
of Angola. In view of the foregoing, the Chinese
delegation has decided again not to participate in the
vote on the draft resolution contained in document

209. Mr. FIFOOT (United Kingdom):
When the
Security Council last met to consider Angola’s application for admission to the United Nations, my delegation stated that we would vote for Angola’s
admission because we supported the principle of
universality of membership of the Organization. That
has remained our position, and it is for that reason
that we shall vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us. We look forward to Angola playing a
constructive role in the work of the United Nations.

S/12234.
204. Mr. SCRANTON

(United States of America):
The United States will abstain in the vote on Angola’s
application for membership in the United Nations.
Our decision to abstain rather than to oppose that
application was made out of respect for the sentiments
expressed by our African friends, some of whom have
stated those sentiments here today,

210.

Mr. LECOMPT

(France) (interpretatio~z
from
will vote in favour of
the draft resolution contained in document S/12234
commending to the General Assembly the admission
of Angola to the United Nations. This attitude should
come as no surprise to anyone, since the French
delegation had already, on 23 June last [i6in.j,
supported this same request for admission. As we had
occasion to state at that time, and as we should like
to repeat today, my delegation is always pleased to
see a new Member swell the ranks of the Organi-

French): The French delegation

205. We still have serious doubts about the true
independence of the current Angolan Government.
It is hard to reconcile the presence of a massive contingent of Cuban troops with the claim that Angola
enjoys a truly independent status. The Angolan
Government exercises only tenuous control over much
20

\

I

I

The dsaft resohrtion

zation and bring us closer to the objective of universality, a principle to which my country is deeply
attached.

none

211. My delegation considers that when the conditions’laid down by the Charter are met by an applicant
for membership, as is true of the People’s Republic
of Angola, which has pledged to discharge our joint
obligations, everything militates in favour of its
admission to the Organization.

was adopted
by 13 \*otes to
(resolution
397 (1976)).

216.

The PRESIDENT
(intelpr’etntion
jkonr SpanSome delegations have requested to speak after
the vote. Therefore, I shall now call on them in the
order in which they asked to speak.

217. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania):
First and foremost, I must say how delighted we are
with the results of the voting. This is the longawaited day. That is why it is really and truly fitting
to be glad and to rejoice. We are delighted because,
this day and at this time, the People’s Republic of
Angola, our beloved sister country, which at one
stage suffered the humiliation of being rejected by the
decision-makers,
has at long last been accepted to
membership of the world body of the community of
nations, the United Nations. We give Angola and its
people a tremendous and overwhelming welcome.
In point of fact, the announcement of the result of the
vote by you, Mr. President, was, ipso @to,
like
saying: “Friend, come up higher; welcome aboard.

213. With the People’s Republic of Angola, a new
African State of great importance will enter the United
Nations. We are convinced that, like many other
African countries before it, it will bring to our work
a spirit of wisdom and generosity, and that it will
contribute in the same constructive way to achieving
the purposes and principles of the Charter.

AnticcJ,

~rscc~nde srtperirrs”.

218. We warmly congratulate our brothers the gallant
Angolan people, and encourage them to look ever
forward, though the present status has been reached
not without disappointments.
Such is life, they say; all
rising to a great place is in many cases by a winding
stair. And to my brother, the representative of the
People’s Republic of Angola, who is with us here
you have gained
today, I would say: “Brother,
victory, and the victory gained is indeed doubled
because you, the achiever, bring home full numbers.
Look at the votes scored and registered”.

214. The international community needs Africa; it
needs that continent to find in it the political resources
that will make it possible for it to solve its own problems. France has precise reasons for expressing its
confidence and trust in the ability of the Organization
of African Unity to find peaceful solutions to the
difficulties we have all inherited fromqthe past. Both
regionally and on a world-wide scale, there can be
no doubt that the People’s Republic of Angola will
be in a better position to play the important role
which falls to it in the search for international peace
and co-operation when it becomes a Member of the
United Nations, which we hope will be very soon.

219. As we all know, the previous application w,as
blocked by the veto of the United States. This was
unfortunate, and very much against the principle of
the universality
of the Organization.
Today, the
weathercock has turned in a rather satisfactory direction. The United States delegation has been able
to have second thoughts. It has opted to remove the
kingpin which otherwise would stand in the way and
thus impede and block the admission of the deserving,
independent
and sovereign State of the People’s
Republic of Angola to full membership in the Organi&ion. This indeed is a step forward in the improvement of friendly relations. It is an amicable gesture
which indicates a change of attitude and improves
the United States image in the eyes of the Members
of the United Nations in general, and members of the
Security Council, in particular.

215. The PRESIDENT
(i,~terprettrtic)n
fiwu
Sptr+
ish): As no other Council member wishes to speak
at this time, I now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 6 of the report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members.

In ,fi/1~1//1’: Benin, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania.

Ahsttriui/l,q:

1 nlwtentiotl

ish):

212. The French Republic recognized the People’s
Republic of Angola on 17 February this year, and
we are still ready to establish with it the best possible
relations on a basis of equality and respect for the
identity of each State. This is particularly true in the
case of a country whose historical, cultural and
economic ties with Europe are numerous. We would
express the sincere wish that Angola will be able to
overcome the difficulties that have surrounded its
accession to independence, and we have no doubt
that in future it will be able to affirm its international
sovereignty, without any foreign interference.

Agrrht:

with

220. The United States delegation is commended
for realizing the truism that no man has the right to
fix the boundary of the march of a nation to independence and membership in the world body once the

None.
United States of America.
21

conditions are met. No man, no State, has the right
to say to its neighbour: “thus far shalt thou go and no
further”.

227. That the Council on this occasion was not
hindered in the discharge of its obligations by the
imposition of the veto should be hailed by all, since it
enables us to take one more step on the road towards
the consolidation of the universal process of decolonization and a march towards full universality of the
Organization. For my Government and my people,
it is a source of profound satisfaction to be able to
welcome in our midst the representatives of the People’s Republic of Angolad

221. Mr. Dulles, then the United States Secretary
of State, was reported to have said on 7 May 1954:
“The United States, as the first colony in modern
history to win independence for itself, instinctively
“-1 repeat: instinctively-”
shares the aspirations
for liberty of ail dependent and colonial peoples.
We want to help and not to hinder the spread of
liberty. We do not seek to perpetuate Western
colonialism.”

228. I should like to make some additional comments
in the light of certain things said in the course of this
debate. Although this time it did not try to justify the
use of the veto, the United States delegation deemed it
necessary to make some affirmations which constitute
further proof of its lack of respect for Angolan national
sovereignty, and its inability to understand that the
African States must enjoy the same prerogatives and
rights as the peoples and States of other regions of the
world.

If that ‘is the stand, the United States should express
more concretely its sympathy with the nationalist
groups and the emerging nations in Africa and elsewhere. If there is such a deep “instinctive”
feeling
for nationalism and universality of the United Nations,
then invariably and increasingly the United States must
support the nationalists and the emerging States.

229. In his statement afew minutes ago, the representative of the United States took the liberty of calling
into question the independent and sovereign nature of
the People’s Republic of Angola by linking it to the
presence in that country of Cuban military personnel,
who, as we have said on other occasions, are there in
Angola as a result of the sovereign decision of the
Government of the People’s Republic of Angola-the
only authority competent to decide who may lend it
that kind of assistance, for whatever time it deems
necessary.

222. Consequently,
much as we appreciate the
United States gesture in today’s voting pattern, we
feel that the gesture would have been more meaningful
and would have gone a long way had the United
States chief representative pronounced himself more
positively on the question before us. None the less, it
is a step forward.
223. The PRESIDENT
(i71f~l’~retotion
Jhn~ Spurnis/r): The next speaker is the representative of Cuba.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

230. They did not go to Angola after having asked
permission from the United States Government, nor
did the request from the Angolan Government have
the prior blessing of the United States Government,
nor is it the intention of our Government to request
it to obtain United States sanction to take any decision
on this matter or on any other matter that falls strictly
within the sovereign decisions of our own country
and, in this case, a friendly country, Angola.

224. Mr. ALAR&N
(Cuba) (interpw~crfio/l
,fi*om
Sporrish): At the outset, I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council
for allowing me to take part in this meeting. I should
also like to express my delegation’s satisfaction at the
decision just adopted by the Council, which opens
the way for Angola’s incorporation in the membership
of the Organization.

23 1. But if the presence of foreign military personnel
within a State, in the view of the United States delegation, is a reason to question the degree of independence or sovereignty which a country enjoys, then,
strictly speaking, the Washington
Government
is
publicly telling in the Security Council some of its
allies, friends and clients, how the United States views
their respective independence.

225. We hope that very shortly the General Assembly
will receive the relevant report from the Council
and that then we will all be in a position to welcome the
representatives of Angola. In that way, the international community will pay a due tribute to a people
which, for four centuries, was the victim of the most
ruthless forms of colonial exploitation, a people which
knew how to wage a heroic and difficult struggle to
gain its full national independence.

232. Furthermore, the representative of the United
States pointed to the fact that the Cuban troops are
foreign troops. I shall not at this time explain the
reasons for reaffirming our fraternal ties and our ties
of solidarity with the Angolan people and with other
African peoples. You, Mr. President, speaking as the
representative of Panama, referred to the affinities and
the historical ties, as well as the cultural and human
bonds which link the peoples of Latin America d

226. That act will be in particular a tribute to the
Angolan fighters who, led by MPLA, have been in
the forefront of that struggle for freedom over the
past 20 years. Throughout that long struggle many
Angolans sacrificed their lives to achieve that most
sacred right-the right ofpeoples to self-determination.
22

the Caribbean with the African peoples and in particular with the people of Angola. I should merely
like to offer members of the Council the following
thought for their consideration.

been mixed up and we were listening to part of the
debate which took place at the Co.uncil’s last meeting.
I was thinking
that Mr. Scranton had mentally
transferred himself to the land of Viet Nam, and since
he seems to be so much aware of the fate OF United
States military personnel which went to that land, he
might unconsciously have been referring in the Council
to some of the exploits which those United States
military personnel carried out in Viet Nam, without
having requested anyone’s permission, not to defend
freedom, but rather to destroy it.

233. An allegation was made by the United States,
a State which was perhaps first in the world and in
history to spread its troops to all the regions of the
globe, in some cases with the authorization or permission of the States concerned, but in many other
cases without any authorization of any kind, without
any request from anyone and even in the face of the
condemnation or rejection by the victims of the
stationing of those troops. If those troops, when they
are in the Far East or in the Caribbean or in the Pacific
or in Europe are not foreign, then we must ask ourselves in what continent is the geographical location
of that country which is known by the name of the
United States of America‘? Is it an Asian country,
since there are tens of thousands of United States
troops in South Korea and Taiwan? Is it a country of
the Pacific, where it has placed large military
contingents’? Is it a country located in Indo-China,
where it sent half a million soldiers to sow destruction
and death among the peoples of that region‘? Is it a
country perhaps located in western Europe? Is it a
country of the Caribbean region, where it is illegally
occupying a portion of Cuban territory in Guantanamo,
and where it has stationed troops in Panama?

237. At any rate, I shall say in this connexion with
regard to the false statements made here by the
representative of the United States that, this morning
in the Fourth Committee,s the representative of the
South West Africa People’s Organization referred to
this campaign of propaganda invented, it would seem,
by the South African authorities, originating in Pretoria
and, as we have seen today, also indulged in by
Washington, on the situation on the frontier between
Angola and Namibia. We see how closely this is tied to
South African aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola, an aggression which was defeated a few
months ago and which continues today unceasing
activity of provocation and attacks on the part of
racist Pretoria against the territory of Angola and, of
course, also against the Namibian people.
238. At any rate, I should like to point out that
today’s words with respect to Angola, like yesterday’s
veto in connexion with Viet Nam, are the outcome of
an arrogant and resentful policy. It was resentment
which prompted the United States to prevent Viet
Nam from being admitted to the Organization and it is
resentment which even now, when it lifted its veto
against Angola, led it nevertheless to level this kind
of accusations against the Government and the people
of Angola.

234. Furthermore, I should like to recall that in the
records of the Council, we find reflected the position of
our Government in connexion with military co-operation with the Government of the People’s Republic of
Angola. That position was clearly stated when the
Security Council last debated this matter, and representatives may recall it.
235. Our participation in the struggle waged by the
Angolans led by their patriotic movement and by
the leaders of the Angolan revolution who heroically
fought in obedience to an agreed tradition of struggIe
for independence is a source of pride and satisfaction
for us. The manner in which the peoples of the third
world have valued that action is also reflected in the
final documents of the Conference of the non-aligned
countries held at Colombo last August.

239. To conclude, I should like to say that I enjoy
uses
certain
humourous
expressions-whoever
them-in
our debates. In this context, I took careful
note OF the fine spirit demonstrated by Mr. Scranton
at the end of his statement. Indeed, he spoke of the
consistent policy of the United States vi+ci-ids African
questions and of the United States position of support
of African solutions to African problems. He even said
that the United States on this occasion today based its
position on its deference to African opinions.

236. I should like to add that in one part of his statement, the representative of the United States made a
series of accusations against the Angolans and the
Cubans, which leads us to suspect that the representative of the United States may perhaps have been the
victim of effects which sometimes occur at this stage
of the work of the General Assembly as a result
of the fact that we have to make many statements in
various United Nations bodies on different topics.
When he spoke of the slaughter of refugees, the
slaughter of cattle, the burning of villages, of attacks
against defenceless peoples and of bloody war, for one
moment I thought that through some administrative
error on the part of some secretary the texts had

240. The Council and the Africans will soon be in a
position to ascertain whether this was a joke or a
change of position. Will the United States now support
African solutions advocated by OAU in connexion
with South Africa‘! Will the United States finally
support the resolutions which imposed sanctions on the
Pretoria regime, as that regime should be’ sanctioned?
Will the United States now support the sanctions or
the arms embargo against the South African regime?
In a word, will the United States at the next opportunity
demonstrate before the Council whether what we
23

colonialism to strangle my country in its infancy, to
throttle it almost in its act of birth. Here again the
people of Angola, undaunted and unweary, rose to the
challenge once more in a long series of never-ending
trials and tribulations. After having fought off and
defeated the external enemy, the Angolan people rose
nobly to the task of confronting the internal agents of
the forces of imperialism, which even now are loath
to give up their fading, dying grip on Africa and its
riches.

heard today was a joke or an indication of a change of
policy towards Africa?
241.

The PRESIDENT
(i~terprerrrtio/r ./ho/n Spa/rThe next speaker is the representative of the
People’s Republic of Angola. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

k/t):

242. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(People’s Republic of
Angola): I wish to state at the outset that what has
made it possible for me to address the Security Council
today has been no favour of history and no enactment
of a colonial decree. It has emerged from the heroic
courage, sacrifice and blood of millions to Angolan
men, women and children who have been fighting
all their lives to make a dream come true. Today it is
with justifiable
pride that I humbly speak here on
behalf of my Government and my countrymen. Today
is therefore a day of cheer for those who are alive and
a day of dedication to the many who gave their lives
for the cause of freedom, to achieve what is no more
than our just due-the endorsement of the membership of the People’s Republic of Angola in this international community of nations.

245. The People’s Republic of Angola is a sovereign
and,legitimate people, for the position we occupy in
Africa and internationally has been attained through a
heroic armed struggle against colonialism and imperialism-the
longest armed struggle on the African
continent.
246. During the years of the war of national liberation
in Angola, MPLA-and
hence the Angolan peoplewas subjected to all kinds of misrepresentation,
misunderstandings and attempts at subversive division
aimed at destroying the Angolan people’s progressive
advance in their armed struggle for complete’ independence. But thanks to the determination, courage
and sacrifices of our people, MPLA, under the leadership of President Agostinho Neto, was able to overcome the obstacles placed in its path and to lead the
Angolan people to sovereignty and independence and
their just place in regional and international organizations.

243. I cannot but refer to the painful experience of
my country being excluded from the United Nations
since its independence by the veto of a Member
State. We wish to warn that such misuse of the veto is
not in the interest of the imernational community
and of peace and stability in the world. The founding
fathers of the Organization decided on the institution
of the veto against the background of the Second
World War. As is well known, it was introduced
with the objective of keeping the peace. It* was
meant as a vehicle for international stability and not
as one for obstructing the peace. We would, however,
take this opportunity to express our gratitude to all
the members of the Council that gave us their support on the occasion when the veto power was used
to squeeze out limited bilateral objectives. Those who
talk about universality of membership of the United
Nations in one breath and oppose the admission of an
African State fully supported by OAU and the nonaligned movement
in another bear a full moral
responsibility
for frustrating the objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations.

247. It is well known that the liberation struggle of
the Angolan people has had far-reaching consequences
beyond our immediate borders, for our fight was and is
a measure of our solidarity with, and encouragement
of, those of our African brothers and sisters for whom
the fight is not yet over. To them the Angolan
people offer hope and assistance on every plane SO
that they too, like Angola today, can have freedom
and their own sovereignty under the African sun. And
it is because the Angolan people dealt such a death
blow to the international forces of imperialism, colonialism, racism and ‘apartheid that the racist minority
regime to our south, correctly sensing the vita1 and
dramatic role of Angola in the liberation of Africa,
chose to invade our country militarily when we were
but a few days old as a sovereign State. Even now
the racist regime in Pretoria continues to instigate and
encourage subversive elements to threaten our internal
security and stability. Like Tarquin, South Africa took
surreptitious strides towards its design to smother
Angola. Like all instruments of darkness, they crawled
into my country to sabotage Angolan independence
and internal stability.

244. Justice is indivisible. Justice can never be
suppressed. Justice will always surface in the tide of
time. And it is in fulfilment of the justice of historical
forces that Angola today is a flee, sovereign and
independent country. All members are aware of the
long and bloody struggle the brave people of, Angola
waged to win their independence; and many and varied
were the enemies we had to fight-not just imperialism, colonialism,
economic exploitation, political
repression, social injustice, human indignities, denial of
even our fundamental human rights. No, in addition to
all that we faced even greater odds-not only the
enemy without but also the enemy within aided and
abetted by external forces of imperialism and neo-

248. The evil machinery of propaganda of the racist
regime in Pretoria continues today, as in the past, to
seek to mislead the world. It continues, unabated, to
peddle the impression that the People’s Government is
not in full control in Luanda. South Africa faiIs, and
will continue to fail, to make any dent in the armour
24

.

of the Angolan people’s solidarity. The power and
strength of the People’s Republic of Angola come not
from a rkgime or government in Luanda but from the
broad base of its masses, from the cities of the Angolan
coast to the remotest villages in its backwoods. Every
Angolan child is a warrior and zealously and jealously
will safeguard the independence and stability of
Angola.

we are fully prepared to shoulder our responsibilities,
We shall join the United Nations to fight the evils and
injustices which we struggled against all these years
within our borders. We shall join in the fight for
human dignity and freedom, particularly in Africa.
NO African can consider himself free when Africans
are in bondage in our continent. Africa cannot be
free until all Africa is liberated. Angola is therefore
ready to assume its fights and duties in accordance
with the rules of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

249. Today our people are fundamentally engaged in
the work of national reconstruction, which extends to
the economic, political, military and social spheres.

255. Freedom was not easily won for my people.
Every inch of land in Angola is a graveyard of imperialism, colonialism and racism, and we are fully
committed
to eradicating injustice, exploitation,
hunger and the denial of human rights all over the
world. From this no one can deter us. The struggle
continues, but victory is certain.

2.50. On behalf of my Government and my country,
I wish publicly to thank those who stood by us in om
hour of need, in our darkest days. We will never forget
those who. came promptly to our aid, to participate
directly in or contribute indirectly to the defence of the
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
People’s Republic of Angola. They acted in the right
cause of safeguarding the gains of the Angolan revolutionary process. We owe them our highest gratitude.
To the Soviet Union and to Cuba, and to our comrades
in the socialist countries, we extend our sindere thanks.
There are those who have deliberately misrepresented
the friendship and assistance given to us by certain
States. This campaign of libel and slander has been
aimed at undermining Angola’s independence. The
campaign has been proved a lie. Today Angola is
sovereign and master of its destiny and its policies.

256. The PRESIDENT
(i/ltel’p/.~t&0/z ,fi~nl Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Mauritius. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
257. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius): No less than
21 representatives have addressed the Security Council
in the general debate, at short notice, at a meeting
which had been expected to last only a few minutes.
All the representatives have spoken in favour of the
admission of the People’s Republic of Angola to the
United Nations.

251. To our African friends, with whom we have
shared a common history, the difficult present and the
hopeful future, to you our friends still in the process
of struggling for your liberty, to you who have supported us, we are grateful and wish to say that Angola
will stand by you in your struggles.

258. On behalf of OAU, I should like, through you,
Mr. President, to thank all those non-members of the
Security Council who spoke here in support of OUT
cause, I also thank the members of the Council for
recommending to the General Assembly that the
People’s Republic of Angola be admitted to membership of the United Nations.

252. This is especially true for the’liberation
movements of southern Africa: it will indeed be a special
occasion when we can clasp the hands of the representatives of free and sovereign Namibia, Zimbabwe and
Azania in the halls of the United Nations. We express
solidarity with all those freedom fighters everywhere
who are seeking to realize their dreams as we have
realized ours. We Angolans who fought SO hard and
fat-so long do not easily forget our past. We thus extend
full solidarity to those whose struggle is not yet over.

259. We are particularly happy that the United States
has reviewed its earlier position and refrained from
standing in the way of Angola-indeed
of Africa
.as a whole. We cannot agree with the explanations
of the United States delegation regarding its abstention, but we respect them, It pains my delegation
to see such a great country as the United States
isolating itself so often by abstaining rather than voting
in favour of justice as the world sees it. Fortunately,
the wheels of progress do not admit brakes forever.

Angola has always been aware of its role in
Africa, Thus, we have been playing and will continue
to play our part in the affairs of OAU and within the
movement of non-aligned countries. Our policy ofnonalignment dated back to the formation of MPLA in
1955; since then, the Angolan people have been committed to consolidating the movement of non-aligned
countries, and consequently, we reaffirm our SOliCiaritY
with it.

253.

260. We hope that both the United States and China,
a leader of the third world, will welcome with open
arms the delegation of Angola once that valiant country
has taken its rightful seat among us in the Organization, and will extend to the Government and People of Angola their understanding, friendship and
co-operation.

2.54. The People’s Republic of Angola is fully aware
of the duties and responsibilities issuing from the fact
of membership in this international Organization, and

2~1. I believe it was my good friend Lord Caradon
who, addressing the Council, reminded the Aembers
25

inside Angola, those reports could be checked, and I
would suggest to my colleague that he use the
influence of his Government, which is now extremely
strong in Angola, for that purpose: to make sure that
there is fairness in these comments.

that while it is a good thing to be strong like a lion,
it is not always wise to behave like a lion.
262. The sun shines for everybody.
brightly for the people of Angola.

Let it shine

269. Last, but by no means least, I should like to
make this point. He challenged the reasoning of the
United States Government with regard to its support
for Africans. May I say to you that, in ourjudgement,
at least-and I think this is the judgement of many
Africans who have told us so-there has been no
Government which in the past year has tried harder
and done more to obtain majority rule for Africans
~~1~7s
~v’ols/zcc than the United States Government,
And those efforts will continue, I can assure you.

263. Mr. President, you have just presided over a
most important, indeed a historic, meeting. I congratulate you in the same breath as I congratulate the
valiant people of Angola.
264. The PRESIDENT
(it1t~1.p,.c~trrtio17
.fkm
Spanis/~): I now call on the representative of the United
States, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right
of reply.
265. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
This has been a lengthier debate than any of us
expected, and I shall try not to keep it going too
long, but I do want to say a couple of things about
what has been said by my Cuban colleague.

270. In contrast, the Cuban Government continues
to use troops in Africa-foreign
troops, I might addinvolved directly in violence.
271. The PRESIDENT
(inte,prctatio/? Jio/?j Spanis/z): The representative of Cuba has asked to be
allowed to speak in exercice of his right of reply.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make a statement.

266. His indication that the Cubans went into Angola
at the request of a legitimate Government is, I think,
quite different from the actual fact. I am sure that all
of us arc aware that the first Cuban combat troops left
Cuba on a troop vessel bound for Angola in early
September 1975, over two months before Angolan
independence and while the factions in Angola were
still attempting to reconstitute the transitional Covernment. I think it should not be forgotten that their
intervention took place at the same time that OAU
was calling upon all States to refrain from further
involvement in Angola.

272.

Mr, ALARCdN
(Cuba) (inte,pretatim flu/n
I do not wish to tax the Council’s patience,
either, since we have been meeting for quite some
time and it is late.

Sptruish):

273. I should like to restate what I said in connexion
with the intervention of Cuban military personnel in
Angola, as a result of a request made by the Government of the People’s Republic of Angola. As for the
dates, they have been recorded in the verbatim records
of the Council’s meetings in June.

267. Far more important than how they got there,
however, is what they are doing there now, in view
of the current situation in Angola. I remind the Council
that the last South African forces left Angola in
March 1976, nearly eight months ago. If the role of the
Cuban troops was a described by their representative,
one would expect to find that the Cuban army is
concentrated along the Namibian border. In fact, the
bulk of the Cuban forces are located in central and
northern Angola, combating the active insurgencies
in those areas. In addition, there are several thousand
Cuban troops in Cabinda, over 1,400 kilometres from
the Namibian
border. I think the Cuban troop
displacements make it obvious that their role is to
protect the Luanda Government from internal opposition and not from external aggression,

274. I know that on other occasions the United
States delegation has tried to present the facts in a
different way and has set up its own timetable of
events. Perhaps the information
received by ,the
authorities in Washington was not the most accurate,
but at any rate that is a mistake which is not our fault
but rather the fault of the sources of information
of the United States Government, who were perhaps
officials of the Central Intelligence Agency or any of
the secret or semi-secret bodies which for many
years, in Angola and elsewhere, co-operated with the
colonialist authorities and assisted them in carrying out
a cruel colonial war against African peoples.

268. Furthermore,
my colleague has raised the
question of the comments I made concerning what
they are doing there. The reports detailing those
events came not from me but from the international
journalists within Namibia and were based on statements from refugees themselves. Reports we have
received from other sources have supported those
accounts and have, indeed, raised even graver accusations against the Cuban forces. I might suggest that,
if international journalists were permitted to travel

275. I could say the same with regard to the information which Mr. Scranton apparently believes is very
detailed and which he claims to possess even regarding
the exact location of Cuban personnel at this time in
Angola.
276. In connexion with what my comrades in Angola
are doing now, I repeat what I said before. American
accusations are nothing but a repetition of South
26

African propaganda. This is one of the ways in which
the United States promotes ‘Lmajority
rule” in
southern Africa. It is the method it has always utilized:
financial support, political support, diplomatic support
and military support for the colonialist and racist
rhgimes of that region. And that support is reflected
in the fact that the United States representative uses
the Council to repeat what the spokesmen of South
African propaganda have been saying for some time
now.
277. He suggested that the Cuban Government should
take some steps vis-il-vis the Angolan authoritiesapparently in connexion with Mr. Scranton’s concern
that some journalists should obtain visas and travel
to Angolan territory. In that connexion he said,
roughly speaking, Cuban influence is very great in that
country. Once again he is projecting imperialist
thinking, and he is not capable of seeing how relations
among other peoples are not the same as those which
imperialism made traditional in tlie world. Relations
between the Cuban Government and that of Angola
do not even allow us to dream of exercising any
influence on decisions which fall strictly within the
competence of the Government of the Angolan people.

stand it, there are other kinds of relationships in this
world. There are other kinds of behaviour among
sovereign States. And that is true of the relations
which exist between the People’s Republic of Angola
and Cuba and those which exist between many
sovereign, independent States of the world outside
the imperialist sphere of domination.
279. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spnnis/?): In accordance with the provisions of the second
paragraph of rule 60 of the provisional. rules of procedure, I shall immediately
transmit the recommendation adopted today by the Council to the General
Assembly, This recommendation
will replace the
special report of the Security Council to the General
Assembly which was adopted at the 1932nd meeting
of the Council, held on 23 June 1976.h
280. If no other member of the Council wishes to
speak and if there are no objections, I shall take it that
the Council agrees to my praposal.
It WNS so decided.
The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.

278. I understand that those problems are extremely
difficult to understand for a Government which has
taken on the role of world policeman and of ring
leader of the forces of reaction, colonialism and racism
and which has grown accustomed to imposing its will
and its designs on all the peoples of the world. It is
impossible for its representatives to understand any
other kind of relationship between sovereign States.
But though it may be very difficult for him to under-

Notes
’ A/31/197, annex IV, resolutions an political questions.
2 Officio1Reco~~ls
P/e~~ory Meetings,

of the

Ger?e,nf

Asse~d~ly,

Thirty-first

Session,

of the Go~erul

Assernhly,

Tllirty-j?rst

Session,

of the Genonl

Assembly,

Thirty-first

Session,

7th meeting, para. 254.
3 A/31/197, annex 1.

4 C$ficinl
Records
Plemwy
Mectitzgs,

1lth meeting, para. 42.

s A/C.413 l/SR.30.
6 Ojflcirri
Amexes,

27

Records

agenda item.26, document A/31/113.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

lJMTF,D

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Units sont en vente dam les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde enticr. Informez-vous
auprbs de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estln en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

83-60&01-April

1%35--2,200
