S/PV.8464

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8464th meeting

Tuesday, 19 February 2019, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndong Mba. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-04780 (E)
*1904780*

S/PV.8464

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

to allow that to happen. Of course, I call upon them
to immediately start the implementation of the
agreement and agree on the details of the second phase
of redeployments in Al-Hudaydah, which we hope will
lead to the demilitarization of that city.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Griffiths is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Amman.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council.
Since I last talked to the Council a few weeks
ago (see S/PV.8441), we have made some significant
progress in the implementation of the agreements
reached in Stockholm towards the latter part of last
year. The parties have now confirmed to Lieutenant
General Michael Lollesgaard and to me their agreement
to the first phase of the Al-Hudaydah redeployment
plan. Naturally, I welcome the agreement they have
reached — and I hope the Council does — and the
commitment it shows by the parties to implement the
Stockholm Agreement and the promises made in that
meeting in early December.
Under the leadership of Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard, the parties agreed to redeploy from the
ports of Saleef and Ras Isa in a first step, followed
by a redeployment from Al-Hudaydah port itself and
critical parts of Al-Hudaydah city associated with
humanitarian facilities in the second step. That will
facilitate humanitarian access to the Red Sea Mills,
where, as we know, significant tonnage of grain has
been waiting to be distributed to the people of Yemen. I
am grateful to both parties, who have made concessions
2/20

19/02/2019

This agreement would not have been possible
without the strong leadership of Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard. He has led those negotiations with patience
and persistence. I personally am very grateful to him for
those qualities. It would not have been possible either
without the strong commitments demonstrated by the
parties. Despite deadlines being missed, the parties
have constantly shown their commitment to implement
the agreement and have consistently assured me of that
commitment. I am under no illusion about the challenges
that we face. But perhaps, for one day at least, we can
be heartened rather than dismayed by challenges. I am
heartened by both parties’ current reminders to me and
my colleagues that this is a unique opportunity.
Since I last briefed the Security Council I have
had the privilege of meeting three times with His
Excellency President Hadi on a wide variety of issues
of concern to him and, of course, to us. I am grateful
for the flexibility that he has shown and, perhaps more
important, the guidance that he provided me and my
colleagues with regard to negotiations on Al-Hudaydah.
The progress that we announced today benefitted from
those exchanges. I rely on him to continue to give me
the benefit of his advice going forward. I should also
add that the numerous, almost daily, meetings that we
have held with the coalition continue to be invaluable
to illuminate issues on the table and allow us to achieve
progress towards their resolution.
There is momentum on Yemen. The Stockholm
Agreement, reached by the parties in December
2018, was described — reasonably, I believe — as a
breakthrough. It was a major shift and showed to the
people of Yemen that something was indeed happening.
As I have reported before, there have been signs of
increased civilian activity in Al-Hudaydah, and the
people of the city are already, at this very early stage,
seeing some tangible benefits from the significant and
consistent decrease in hostilities in that area as a result
of the Stockholm Agreement. The Agreement reached
on phase 1 is a sign that the parties are committed
keeping up the momentum of which I speak. It
demonstrates, to me at least, that the parties are able
to deliver on their commitments to turn words into
tangible progress on the ground. It reinforces trust,
19-04780

19/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

which is an essential commodity, between the parties.
Finally, most important, it shows political will.
With the beginning — possibly today or
tomorrow — of the implementation of that part of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement, we now have the opportunity
to move from the promise made in Sweden to hope
for Yemen. As I am sure Mark Lowcock will describe
shortly, an agreement on redeployments is also
important for the broader humanitarian effort in the
country. In the past few days, both Mark and I have
already underlined the parties’ responsibility to give
the World Food Programme access to the Red Sea
Mills, grain tonnage which represents enough food to
feed 3.7 million people for a month.
In recent weeks, in order to make progress on
agreements made in Sweden, I have made many visits
to Sana’a and Al-Hudaydah, meeting each time with
Abdulmalik Al-Houthi and his colleagues in the Ansar
Allah movement. I am glad to report to the Council
that he has always engaged positively with me on all
discussions that we had on Al-Hudaydah, the vital
logistical issues necessary for the introduction of a
United Nations mission in Al-Hudaydah, the release
of specific individuals and the general release of
prisoners. I am grateful for his commitment to support
all our efforts. I was back from Sana’a just yesterday,
and it is clear to me that the commitment found there
with regard to the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement is genuine and, therefore, most welcome.
We have also been very busy these past weeks
in seeking agreement for the release and exchange of
prisoners. The Council will recall that a mechanism
concerning the matter was in fact the first agreement
between the parties, and was made before we went to
Sweden in November 2018. We have held two substantial
and substantive meetings between the parties here
in Amman in recent weeks. I am very grateful to the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, and personally to the
Foreign Minister, for allowing those meetings to take
place. With the International Committee of the Red
Cross — the co-Chair of the supervisory committee — we
were able in those bilateral meetings and discussions
with the parties to make progress towards what we hope
will be the release of the first batch of prisoners. But I
should stress here that, as was always the intention of
that prisoner exchange agreement, to which I referred,
the parties and their leaders — as they have expressed
directly to me on more than one occasion — seek the
release of all prisoners on both sides of this conflict.

S/PV. 8464

As many of them remind us, “All for all” is
the watchword for this process. That remains our
commitment and responsibility as it is theirs. I would
like to think that we are not far off from agreeing and
realizing the release of a first batch, and I am very
grateful to both parties for their prompt support for
that move. We still have some work to do before it
can be finalized, not least to ensure that it is clearly
part of a larger process to provide for the release of
those who remain in prison. I hope beyond hope that
the parties can push those particular efforts forward
to reunite thousands of families and relieve the
humanitarian burden on those who have been detained
in the conflict. I should like to express my gratitude
to Peter Maurer, my good friend and President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, who took
time out from his extraordinarily busy schedule to open
the most recent of those two meetings in Amman. The
involvement of his organization, as you read out earlier
in your statement, Mr. President, guarantees the probity
and professionalism of the process.
Both parties have once again reaffirmed to me
their commitment to the statement of understanding on
Taiz, agreed in Stockholm. Members will recall that I
mentioned in my previous meeting how significant, and
almost iconic, Taiz is in this conflict, and how essential
it is that we improve freedom of access and movement
of peoples in that area. I will focus all our efforts on
meaningful steps to make a difference there, as well.
We need to agree on small steps now, not big things
later. No one is suggesting that the process will be
straightforward. Taiz is a place that has witnessed some
of the worst parts of the conflict, but we like to think
that we have a good chance of seeing some tangible
progress in the coming weeks.
I have said to the Council — on more than one
occasion, I am afraid — that Al-Hudaydah is the centre
of gravity of the war, and perhaps it is. In truth, our
primary interest — and in that sense, the real centre
of gravity of this conflict for us — has to be moving
towards a political solution. The agreement concerning
phase 1 of redeployment in Al-Hudaydah, as confirmed
today, gives us permission, I like to think, to look ahead
beyond the agreements made in Stockholm. While we
need tangible progress very clearly before we may move
forward, we can now imagine how we would begin to
address those serious substantive difficulties. I believe
that we have an obligation to focus our minds on finding
that political solution. We need to start talking about

19-047803/20

S/PV.8464

The situation in the Middle East

the future. The beginning of a discussion on political
and security arrangements would constitute, in our
view, a major step forward and an important statement
of intent from the parties that they are determined,
together with us and the support of the Council, to
bring the conflict to an end.
The members of the Council will recall that the
Stockholm Agreement was only ever intended to be
a preliminary step — a humanitarian step — of great
moment, but not the end of the story. Indeed, the
parties, civil society, women’s representatives and the
international community have repeatedly reminded me,
as the Council did when we last met on this subject,
that a comprehensive solution is the only way to put
an end to the conflict. I note in particular the growing
support of southern groups to our efforts and their clear
desire for a peaceful settlement to the conflict and their
broader concerns regarding the future of the country.
We therefore have an overriding responsibility to
build on the momentum created in Stockholm towards
resolving the conflict. I say that without, I hope,
being naïve about the difficulties that we will face,
and continue to face, in implementing promises and
agreements. There will be setbacks, but we need to look
beyond those to the horizon that is before us.
Next week — as I am sure Mark Lowcock will tell
us — we will be reminded in Geneva of the financial
needs of the humanitarian programmes in Yemen and
their extraordinary dimensions, as well as the courage
of those colleagues who fulfil their responsibilities and
obligations daily. That reminder in Geneva reminds us
here, I would like to suggest, that the cost of the war, if
our collective efforts fail, will continue to rise steeply,
at the tragic expense of the people in Yemen.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: Last week, my office released
the 2019 Humanitarian Needs Overview for Yemen.
Agencies pooled data from more than 100 earlier
assessments. We also collected new data from nearly
7,000 locations in 331 of Yemen’s 333 districts, and we
conducted more than 22,000 interviews. With a stronger
evidence base than ever, the 2019 Humanitarian Needs
Overview represents an authoritative analysis of the
scale, drivers and trajectory of Yemen’s crisis, and it
paints a bleak picture.
4/20

19/02/2019

About 80 per cent of the population, 24 million
people, need humanitarian assistance and protection.
Some 20 million people need help securing food,
including nearly 10 million who are just a step away
from famine. Nearly 240,000 of those people are right
now facing catastrophic levels of hunger. Almost
20 million people lack access to adequate health care,
and nearly 18 million do not have enough clean water
or access to adequate sanitation. More than 3 million
people, including 2 million children, are acutely
malnourished. Some 3.3 million remain displaced from
their homes, including 685,000 who have fled fighting
along the west coast since June 2018.
Those numbers are considerably worse than
they were last year. Conflict and a failure to respect
international humanitarian law, together with the
economic collapse in mid-2018, are the driving forces
behind that deterioration. The most severe needs are
in areas of active hostilities or with large numbers of
forcibly displaced people. Violence has declined in
Al-Hudaydah following the Stockholm Agreement, but
it has continued elsewhere and escalated in some frontline areas, particularly in Hajjah.
Amid the conflict, the economy continues to
unravel. The Yemeni rial is again losing value. The
exchange rate is around 600 rials to the dollar, down
from about 400, which was the level it recovered to
following substantial injections of foreign exchange
into the Central Bank by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
in late 2018. As the rate falls, so the price of food for
ordinary people rises.
In short, things are very bad. Unfortunately, aid
agencies are running out of money. Among the many
challenges the aid operation faces, funding is quickly
becoming the biggest. We expect current resources to be
used up by the end of March, just six weeks from now.
The United Nations-coordinated humanitarian
relief operation in Yemen is the biggest in the
world. It has delivered impressive results. More than
250 humanitarian agencies, most of them Yemeni
organizations, worked together in 2018 to assist nearly
8 million people across the country every month. We
delivered a step-change in the operation last year. The
World Food Programme reached more than 10 million
people last December, which was a record achievement.
Compared to 2017, the number of people who received
health assistance increased by 40 per cent last year, to
12 million, and the number of people who were helped
19-04780

19/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8464

with water, hygiene and sanitation needs rose by 20 per
cent, to 11.5 million.

imports were being denied entry by the Government of
Yemen under Decree 75.

Of the many milestones achieved last year, three
stand out in terms of impact, scale and efficiency. At
the beginning of last year, 107 districts were facing
extreme food insecurity. By the end of the year, 45 of
those districts were no longer at the pre-famine stage,
because of the massive, synchronized and rapid scale-up
of all forms of humanitarian assistance.

Many operational challenges faced by humanitarian
agencies are eventually overcome through dialogue,
and it is by resolving those challenges that we have
been able to reach so many people in all 333 districts.
As Martin Griffiths said, we are also hopeful that an
assessment mission will finally be able to reach the Red
Sea Mills in Al-Hudaydah in the next few days.

Working through public institutions, UNICEF,
the World Health Organization (WHO) and
non-governmental organizations stemmed the largest
cholera outbreak in modern history, reducing the number
of new cases from 1 million in 2017 to about 370,000
in 2018. UNICEF, WHO and nutrition partners, also
working through public institutions, helped to identify
and cure a higher percentage of children suffering
from severe acute malnutrition than in any comparable
operation globally. Nutrition programmes last year
treated 310,000 children for severe malnutrition, about
20,000 more children than originally planned.

The operation in Yemen also faces risks of aid
diversion that exist in all conflict settings. Those risks,
too, can be mitigated. My office continues to coordinate
an independent, impartial third-party monitoring
programme that covers the entire humanitarian
response plan. Early results have been positive, which
indicates that the vast majority of assistance is going
where it is supposed to go. It is therefore is clear that,
while daunting, the operational challenges in Yemen
can be managed.

None of that would have been possible without the
generous funding provided by all our donors in 2018:
nearly $2.6 billion, or 83 per cent of the humanitarian
response plan requirements. The single-most important
contribution was the $930 million we received from
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. It was not just a large commitment; it was
also transferred in a single payment early in the year.
Without it, the scale-up I have described would not
have been possible.
As the largest humanitarian operation in the world,
agencies in Yemen face obstacles beyond funding. The
operating environment is far from what it should be.
Humanitarian agencies struggle every day with issues
such as delays in the issuance of visas, restrictions
on movements, delays in imports, bureaucratic
impediments, restrictions on monitoring or interference
with principled humanitarian action.
We are particularly concerned that the operating
environment is becoming ever-more restrictive in
northern Yemen. At the same time, we are concerned
that Cabinet Decree 75, imposed by the Government
of Yemen last year, continues to hinder commercial
fuel imports, which are needed to pump water and
keep hospital generators running, among other critical
functions. As of yesterday, four vessels carrying the
equivalent of half an average month’s commercial fuel

I cannot say the same of funding-related challenges.
Let me explain the position clearly. The aid operation
will grind to a halt without adequate resources, at a time
when more people need more help than ever before.
Humanitarian agencies aim to assist up to 19 million
people across the country in 2019. That is more than
half the population, including 12 million people who
will receive emergency food assistance every month.
It will cost more than $4 billion to deliver all the
lifesaving and protection programmes set out in the
2019 United Nations-coordinated response plan, which
was released today. The response plan lays out a clear,
evidence-based and prioritized strategy to address
hunger, roll back cholera and other diseases, improve
conditions for displaced people and support critical
institutions. It is a lifeline for millions of Yemenis.
As Mr. Griffiths reminded the Council, the
Secretary-General will convene a high-level pledging
conference in Geneva a week from today, to be
co-hosted by Sweden and Switzerland. That event will
provide an important opportunity for the international
community to make clear its continuing commitment
to save the lives of the starving and vulnerable people
of Yemen, as we continue to work in the way that
Mr. Griffiths described towards political solutions. I
urge Member States to attend the Geneva meeting at a
senior level and to pledge generously. Together we can
save millions more lives in Yemen, but only if we have
the resources we need.

19-047805/20

S/PV.8464

The situation in the Middle East

Let me make one last point, again similar to one
Mr. Griffiths made. The year 2019 needs to be one not
just of saving lives but also of recovery. I would like at
the end of the year to be able to say that Yemen is no
longer the world’s worst humanitarian crisis. I would
like to see a reduction in the number of people who
need humanitarian assistance. The people of Yemen
need a realistic chance of a better future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Once again, we
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, as well as
their teams, for all their work and dedication. We have
heard what Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock said about
the involvement of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the World Food Programme in some of
the things that have been happening on the ground. I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
those organizations and everything they are doing to
try and make the lives of ordinary people in Yemen
easier. We also welcome Lieutenant General Michael
Lollesgaard to his new post and thank Major General
Patrick Cammaert for his contribution. I will be brief,
Mr. President, because we will have closed consultations
later with Mr. Griffiths and General Lollesgaard.
We very much welcome the progress that has
been made very recently over the weekend. There was
particularly good news about the ports of Saleef and Ras
Isa. We look forward to what will happen in the next
phase involving Hudaydah port and parts of the city. As.
Mr. Lowcock’s briefing emphasized, access to the Red
Sea Mills is vital — we are running out of superlatives
for the word critical — but it is obvious that we have
to be able to have the humanitarian agencies obtain
access to the food supplies there. Therefore, these steps
towards ensuring that access are extremely welcome.
As Mr. Griffith’s briefing emphasized, we need
meaningful implementation to begin. It is extremely
welcome that the parties have been able to work closely
with the Special Envoy, and the commitments they
have given him are extremely necessary. But I think
what both briefings emphasized is how important it is
6/20

19/02/2019

that those commitments get translated into meaningful
practice on the ground.
I want to say a word, if I may, about standing up
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement. It is obvious that the Mission has an
important role to play in getting implementation under
way and making sure that it is comprehensive. I know
there have been some teething problems with some of
the logistical arrangements for the Mission. I would
therefore like to use this opportunity to call on the all
the parties to do their utmost to ensure that Mission
personnel can get into place and do their work.
Mr. Griffiths said some encouraging things
about tackling the prisoner exchanges — we need to
finalize those. I think we all know that that is a crucial
confidence-building measure, as is a commitment to
the next round of talks. But I would particularly like to
echo what Mr. Griffiths said about the need — regarding
Taiz — for taking small steps now, not big steps later.
I think that is absolutely important. There is often in
peace processes a feeling that one should always go
for the biggest outcome possible. And, of course, in
principle that is right. But the people of Yemen, as we
heard very eloquently today from our briefers, need to
see tangible results, and they need to see them fast. I
therefore think that taking small steps now is absolutely
the right approach.
Regarding the political process overall, taking
careful, incremental steps forward is probably the way
to go. Mr. Griffiths set out the difficulties, and we
recognize that the peace and momentum that have been
achieved so far remain fragile; nevertheless, if we are
to try to bring peace and help to the people of Yemen,
who have suffered for so long, we need to keep going no
matter what the difficulty is.
Mr. Lowcock very eloquently described how the
challenges on the humanitarian side remain dire. And I
was very worried by what he had to say about operations
grinding to a halt. The urgency of making progress
cannot be overestimated. We hope that the pledging
conference to be held in Geneva on 26 February will be
able to give a boost to these important efforts.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that longerterm progress towards a political settlement — towards
a more representative settlement in Yemen — is
absolutely vital for the peace, security and stability
of the country and the health and well-being of the
Yemeni people.
19-04780

19/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8464

Mr. Delattre (France): First of all, I would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, as well as the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for
their very informative briefings and their exemplary
dedication and that of their teams. I would like to revisit
briefly the following three points.

delivery of humanitarian assistance and trade flows.
The initial progress achieved with the lifting of
bureaucratic obstacles must continue. It is urgent in
particular to allow access to the Red Sea Mills, as has
been mentioned, and to then reach as quickly as possible
an agreement to ensure that the critically important
route between Sana’a and Al-Hudaydah can be used by
humanitarian actors.

First, after the adoption of two resolutions and
the deployment on the ground of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, the
priority now is for the parties remain committed to the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. It is also
essential that the parties ensure the safety and security
of Mission personnel, as well as their free movement.

The Stockholm Agreement must also make it
possible to protect civilians — in particular women
and children, who are often forced to leave their
homes due to conflict, which makes them very
vulnerable — as well as humanitarian personnel. Mark
Lowcock underscored very clearly that it is vital to
provide a financial response to the humanitarian crisis
in Yemen. France will announce once again this year a
contribution to the humanitarian response plan. France
also has announced that it will provide a contribution to
the peace support facility that was presented in January
in Berlin.

As we have been informed, tangible progress has
already been made. In that regard, we welcome the
agreement reached last weekend in the context of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee chaired by
Lieutenant General Lollesgaard, on the first phase of
redeployment, as well as the ongoing discussions on
the exchange of prisoners. These are encouraging steps
that reduce the threat of a resumption of hostilities.
Discussions should therefore continue so as to further
bolster the progress made; the redeployment operations
on the ground agreed this weekend should be launched;
and we must move towards the second phase of the
redeployment and exchange of prisoners. The goal is
to strengthen trust among the parties and to make the
process irreversible by creating a positive dynamic.
The situation in Al-Hudaydah, however, remains
fragile, and military operations are continuing in the
rest of the country. As we noted earlier, we remain
concerned at these continuing operations as well as
at the ongoing threat of ballistic transfers. The parties
must continue to maintain an ever stronger engagement
with the Special Envoy and with General Lollesgaard
by playing a responsible and constructive role. Failing
that, sanctions could be imposed against any individuals
and entities obstructing the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement.
Secondly, as my British colleague reminded us,
this progress should not make us forget to what extent
the humanitarian situation remains worrisome. I can
only echo what has just been stated so eloquently by
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.
The Agreement reached in Stockholm must lead to full
access and to the immediate, secure and unimpeded

The Geneva conference will be an opportunity
for the Council, regional actors and, more broadly, the
entire international community to send a very strong
signal of support to the Yemeni people.
Thirdly, and lastly, we should bear in mind that the
conclusion of a negotiated political settlement is the
ultimate goal. That is why it is crucial that we remain
collectively mobilized in the process of supporting
the efforts of the Special Envoy. Indeed, everything
is interconnected. Without significant progress on the
ground, prospects for future negotiations will become
more remote. Consistent messages must be conveyed to
Yemeni and regional actors, and we therefore encourage
the Special Representative to continue to reach out to
all the parties in order to continue making progress in
the dynamic under way.
Relaunching the discussions in a comprehensive
political framework is the only path towards a lasting
solution to the conflict in Yemen that will make it
possible to ease the humanitarian suffering of the
Yemeni people. We fully support the efforts of the
Special Envoy, Martin Griffiths, and call on all parties
to perpetuate and translate into action the positive
momentum created by the Stockholm negotiations.
On the demanding path towards peace in Yemen,
the unity of the Security Council is our most valuable
asset. This is not the case, as we know, in all crises — to
put it very diplomatically — so let us take advantage of

19-047807/20

S/PV.8464

The situation in the Middle East

this unity as leverage to help find a political solution,
which today, in spite of the magnitude of the difficulties
faced, is within reach.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank today’s briefers for their valuable inputs into
our discussion. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our full support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy, Martin Griffiths, and Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock and to express our appreciation for the
work done by United Nations personnel in Yemen.
I would like to make three comments.
First, I wish to address the current situation in
Al-Hudaydah. I think that we are all united in the
view that the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement is currently of the utmost importance. We
strongly believe that consensus on the modalities
of the redeployment of forces is a matter of urgency
and that the protracted stalemate poses a growing risk
to the holding of the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah and
could lead to a further escalation of hostilities. We are
therefore encouraged by the important progress made
by the parties last weekend, and we commend the
agreement they reached on the first phase of the mutual
redeployment of forces.
We encourage the parties to build on this positive
development and to finalize the agreement on the
second phase of the process. At the same time, it is
vital that the parties refrain from taking any action that
could jeopardize the ceasefire or undermine efforts to
build confidence. We are alarmed by the recent surge
in violence across Yemen and condemn any acts of
violence against the civilian population. We would
also recall that all parties must respect international
humanitarian law, in particular as it pertains to the
protection of civilians, as well as international human
rights law.
Secondly, Poland remains concerned at the fact
that the Stockholm Agreement has not yet resulted in
an improvement of the dire humanitarian situation in
Yemen. There is still no access to the Red Sea Mills
grain silos and their critical grain store, and the main
road linking Al-Hudaydah port to Sana’a is still
blocked. We urge the parties to prioritize the opening
of humanitarian corridors and to allow access to all
humanitarian facilities without further delay. We expect
them to allow and facilitate the flow of humanitarian
and commercial imports — including fuel — into
Yemen and to ensure safe and unhindered access for
8/20

19/02/2019

humanitarian assistance and personnel to all parts of
the country.
Thirdly, it is also very important that the parties
accelerate efforts to implement the other important
steps to which they agreed in Stockholm, namely, the
exchange of prisoners and the settlement of the situation
in Taiz. We call upon the Government of Yemen
and the Houthi to continue to cooperate closely and
constructively with the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hudaydah Agreement and the Special Envoy in
that regard.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the parties’ obligation
to guarantee the safety and security of the advance
team and all United Nations personnel and ensure their
unrestricted access and freedom of movement. We
strongly urge them to extend all possible support for
United Nations personnel in Yemen, including through
assistance in advancing the additional deployment of
United Nations staff and equipment.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Mark Lowcock, for their informative briefings. I
will focus my statement on two main issues, namely,
the status of implementing the Stockholm Agreement
and the humanitarian developments.
On the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, nearly two months have passed since the
Council’s adoption of resolution 2451 (2018), which
endorses the Stockholm Agreement between the Yemeni
Government and the Houthis. That is an important and
vital step for a political solution that ends the crisis
and enables the alleviation of the human suffering of
our brotherly Yemeni people. Regrettably, the lack of
compliance with the Security Council resolutions on
Yemen and their full implementation continues to be
a salient characteristic of the situation, starting with
resolution 2140 (2014) and ending with resolution 2452
(2019), including resolutions 2201 (2015) and 2216
(2015). If those resolutions had been implemented,
we could have put an end to the political crisis in that
brotherly country.
In the interim, we have not seen a constructive
approach for the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement on Al-Hudaydah. Indeed, no tangible
progress has been made in the redeployment of forces,
19-04780

19/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

beginning with the ports and cities of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa. That is compounded by repeated
obstacles hindering the work of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, which has not been able to
carry out its tasks of monitoring the implementation as
defined by Security Council resolutions.
However, we underscore the important role of the
Committee in resuming its work, which ended two
days before its fourth meeting and made possible an
agreement on the implementation of the first phase
of the redeployment plan through the withdrawal of
forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Ras Isa and
Saleef as well as from certain areas in the city so that
the second phase could be implemented according to
a well-defined and agreed time frame, pursuant to the
Stockholm Agreement, as endorsed by resolutions 2451
(2018) and 2452 (2019).
The political will of the two parties is extremely
important, as indicated by the Special Envoy, for
achieving the desired progress. However, it is also
crucial for words to be matched by deeds through the
full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement,
since that would enable the next phase of consultations
to be resumed, encompassing all remaining aspects
in order to put an end to the crisis on the basis of the
relevant Council resolutions, notably resolution 2216
(2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism and the outcome of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference.
On the humanitarian situation, which is increasingly
critical, we would reaffirm the importance of the full
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement in order
to alleviate human suffering through the opening up
of safe corridors to deliver humanitarian assistance to
those in need in all affected areas. The United Nations
and its specialized agencies would be able to access
the Red Sea Mills, which contain significant grain
stocks that would allow feeding nearly 3.7 million
people for 30 days. We also welcome the call of the
Yemeni Government to facilitate safe access to
those mills and open up the roads for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
The statistics put forward by Mr. Lowcock reflect
the acute deterioration in the humanitarian situation,
which needs 26 per cent more funding for the
humanitarian response plan than was needed last year.
The international community should redouble its efforts
to finance the humanitarian response plan for this year,

S/PV. 8464

by participating in the high-level pledging conference
to be held on 26 February in Geneva. That contribution
must be constructive in order to reflect the importance
of addressing this crisis. In that regard, we recall the
important role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates, the United States of America,
the United Kingdom and Kuwait in financing 83 per
cent of last year’s response plan. The state of Kuwait
looks forward to taking part in the conference within
the context of its ongoing humanitarian approach to
alleviate the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people.
In conclusion, we reiterate our appeal to the parties
in Yemen to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement
on Al-Hudaydah and its three ports, as well as the
prisoner-exchange agreement and the statement of
understanding on the city of Taiz, so as to complement
the efforts of the Special Envoy with a view to
reaching a political solution based on the three agreedupon political terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference and the relevant Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2216 (2015). That would put
an end to this crisis and preserve the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen, as well
as non-interference in its internal affairs.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for their briefings.
The international community is currently paying
close attention to the issue of Yemen and has high
expectations for the restoration of peace and stability
in the country. The Stockholm Agreement has brought
about hope for peace among the Yemeni people. The
Security Council must reach a timely understanding on
the implementation of the agreement by all parties and
on the challenges they are facing. It must also continue
to play a positive role on the issue of Yemen.
At the moment, all Yemeni parties are abiding by
the ceasefire agreement in general. The Redeployment
Coordination Committee, under the auspices of
the United Nations and with the participation of all
Yemeni parties, is conducting this work in an orderly
fashion and arrived at a consensus on 17 February on
arrangements for the first phase. The Yemeni parties
are implementing the prisoner-exchange agreement
and addressing the issue of the city of Taiz and the
large-scale prisoner-exchange plan.

19-047809/20

S/PV.8464

The situation in the Middle East

China welcomes those positive developments. At
the same time, as indicated by the representative of
Kuwait, we see that there are challenges remaining. The
practical difficulties in implementing the agreement
cannot be underestimated. There is still fighting in
Al-Hudaydah and its surrounding areas. The two parties
still have differences on the release of prisoners and the
issue of Taiz. The humanitarian situation in Yemen is
dire. Against that backdrop, I would like to share the
following comments.
First, we should continue with the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement. The Yemeni parties
should effectively implement the Agreement, address
their differences through dialogue and achieve broader
consensus. Efforts should be made to accelerate the
deployment of the United Nations mission in Yemen in
order to assist and monitor the implementation of the
Agreement. The Yemeni parties should also strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations, provide
assistance to and facilitate the Mission’s deployment
and effectively guarantee the security of international
personnel in Yemen. The Security Council should take
full account of and respect the opinions of the country
in question and the countries in the region, and should
remain united.
Secondly, we must intensify efforts to ease
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. The Yemeni
parties must actively cooperate with United Nations
humanitarian assistance efforts and facilitate its rapid
and unhindered humanitarian access. The international
community must provide food, medicine and funds in
a targeted fashion in order to support the economic
improvement and price stabilization in Yemen so as to
meet the basic subsistence needs of the Yemeni people.
China looks forward to the positive results of the highlevel pledging conference on the Yemen humanitarian
response plan, to be held on 26 February.
Thirdly, we should push the Yemeni parties to
sustain effective political dialogue and negotiations.
We must insist on the role of the United Nations as
the main channel. The Yemeni parties should also
strengthen cooperation with Special Envoy Griffiths
and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard, and maintain
contact with them in order to build mutual trust and
narrow their differences. Under the leadership of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee, political
will must be translated into genuine action. We look
forward to seeing the early launching of the next round
of peace talks under the leadership of Special Envoy
10/20

19/02/2019

Martin Griffiths so as to achieve a balanced settlement
that takes into account the interests of all parties and
helps to restore peace, stability and normalcy in Yemen.
Political means are the only way to resolve the
Yemeni issue. All parties must safeguard the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Yemen and, based on resolution 2216 (2015) and other
resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and
its implementation mechanism, as well as the outcome
document of the National Dialogue Conference, support
efforts to reach a broad and inclusive political solution
through dialogue and consultation. The international
community should create favourable conditions for the
Yemeni parties to implement the agreements towards a
political solution.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize that China is
willing to work with all parties in a concerted effort
to continue to play a constructive role in moving the
political process in Yemen forward and improving the
humanitarian situation.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
thanking Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings,
which provide valuable updates on the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement and on the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. We affirm our full support for
their efforts.
Like others, we are also deeply concerned about the
slow progress of the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement given the inference that the required
humanitarian assistance has not been fully delivered to
the Yemeni people. However, we believe that the good
faith is still there. We recognize that the Agreement is
delicate and requires complicated technicalities to be
agreed upon prior to its implementation. Nevertheless,
the commitment has been made, and the parties should
make all the efforts necessary to ensure that the
Agreement is fulfilled. For both the Security Council
and the parties, that is a matter of great urgency, as we
are under the scrutiny of the international community.
Having said that and in response to the briefings,
Indonesia would like to emphasize three main points.
First, securing the corridor for humanitarian
assistance should be the top priority of all the parties.
They must make every effort to provide access by,
among other things, demining the road and clearing the
way to allow for the safe passage of the humanitarian
convoy. It is essential for all parties to permit access for
19-04780

19/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian personnel to the Red Sea Mills compound
and to ensure their safety and security during the
delivery of aid. The world cannot afford to once again
lose those important commodities, which can feed
3.5 million needy people. That is non-negotiable. Even
as we speak in the Chamber, there are many people,
in particular women and children, who are dying
from hunger and malnutrition. We listened to UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock’s briefing, which
described the dire situation, the increasing risk of a
pandemic, the presence of cholera and malnutrition, the
ongoing operational and logistical challenges and, of
course, the need for international funding. It is clear that
the international community must assist in that effort.
That leads me to my second point, which is
that the full implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement would provide a more stable, safer and
more secure humanitarian corridor in the longer term.
The implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement
is also the gateway to a political process that could
be replicated in other parts of Yemen. It is a building
block for greater reconciliation in Yemen with the aim
of ending the conflict. We are pleased to hear that
the parties have reached agreement on phase 1 of the
mutual redeployment of forces and have also agreed in
principle on phase 2. Indonesia commends the parties
that have shown their good faith in reaching agreement,
in particular the Government of Yemen, which crossed
the front line to attend the meeting. Special thanks
should also be extended to General Cammaert, who set
up the initial work, and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard
for facilitating the agreement. That is a critical part of
the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement, and
we are hopeful that the redeployment of troops and the
demilitarization of the city of Al-Hudaydah and the
ports can soon be completed. That means the United
Nations can now fully deploy the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement, with
only five months left to put in place its initial work
in Al-Hudaydah. Indonesia is ready to contribute its
personnel on the ground, if needed, in the quest for
peace. We recognize that the steps that I have outlined
above are not easy and require the trust that does not
currently fully exist between the parties. We encourage
Martin Griffiths to continue to build trust.
That links to my third point, namely, that all parties
should exercise restraint and de-escalate tensions beyond
Al-Hudaydah. Any military escalation or hostilities
elsewhere may diminish trust and undermine not only

S/PV. 8464

the prospect of peace but also the implementation of the
commitments already agreed. However, in our view,
exercising restraint and de-escalating tensions beyond
Al-Hudaydah will significantly strengthen trust and
gradually build the essential confidence among all the
parties. That is the key to the full implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement. We would like others to also
strongly support the push for a second dialogue.
To sum up, Mr. Griffiths referred to the increasing
political will and that there was a genuine commitment
by the parties to the conflict. In our view, that must
be tested. While we are pleased to hear about the
progress that the Special Envoy mentioned, it needs
to be tested through concrete action, among other
measures, by all parties first, by the provision of access
for all humanitarian efforts; secondly, the withdrawal
of troops; and thirdly, the release of all prisoners — as
Mr. Griffiths said, “all for all”. It is time for them to
reunite with their families. Those are only a few points
that would clearly demonstrate that there are tangible
intentions and good faith. In short, that is needed to
ensure the further opening up of the dialogue. Lastly,
also to quote Mr. Griffiths, Al-Hudaydah is the centre
of gravity in the conflict. Let us focus on Al-Hudaydah,
while also not forgetting other areas that are part
of Yemen.
In conclusion, I was also glad to hear the Special
Envoy say that something was happening and people,
in particular in Al-Hudaydah, had noted it. I hope that
other Yemenis in different parts of the country can say
the same: something is happening, and there is hope for
our children.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): We thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their informative
briefings. We also welcome the appointment of
Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard and wish
him every success as Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and Head of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement.
We also join in congratulating the members of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee on making
progress in planning for the redeployment of forces,
in line with the Al-Hudaydah agreement, during their
fourth joint meeting, held in Al-Hudaydah city from
16 to 17 February. The meeting was a commendable

19-0478011/20

S/PV.8464

The situation in the Middle East

confidence-building measure by the parties, and
we congratulate them on agreeing on phase 1 of the
mutual redeployment of forces. We look forward to the
Committee convening again within a week to finalize
phase 2.
South Africa remains concerned about the serious
humanitarian and security situation in Yemen. We
reiterate that, in order to ensure a long-term solution
to the crisis in Yemen, it is necessary for all parties
to commit to a political process. We also welcome
the proposal made by the Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee to move forward in the
implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We
hope that this commitment will result in tangible process
that can bring peace and stability to the region. It is
imperative that all parties make every effort to adhere
to the ceasefire agreement and the full implementation
of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We want to reiterate
that the conflict cannot be resolved through military
might. The parties must engage constructively and
in good faith in order to overcome the obstacles and
find a political solution that can end the conflict. That
includes the continued exchange of prisoners, which is
an important confidence-building measure that could
contribute to reaching a political solution.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
dire. We call on all parties to ensure that the necessary
humanitarian aid can safely reach its intended
destinations. Most of Yemen’s imports, including
food and humanitarian assistance, enter through
Al-Hudaydah port, which the ongoing fighting has
frequently put out of action. Any hindrance to the
delivery of this vital humanitarian aid after agreement
has been reached among all the parties concerned can
only exacerbate an already severe crisis. We reiterate
that the only sustainable solution is a Yemeni-led
negotiated political settlement that is inclusive and fair
and puts the interests and welfare of all the citizens of
Yemen first.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock
for keeping us informed about the situation in Yemen,
particularly with regard to the implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement and Yemen’s difficult
humanitarian situation. We have taken note of the
progress on the political front that Mr. Griffiths has
described, and we commend his efforts to advance the
implementation of the Agreement.
12/20

19/02/2019

We firmly condemn the violent acts committed by
both parties and call for an end to the hostilities and
provocations that are jeopardizing the achievements
that have been made, especially the ceasefire, which
requires an absolute commitment on both sides. We
are pleased with the efforts that the parties have made
to participate in and agree on the first phase of the
withdrawal of fighters from Al-Hudaydah governorate,
which will enable the United Nations to monitor the
ceasefire more effectively. We thank the parties for the
progress they have made in finalizing a list of prisoners,
which is a step forward in the implementation of the
prisoner exchange agreement signed in Stockholm.
We believe those actions will have a positive effect
on the efforts to create trust between the parties, and
we congratulate Mr. Griffiths and the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their excellent work in
that regard.
We should not forget that the ultimate goal of all
the diplomatic efforts being made with regard to this
conflict is to reach a political solution that will promote a
sustainable ceasefire throughout the country. And while
we understand that all the attention has been focused on
implementing the Al-Hudaydah agreement, owing to the
importance of the city’s port, it is important to ensure
that we do not lose sight of other parts of the country
where the war has given the populations affected no letup. In that regard, we emphatically urge the parties to
the conflict to respect international humanitarian law
and refrain from jeopardizing the lives and safety of
civilians whose hopes of living in peace and rebuilding
their lives are little by little being restored, thanks to
the agreements that have been reached.
In his statement Mr. Lowcock discussed the
most worrying aspect of this conflict, the terrible
humanitarian situation, which after so many years of
war and economic and institutional collapse is affecting
millions of people. This must be the main point of
reference for all of our actions. The parties must
guarantee immediate access for humanitarian workers
to the Red Sea Mills in Al-Hudaydah, for the lives of
thousands depend on it. We cannot allow starvation
to be used as a weapon of war, and we hope that the
agreements arrived at this weekend can finally ensure
that the people affected receive the food they need.
We have listened to Mr. Lowcock’s call to secure
sufficient funds for the humanitarian assistance and
protection that Yemenis so desperately need, and in that
regard, we echo his call to the donor conference to raise
19-04780

19/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

funds to be held in Geneva on 26 February. We hope
the conference will meet expectations and enable us to
finance the national response plan for 2019 designed
to supply assistance based on humanitarian principles
and thereby mitigate the disastrous situation of the
people of Yemen. We reiterate that the Dominican
Republic remains committed to contributing to
the Council’s efforts to implement the Stockholm
Agreement through the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and the United Nations Mission to support
the Hudaydah Agreement.
Lastly, after the signing of the Agreement, the
Council has remained united with regard to the
situation afflicting the people of Yemen. Only the
express political will of the parties can enable us to put
an end to this scourge, and the international community
is waiting for it.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I too would like to thank Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for their briefings.
In Belgium’s view it is essential that the Stockholm
Agreement be respected and implemented in a
realistic space of time. In view of the urgency of the
humanitarian situation, the agreement on the port of
Al-Hudaydah is especially important. We welcome the
agreement reached on the first phase of redeployment
at the last meeting of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, and we hope that implementing it according
to the agreed timetable will help build trust between
the parties and enable them to advance the political
process. It should also finally allow humanitarian
actors access to the Red Sea Mills. The situation is still
fragile, however, and we once again urge all the parties
to show restraint, refrain from inflammatory rhetoric
in the media and from mutual accusations of ceasefire
violations and focus on implementing the Agreement in
good faith. In that regard, we welcome the initiatives
that the parties have taken regarding the exchange of
prisoners. The implementation of the redeployment
plan will make it even more important to ensure the
safety of United Nations personnel. We are ready to
support the measures necessary for that.
Besides this, the efforts to improve the disastrous
humanitarian situation remain crucial. We note that
the financial needs are estimated at around $4 billion,
half of it for food aid, and we hope to see strong
commitments at next week’s donor conference in

S/PV. 8464

Geneva. We also urge the parties to facilitate access for
humanitarian assistance.
The reports of the Group of Independent
Eminent International and Regional Experts on the
recruitment of children in conflict (A/HRC/39/43) are
particularly worrying. Children are the primary victims
of the conflict in Yemen. Their recruitment must stop.
We call on all the parties to respect international
humanitarian law and take effective and urgent
measures to end the recruitment and use of children in
the conflict. We ask Mr. Griffiths to ensure that the
protection of children is central to the peace process,
and that is something that we must also address in the
framework of the sanctions regime.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings, and for their and their
teams’ tireless efforts.
On 13 February, the United States joined the United
Kingdom, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
in welcoming the adoption of resolutions 2451 (2018)
and 2452 (2019), and we reiterated our commitment
to a comprehensive political solution to the conflict
in Yemen. We are encouraged by the reconvening of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee over the
weekend and the parties’ progress towards agreement
on redeployment from Al-Hudaydah. We are also eager
to see further progress on exchanges of prisoners and
the return of the bodies of those killed in conflict. We
urge all parties involved to cooperate with the Special
Envoy’s team as he works to finalize the terms of
the exchange.
The United States is concerned about the fact that
World Food Programme officials have not yet gained
access to the Red Sea Mills. Special Envoy Griffiths
and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock had already
warned us that the grain stocks there are at risk of
rotting (see S/PV.8424), and we cannot waste any time
assessing the condition of an emergency food supply
that is meant to feed 3.7 million people. We again urge
the parties to facilitate immediate access to the Mills
and ensure that the surrounding area is safe.
The escalation of violence in Hajjah governorate in
January has reminded us that while the Al-Hudaydah
ceasefire is a promising first step, the broader conflict
persists. The Yemeni people must know, and the parties
to the conflict must understand, that the United States
remains focused, as does the Council as a whole, on

19-0478013/20

S/PV.8464

The situation in the Middle East

achieving a comprehensive, credible and durable
political settlement of the war. That will require
compromise on all sides, so that we can start the long
process of ensuring the country’s recovery from this
humanitarian catastrophe. Going forward, the United
States will work with the United Nations and the
members of the Security Council to ensure the success
of all United Nations efforts in Yemen, both political
and humanitarian.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Мy delegation welcomes today’s briefing on the latest
developments in Yemen. We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their excellent briefings.
My delegation would also like to warmly congratulate
Lieutenant General Michael Anker Lollesgaard on his
appointment as Chair of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and Head of the United Nations Mission in
support of the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA), and to
wish him every success in carrying out his new duties.
We also want to take this opportunity to pay special
tribute to his predecessor, Major General Patrick
Cammaert, whose commitment and methodical efforts
have helped to advance the peace process in Yemen.
Côte d’Ivoire would once again like to commend
the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts, which
have helped to make it possible to achieve the ceasefire
needed to launch an inclusive dialogue. We also
welcome the adoption of resolutions 2451 (2018) and
2452 (2019), which have established a framework for a
sustainable way out of the crisis in Yemen. We believe
that the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
on a ceasefire and of resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452
(2019) offers some hope for peace for the Yemeni
people, on whom the years of war have inflicted so
much suffering. That is why we deplore the recurring
violations of the ceasefire, which seriously undermine
the prospects for settling a crisis whose humanitarian
consequences are the worst the world has seen in the
past few decades, according to the United Nations.
In view of the situation, new initiatives, together
with the right confidence-building measures, are
desperately needed in order to enable the major players
to effectively implement the Stockholm Agreement with
the assistance of the United Nations. The Agreement
specifically covers the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah city,
the mutual redeployment of forces outside the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa, the declaration of
14/20

19/02/2019

understanding on opening humanitarian corridors for
the city of Taiz and the implementation of the agreement
on the exchange of 15,000 prisoners. With respect to the
last point, my delegation calls on the parties to finalize
the provisions of the prisoner exchange mechanism as
soon as possible in order to build confidence between
them and facilitate the comprehensive implementation
of the Agreement. In addition, we urge all stakeholders
to honour their commitments and overcome the
difficulties hindering its implementation.
Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about the serious
humanitarian crisis that continues to affect about three
quarters of the Yemeni population, or nearly 22 million
people, 14 million of whom are facing pre-famine
conditions. We encourage the international community
to respond as quickly as possible and to adapt its response
to the scale of people’s needs. We also urge Yemeni
stakeholders to continue to work to remove obstacles
to the delivery of humanitarian aid and to strengthen
measures to restore activity in the country’s ports with
a view to resuming economic and trade activities. We
also call on the warring parties to ensure the safety and
security of UNMHA’s personnel and to work with the
specialized agencies of the United Nations to facilitate
the unhindered entry and movement of food and basic
supplies for the affected populations, in accordance
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. My delegation
also welcomes the Council’s plan to hold a donors’
conference in Geneva on 26 February under the auspices
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, as part of the funding of the 2019 humanitarian
response plan, which will provide $4 billion to meet the
needs of approximately 15 million Yemenis.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the operationalization
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
which has resulted in a series of meetings among the
parties concerned, in accordance with the Stockholm
Agreement. We welcome the meetings’ constructive
discussions of the Committee’s mandate and the main
priorities of maintaining the ceasefire, redeploying the
military forces and providing access to humanitarian
aid. In view of those developments, we urge the parties
to the conflict in Yemen to refrain from any action
that could result in a resumption of hostilities in
Al-Hudaydah or other areas considered critical, and to
continue their cooperation in good faith with both the
Special Envoy and the Head of UNMHA.
19-04780

19/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its support for
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and his commitment to
a definitive and lasting solution to the crisis in Yemen,
as well as for Lieutenant General Lollesgaard and his
observation team, whose rapid deployment to the cities
of Aden, Sana’a, Al-Hudaydah and Taiz attests to the
international community’s commitment to advancing
the peace process. We reiterate our support for Mr. Mark
Lowcock in his commitment to mobilizing all of his
energies for a successful resolution to the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen. Lastly, my country reiterates its call to
the parties to the conflict to show restraint and to respect
their commitments in the context of the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement in order to give peace and
stability in Yemen a chance.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy Griffiths and UnderSecretary-General Lowcock for their comprehensive
survey of the military, political and humanitarian
situations in Yemen. We welcome the progress that
the parties made during the fourth joint meeting of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee under the
leadership of Lieutenant General Lollesgaard. We would
also like to note the efforts to deploy the United Nations
Mission in support of the Hudaydah Agreement, aimed
at helping to strengthen the intra-Yemeni agreements
reached in Stockholm and to speed up the process of
disengaging and redeploying the warring parties. That
will unquestionably make a significant contribution to
reducing the violence, not just in Al-Hudaydah but also
outside the city.
We realize that we should not expect or demand
instant results. But while we have to be patient and
persistent, we want to believe that we are now entering
a new phase in the resolution of the Yemeni conflict. In
that regard, we very much appreciate the efforts of the
United Nations to advance the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement, especially the mediation work of
Mr. Griffiths and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard. We
hope that they will help the parties realize the futility
and uselessness of attempts to resolve the conflict
militarily. From the very beginning of the conflict
in Yemen, Russia has advocated for an exclusively
political and diplomatic solution through a dialogue
that includes all the Yemeni parties. We have continued
to provide assistance, including through our contacts
with all of the country’s political forces and the parties
concerned, encouraging them to take a constructive
approach and refrain from violence.

S/PV. 8464

Regrettably, however, we have been forced to
acknowledge that despite the fact that the fragile
de-escalation in Al-Hudaydah has been maintained,
with every passing day the conflict in Yemen is
increasingly taking on the appearance of a fullon humanitarian disaster. Millions of Yemenis are
starving, with no way of getting essential medicines
and services, and are in need of one kind of assistance
or another. The country’s civilian infrastructure is in
ruins and the cost of restoring its shattered economy is
increasing exponentially.
We call on Council members to continue their
collective efforts to shift the conflict onto a political
track, achieve a nationwide ceasefire and provide
the people of Yemen with the assistance they need.
Emergency humanitarian assistance for Yemenis is a
top priority. Like many other Member States, including
Yemen’s immediate neighbours, Russia will continue to
contribute to assisting the country’s inhabitants. In our
view, foreign humanitarian aid should be provided to
all Yemeni citizens, regardless of who controls the area
where they live. We believe in ensuring strict adherence
to the provisions of international humanitarian law
and unhindered humanitarian access to all areas of
the country. It will also be important to finally allow
humanitarian and commercial goods traffic along the
main Al-Hudaydah-Sana’a route linking the coast to the
north of the country, where most of the population lives.
In conclusion, we want to stress once again that
establishing a political process in Yemen would
contribute significantly to stabilizing the situation in
the entire region. We would like to remind the Council
of our proposal to launch a process to develop a
package of security- and confidence-building measures
in the Persian Gulf and ultimately the entire Middle
East. That architecture, in which all the key countries
of the region should participate, including the Gulf
States and Iran, would not only help to strengthen a
comprehensive and indivisible system of security in
that part of the world but also to resolve its old and
new crisis situations, including the conflict in Yemen.
Threats and clashes must give way to dialogue and
interaction. We must get to work together immediately
to improve the overall atmosphere, which, incidentally,
will be a primary factor contributing to the success of
Mr. Griffiths’ efforts.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting, and to
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for their comprehensive

19-0478015/20

S/PV.8464

The situation in the Middle East

19/02/2019

briefings, in which they described to us a situation that
requires the special attention of the Security Council.
We would like to acknowledges the valuable efforts that
they and their teams are making to end the devastating
conflict in Yemen and alleviate human suffering.

extremism, which in turn leads to terrorism. In such
tragic circumstances, we fully support the humanitarian
work of the United Nations and other agencies in Yemen
and emphasize the moral and legal duty of all parties to
allow them full access to the people in need.

Implementing the important and concrete
agreements reached in Sweden will clearly be very
complex, considering that the acute distrust between the
parties is the major stumbling block to that end. In that
regard, we are encouraged by the recent developments
in the Redeployment Coordination Committee under
the able leadership of General Lollesgaard, aimed
at redeploying the military presences in the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa. We welcome the
willingness and commitment shown by the Yemeni
parties with regard to that critical aspect of the political
process launched by the United Nations and which, if
implemented, will lay the foundations for effectively
extending the ceasefire to other problem areas of
Yemen. We look forward to further and sustained
progress with regard to that issue, particularly as it
pertains to the second phase of the agreement, on which
there are already preliminary understandings.

The Yemeni parties must ensure the unrestricted
flow of commercial goods, especially food, medicine
and fuel, which among other things requires the full
opening of the ports of Aden, Al-Hudaydah and Saleef.
Priority must be given to the situation of women
and children, owing to their greater vulnerability to
psychological, physical and sexual violence, which is a
particular problem in the camps for internally displaced
persons. It is also vital to ensure that the international
community increases its contributions aimed at
stabilizing the local economy, since factors such as the
devaluation of the currency, inflation and the failure to
pay civil servants are significantly increasing the risk
of famine. The Geneva pledging conference is an ideal
venue for that purpose.

We also urge the Houthi authorities to provide
the facilities needed for deploying the United Nations
Mission in support of the Hudaydah Agreement,
including, among other things, the speedy issuance of
visas for its personnel and guarantees for their security.
In that regard, it is essential that the Yemeni parties
continue to develop confidence-building measures,
particularly for the exchange of prisoners, with the
valuable assistance of the International Committee of
the Red Cross. We also encourage them to abandon the
notion of a military response and to work to address
all differences through diplomatic dialogue. The
confrontational rhetoric and mutual accusations of
each side’s authorities and other actors involved in the
conflict must cease.
The emphasis on developing the political process in
Yemen should not overshadow the urgent need to deal
immediately and simultaneously with the country’s
humanitarian crisis, especially since it appears to be
worsening on the ground. Mr. Lowcock’s statistics on
the numbers of people suffering from food insecurity
and famine are alarming. The population’s extreme
vulnerability, which has been exacerbated by the
collapse of the country’s public services and economy,
has resulted in greater losses of life than the military
campaigns, and helps to lay the groundwork for violent
16/20

Lastly, we must also underscore that it is important
to ensure that the Council remains united in fulfilling
its responsibility to protect Yemen’s civilian population,
while demanding that the parties strictly abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law for
the protection of civilians, and that they commit in
good faith and without preconditions to the inclusive
political solution that Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths has proposed, which is the
only viable way we can end the conflict and achieve
reconciliation for the people of Yemen.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Having listened to
everyone’s statements, I believe we really have a
consensus around the table, which is a very positive
thing. I too would like to thank Mr. Lowcock,
Mr. Griffiths and General Lollesgaard for their untiring
engagement, and we welcome the progress that has
been made, including with regard to the exchange of
prisoners. While of course we are not there yet, those
efforts must continue in order to make this process
irreversible, as our French colleague just said. We must
move towards the next round and work to ensure that
all the remaining bureaucratic obstacles are overcome.
Mr. Lowcock cited several concrete examples as to how
that could be done. Demining must also be stepped up
so that we can actually access the food that is in the Red
Sea Mills.
19-04780

19/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

As Mr. Griffiths underscored in his briefing, I
also welcome the need and objective of engaging in
the political process, which is extremely important;
we must move in that direction. It is essential for
the political process to produce a comprehensive
solution. What does that mean? We must ensure that
all groups are included in the process. I believe that
Mr. Griffiths mentioned that the southern groups have
already expressed interest in such a process. In this
very complicated country, we must consider all those
groups. Some have mentioned that there is a flare-up of
some conflict in the Hajjah governorate. I believe that
it is paramount for all underrepresented groups to be
part and parcel of the political process, and that their
interests be taken into consideration.
Moreover, with regard to not just this peace process
but all processes, I want to again repeat what I said
the last time (see S/PV.8441), it is very important that
the interests of women, youth and underrepresented
groups be addressed, especially children. I would like
to echo and again support what Mr. Lowcock said about
the recruitment of youth: what is happening there is
unacceptable, and that should also be a criterion for our
sanctions work.
Everyone around the table has said that there is
no alternative but to move towards a political process.
That also means that everyone around the table agrees
that there is no military solution to the problem, and
therefore, instead of investing in arms, we should invest
more in responding to the plea by Mr. Lowcock for
humanitarian support.

S/PV. 8464

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.
With the same interest as always, we have listened
to the briefings by the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
on the implementation of resolutions 2451 (2018) and
2452 (2019). In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea welcomed the dialogue initiated between
the Government of Yemen and the representatives of
the Houthis — a dialogue that took shape with the
signing of the Stockholm Agreement and that is being
implemented relatively well on the ground.
Our delegation would once again like to emphasize
here that any solution to the conflict must come from the
negotiating table. The latest indications from the parties
to the conflict of a willingness to negotiate are therefore
very encouraging and deserve the full support of the
international community. The Stockholm Agreement
has indeed given the Yemeni people an initial spark of
hope for a peaceful solution to the conflict after several
years without any sign of a possible way out. In fact,
there has been a significant decrease in hostilities in
some areas affected for years, which we are certain is a
positive sign that boosts the confidence of all involved
with respect to the likelihood of finding a solution to
the conflict.

Lastly, with respect to the humanitarian situation,
the figures remain horrendous, with 20 million people
suffering from malnourishment and 250,000 people’s
lives endangered, as Mr. Lowcock said. That must
change. I also agree with Mr. Meza-Cuadra that, in our
work on the humanitarian situation, we must concentrate
on women and children and ensure that sexual violence
against women be placed high on the agenda.

However, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
understands that the process of implementing resolutions
2451 (2018) and 2452 (2019) is neither easy nor quick;
but we believe that it is essential that every effort in that
process should be firmly supported in order to alleviate
the enormous suffering that the Yemeni people are
enduring. In that regard, we urge all parties to fulfil all
the commitments made in Stockholm and to cooperate
closely in a constructive manner and in good faith with
Special Envoy Griffiths.

In terms of Geneva, Germany will again pledge
substantially, and we call on all partners to do the
same. At this stage, I want to join my French colleague
in highlighting the peace support facility, to which
Germany has already contributed. Beyond the
humanitarian aid, the people must see that the political
process will bear fruit, that there will be stabilization
in the country and that there will be funds for getting it
back on its feet.

As we have just pointed out and Mr. Griffiths
mentioned in his briefing, although the overall situation
in Yemen is moving in a positive direction, we must
nevertheless acknowledge that we are still a long way
from the kind of stability that is required. The focus that
we have rightly placed in recent agreements must not
diminish our commitment and efforts to make progress
towards resolving the conflict throughout Yemeni
territory, including in regions that are not yet covered

19-0478017/20

S/PV.8464

The situation in the Middle East

by the agreements. We invite all parties to demonstrate
goodwill in actions taken outside the already agreed
upon framework. Only in that way will more areas be
able to experience a decrease in violence. More than
ever, peace is needed in Yemen, and for that reason
political will is key to achieving it.
Strong emphasis should continue to be placed on
alleviating the humanitarian crisis. The humanitarian
situation continues to be catastrophic, and the flow of
humanitarian assistance and its access to all areas where
such assistance is needed is a high priority. The human
suffering being experienced in Yemen, as Mr. Lowcock
described in his briefing, is one of the worst of our time.
Tens of millions of people are in need of humanitarian
aid, including 11 million children. Almost 3.5 million
people are displaced, and more than 10 million people
are at a real risk of starvation. That sad and worrisome
situation must move the international community
and all parties directly and indirectly involved in the
conflict to deploy all the necessary efforts to find a
rapid solution to the crisis.
I will conclude my remarks by congratulating
Major General Michael Lollesgaard on assuming the
leadership of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement. We wish him every success
in that new role, especially on effectively implementing
the Al-Hudaydah agreement to achieve concrete results,
following the excellent work he carried out in his
previous role as Force Commander of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. I also extend our long-standing appreciation to
Mr. Griffiths for his commendable work as the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, particularly
for achieving the Stockholm Agreement, and we
encourage him to continue its implementation in its
three phases, including the release of all prisoners, with
enthusiasm and his usual diplomacy.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to thank the President of the Security
Council for this opportunity to address the Council. I
would like to wish the Ambassador and the delegation
of Equatorial Guinea every success at the helm of the
Council for this month. I would also like to thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, as well as General Lollesgaard,
18/20

19/02/2019

Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
for the efforts that they have made to support the
Stockholm Agreement. I thank also Mr. Mark Lowcock
and his team for working to ease the humanitarian
suffering of the Yemeni people in the wake of the Houthi
coup, which was supported by the Iranian regime with
a view to destabilizing the region by supporting armed
militias and fomenting hatred, triggering conflict and
stoking intercommunal tensions by sowing hatred,
chaos and violence.
The Yemeni Government aspires to peace given
its full responsibility for all the Yemeni people. We
support United Nations efforts, as represented by the
Special Envoy for Yemen, to achieve peace according
to the three agreed terms of reference: the initiative of
the Gulf Cooperation Council and its implementation
mechanism; the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference; and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015).
The Yemeni Government is committed to achieving
peace and to putting an end to the coup and to the
suffering of the Yemeni people, as well as rebuilding
State institutions and a new federal Yemen. In that
regard, the Yemeni Government has participated in
all relevant talks and made many concessions in order
to reach a political solution that meets the aspirations
of the Yemeni people in terms of security, stability
and peace.
However, the coup party has not shown a real
desire for peace or faith in dialogue. Today we are
seeing obstruction by the militias, which is clear
evidence of the fact that they are ignoring the need for
peace and the demands of the international community
and the United Nations to implement what was agreed
in Stockholm and to abide by the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The Yemeni Government reiterates its full
commitment to implementing the Stockholm Agreement
and also approved the first stage of the redeployment
in Saleef, Ras Isa and Al-Hudaydah. The second phase
involves measures concerning the return of the security
and administrative authority, the coast guard and the
Red Sea Port Authority to manage ports and cities under
Yemeni law, as well as implementing the spirit and the
letter of the Stockholm Agreement itself. The Yemeni
Government is willing to assist in facilitating access to
the Red Sea Mills and to open routes for humanitarian
assistance because it wishes to alleviate the human
19-04780

19/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

suffering of the Yemeni people. Indeed, we welcome all
efforts to implement the Stockholm Agreement so as
to achieve a lasting and comprehensive solution based
on the aforementioned three terms of reference, which
constitute a solid foundation for a fair, comprehensive
and lasting solution to the conflict in Yemen.
Although the Yemeni Government is committed
to implementing the Al-Hudaydah Agreement and
remains positive towards all proposals submitted by the
United Nations to implement it since it was announced,
the Houthi coup militias, for their part, continue to
violate the ceasefire and to deliberately carry out even
more attacks and violent acts to ensure the failure of
the Agreement and peace efforts, which would have
promoted opportunities for building confidence. From
18 December 2018 to 12 February 2019, we saw 1,177
violations of the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah, and 80
civilians were killed and 503 wounded. The militias
are continuing to use weapons of all kinds to target
houses, public spaces, companies and army barracks.
They are redeploying in cities, laying mines, trenching
and building blockades so as to provoke the national
army and coalition forces with a view to undermining
the Stockholm Agreement.
The Houthi militias are also using mortar shells
against the Red Sea Mills as barbaric tactics to
exacerbate the suffering of the Yemeni people, while
ignoring the efforts of the United Nations.
The Yemeni Government shares the grave concern
of the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs with regard to the inability of the United
Nations to access the Red Sea Mills since September
2018. There are significant stocks there that could feed
3.7 million people for a month, but the Houthi militias
are not allowing the United Nations to go beyond the
front lines to get to the Mills. This has been going on
for five months, which means that the stocks are now
in danger of spoiling. In addition, 20 per cent of the
stocks have been burnt by fires started by Houthi shells,
according to the former Chair of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, Mr. Cammaert. We therefore
call on the Security Council and the international
community to ensure that the responsibility is met to
save the Al-Hudaydah Agreement and put pressure on
the Houthi militias so as make sure that the Agreement
is fully implemented within a clear, agreed time
frame. We also call on them to identify those who are
hindering the Agreement and to ensure the delivery of

S/PV. 8464

humanitarian aid to all regions now under the control
of Houthi militias.
The Yemeni Government also stresses the need to
free all prisoners, locate all missing persons, release
victims of arbitrary detention and house arrest and
find those who were subject to forced disappearance.
We will leave no stone unturned in our attempts to
achieve this humanitarian goal. We also need to put an
end to the arrests of civilians carried out by militias.
Even some Yemeni women have been arrested, which is
unprecedented in our history. We call on those militias to
lift the blockade in Taiz so as to let citizens move freely
and to allow the delivery of humanitarian assistance in
order to alleviate the suffering of the people. We hope
that the meeting of the special committee on the Taiz
declaration of understanding, to be held at the end of
this month, will lead to the hoped-for results.
Our families in the Hajour regions are suffering
barbaric and savage attacks by Houthi militias. All
kinds of weapons are being used against them. These
regions are suffering under siege, and the aim is to get
the militias’ hands on the property of civilians. This
is a flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Such attacks
must cease; the areas must be liberated; and civilians,
including women and children, must be saved.
Yemeni banks recently witnessed a campaign in
which bank executives were arrested because they had
opened lines of credit for traders at the Yemeni Central
Bank in Aden in order to import commodities. The
Houthi militias were compelling bank executives not
to provide any amount of money to the Central Bank in
Aden, but were instead asking them for profits, which,
according to their estimate, would reach 30 per cent.
One of the largest banks had to cease its activities
in Sana’a and in all other branches located in areas
under the control of Houthi militias. This is therefore
a stumbling block for regular banking and trading
activities, as well as a factor further deteriorating the
national economy.
According to the directives of the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Abdrabbuh Mansour Hadi,
the Yemeni Government is prioritizing the improvement
of the economic and humanitarian situation of civilians
throughout Yemen. The Government has made efforts
and taken measures in that connection, notwithstanding
the militias, which are exploiting the resources of our
national economy in regions they control in order

19-0478019/20

S/PV.8464

The situation in the Middle East

to finance their destructive activities, prolong the
suffering of the Yemeni people and further degrade the
situation in those regions.
Government efforts have led to positive results,
such as the payment of monthly pensions to retirees and
salaries to civil servants in Al-Hudaydah governorate,
as well as to those working in the education and health
sectors. The prices for commodities, such as oil and
fuel, have stabilized in regions under the control of the
Yemeni Government, in addition to improvements in
health, educational and electricity services. The Yemeni
Government intends to adopt this year’s budget, finance
the deficit and pay the wages of all civil servants as soon
as Government revenues have been collected, including
in the regions under the control of the Houthi militias.
We are working to find ways to finance the deficit.
We hope that the international community will help us
in that endeavour so that we can honour our obligations
to our citizens. We call on the international community
to support our efforts to stabilize the exchange rate and
improve the economic situation so that we can alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people.
The Yemeni Government also welcomes the
holding of the high-level conference to finance the 2019

20/20

19/02/2019

humanitarian response plan for Yemen, to be held in
Geneva on 26 February. We once again call on sisterly
and friendly donor countries, as well as international
organizations, to provide greater support and honour
their obligations. In that regard, we would like to
thank the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates, the State of Kuwait, the United States and
the United Kingdom for their generous support, which
is helping to alleviate human suffering in Yemen in the
wake of the armed Houthi militias’ coup.
Today we are at a critical juncture that requires
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in
order to preserve the significant momentum created in
Stockholm and to condemn the party that wants only to
see our efforts fail. The momentum we have achieved
is a positive step forward on the path towards attaining
comprehensive and lasting peace in Yemen.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on my list.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

19-04780
