General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

68

Deeply concerned over the threat to human dignity
and to society posed by the flow of illicit drugs,
Gratified by the adoption by international conferences of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances27
and the Protocol Amending the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 28
Convinced that the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances would result in the necessary international
regulation of these substances,
Further convinced of the importance of the Protocol in strengthening the enforcement provisions of
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,29
Calls upon all States, provided they have not already done so, to adhere to:
(a) The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,

1961;
( b) The Protocol Amending the Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs, 1961;
(c) The Convention on Psychotropic Substances.

2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3014 (XXVII). United Nations programme for
drug abuse control

The General Assembly,
Noting that drug abuse is a continuing problem in
many parts of the world,
Encouraged by the growing interest of Governments in dealing with drug abuse,
1. Welcomes the expanded operations of the United
Nations programme for drug abuse control, and especially the efforts made by the Division of Narcotic
Drugs of the Secretariat in the field of drug abuse
control;
2. Recognizes the importance of the United Nations
programme of action based on short-term and longterm policy, as approved by the General Assembly in
resolution 2719 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, and
affirms the need for more effective and extensive efforts by the United Nations system;
3. Appeals consequently to Governments for sustained support and voluntary contributions to the United
Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control, in any form
and according to their capacity;
4. Invites the Division of Narcotic Drugs, the
specialized agencies and other interested intergovernmental organizations to co-operate fully in the United
Nations programme of action;
5. Further invites the specialized agencies and other
interested intergovernmental organizations to pay
special attention, in the formulation of their own programmes relating to the socio-economic consequences
of drug abuse, to appropriate means of combating this
abuse.
2113th plenary meetinf?
18 December 1972
27 E/CONF.58/6 and Corr. l and 2.
28 E/CONF.63/8.
"II United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 751'i, p 151.

3020 (XXVII). Principles of international cooperation in the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of persons guilty of
war crimes and crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2840 (XXVI) of 18 December 1971 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1691 (LII) of 2 June 1972 concerning the
need to formulate principles of international co-operation in the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of persons guilty of war crimes and crimes
against humanity,
Convinced that the effective punishment of war
crimes and crimes against humanity is an important
element in preventing such crimes and putting an end
to them, as well as ensuring better protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms and promoting cooperation between peoples and international peace and
security,
1. Takes note of the draft principles submitted
to the Third Committee at the current session;30
2. Decides to transmit the above-mentioned draft
principles for further elaboration to the Commission
on Human Rights, together with the records of the
meetings at which the Third Committee debated this
item during the current session;
3. Requests the Commis-sion on Human Rights to
submit to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session, through the Economic and Social Council,
draft principles of international co-operation in the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of persons
guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Principles
of international co-operation in the detection, arrest,
extradition and punishment of persons guilty of war
crimes and crimes against humanity".
2114 th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3021 (XXVII). Crime prevention and <>ontrol

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned by the increasing seriousness and
proportions of the prohlcm of crime in many parts of
the world.
Conscious of the threat that crime in its various
forms presents to economic, social and cultural development and to man's quality of life,
Bearing in mind the call of the international community for more effective United Nations action in
crime prevention,
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and
Developmcnt/11 which stipulates that social progress
and development shall aim equally at the progressive
attainment, inter alia, of the main goal of the provision of social defence measures and the dimination
nf conditions leading to crime and delinquency. especially jm ,·nilc (:l'liHquency,
:io Official Records of the General Ass«mb/y, Twenty-seventh
Session, Annexes, agenda item 52, document A. 1 8939, para 7.
BI Resolution 2542 (XXIV).
