S/PV.8026

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8026th meeting

Thursday, 17 August 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Paulichenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Letter dated 8 August 2017 from the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo extended pursuant to Security Council resolution 2293
(2016) addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/672/Rev.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-26116 (E)
*1726116*

S/PV.8026

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Letter dated 8 August 2017 from the Group
of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo extended pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2293 (2016) addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/672/Rev.1)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional
Integration of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/672/Rev.1, which contains the text
of a letter dated 8 August from the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo extended
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2293 (2016)
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
(spoke in English)
I have the honour to speak in my capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In my briefing this morning, it is my
intention to touch upon three issues. First, I will
highlight the final report (see S/2017/672/Rev.1) of the
Group of Experts, the findings and recommendations
of which the Committee considered during its informal
consultations on 21 July. Secondly, I intend to provide
an overview of the work of the Committee since I last
briefed the Security Council on 11 October 2016 (see
S/PV.7788), not only in terms of the activities conducted
by the Committee in addressing the complex challenges
2/22

17/08/2017

facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo today and
over the long-term but also with a view to promoting
synergy among United Nations actors and cooperation
with the region towards the building of peace and
stability in the country. Finally, I will report on the
work that lies ahead, including a number of possible
activities for the Committee in the coming few months.
I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Léonard She
Okitundu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to welcome
him to this briefing, which comes at a moment when the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is facing tremendous
challenges. The final report of the Group of Experts
of 10 August depicts a complex picture in connection
with those challenges. The Group observed a changing
dynamic of conflict and armed mobilization in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as reflected by the
further fragmentation of armed groups operating in a
more decentralized, albeit heavily networked, manner.
Foreign and local armed groups are increasingly
interconnected, which also has an impact on patterns
of violence.
Concerning natural resources, the implementation
of mineral traceability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has considerably reduced instances of
armed groups directly and indirectly benefiting from
the exploitation and trade of tin, tantalum and tungsten.
However, the Group found that the ITRI Ltd Tin Supply
Chain initiative traceability system has shortcomings
in its implementation, thereby enabling different actors
to intentionally or inadvertently facilitate smuggling.
Moreover, the gold sector continues to suffer from the
lack of a traceability system, as artisanally sourced
gold from conflict-affected areas can still be exported
to international markets through smuggling, involving
illicit financial flows. Furthermore, legally issued
certificates are being used in a fraudulent manner
to export gold out of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and efforts must be made in that country, as
well as the transit and recipient countries, to address the
smuggling of gold in carry-on luggage aboard flights.
In the area of human rights and international
humanitarian law, the Group observed that violations
continue to be at significant levels in the the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Group focused on violations,
such as cases of child rape in South Kivu province, the
attack on the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
17-26116

17/08/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

(MONUSCO) in North Kivu province, and the murder
of two of its members on 12 March in Central Kasaï
province. In that context, I would like to recall that, of
the eight recommendations set out in the Group’s final
report, the Committee considered, during its informal
consultations on 21 July, four recommendations that
were addressed to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, while the remaining four
recommendations of the Group were addressed to
the Security Council, including one recommendation
related to the investigation into the murder of two
members of the Group of Experts.
I would like to pause here for a moment and
acknowledge the presence in the Chamber today of
Mr. John Sharp and Mrs. Michele Sharp, the parents
of Michael Sharp, as well as Ms. Maria Moresby and
Ms. Elizabeth Moresby, the mother and sister of Zaida
Catalán, the two deceased members of the Group of
Experts. As I mentioned in a statement on 29 March
(see SC/12768-PKO/629), I had the honour to know
Michael and Zaida personally and to work closely with
them in my capacity as the Chair of the Committee.
Despite the numerous risks and challenges they faced,
their profound courage, dedication to their work and
utter devotion to the cause of peace were a source of
inspiration for us all. The tragic loss of Michael and
Zaida is a painful reminder of the volatile environments
in which the members of the United Nations groups and
panels of experts operate in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and elsewhere, which often come at
great personal cost. That loss is also a reminder of the
suffering inflicted upon a great number of innocent
civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
that realizing lasting peace for those who have no voice
remains our ultimate cause.
It is against that backdrop that the Committee
and the Group of Experts have taken an active role
in addressing both the short-term and long-term
challenges facing the country. That has been marked
by a deliberate effort to involve the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and those of the
Great Lakes region to promote synergies among United
Nations actors working on sanctions-related issues
and to encourage collaborative efforts among regional
and international partners, with the aim of forging a
common approach to help achieve peace and stability.
In that context, following my trip to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region in August 2016,
the Committee conducted a number of activities with

S/PV. 8026

the aim of maintaining dialogue with the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo through the
Permanent Mission in New York and Government
officials in Kinshasa with regard to several aspects
related to the Committee’s work. For example, on
19 November 2016, the Committee received a briefing
from Ms. Jeanine Mabunda, Presidential Adviser
on Sexual Violence and Child Recruitment of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, following which the
Committee held informal consultations with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The Committee also maintained its commitment to
conduct outreach with representatives of the region. On
30 January, I briefed the regional States in connection
with the Group’s mid-term report (see S/2016/1102).
During that meeting, the Committee engaged with the
invited States and listened to their views with regard to
the mid-term report and the recommendations therein.
In the same vein, on 20 March, the Committee held
its ninth formal meeting, which aimed at enhancing
its understanding of the security situation and the
surrounding regional dynamics. The meeting featured
briefings by the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral to the Great Lakes Region and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Head of
MONUSCO, as well as statements by the representatives
of the invited regional States, on the progress and
challenges in their cooperation bilaterally or regionally,
including in the context of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, particularly regarding
support for the neutralization of armed groups, as well
as disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement or repatriation.
The security situation in the country, and
particularly in the Kasaï region, received further
close attention by the Committee when it received a
detailed briefing by MONUSCO on 22 May, following
which a representative of the United Nations Mine
Action Service made a presentation on weapons and
ammunition management in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. With a view to promoting collaboration
and coordination among United Nations and regional
actors, the Committee held its first-ever open briefing on
4 August on the illicit exploitation of natural resources,
with broad participation from the United Nations

17-261163/22

S/PV.8026

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

membership at large. Speakers included the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to the Great Lakes
Region, the Executive Secretary of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Acting
Coordinator of the Group of Experts, as well as the
Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and other participants from the region.
As highlighted in numerous reports of the Group
of Experts, the proceeds from the illegal exploitation of
natural resources fuel criminal networks, armed groups
and the ongoing insecurity in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such exploitation
further limits the capacity of the State by facilitating
corruption, weakening State institutions and hindering
economic growth and social development. For example,
although a major producer of gold and one of the largest
diamond producers in the world, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is one of the 47 least-developed
countries according to the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development. Therefore, the fight against
the illicit trafficking of natural resources is critical
to enable the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
move beyond conflict towards peacebuilding and
development. The open-format briefing on 4 August
was intended to take stock of the progress at the national
and regional levels, as well as existing challenges and
shortcomings, and to facilitate further improvements
through a collaborative approach involving relevant
regional and international partners.

17/08/2017

and MONUSCO, as well as key partners in other
regional capitals.
Among the major objectives of my delegation for
that visit would be obtaining first-hand knowledge
of the implementation of the measures pursuant
to resolution 2360 (2017) and of the impact of the
exploitation of natural resources on the situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in line with Security Council emphasis as set out in
paragraphs 19 to 26 of the resolution. The visit would
also provide an opportunity to hold legal consultations
with the Member State concerned in order to ensure
the full implementation of the measures set forth in the
resolution. The visit’s findings would hopefully feed
into the Council’s review of the measures imposed by
the solution 2360 (2017), as well as future engagement
with the State concerned on the implementation of
the measures.
Following my return to New York from the visit,
I intend to convene a meeting of the Committee with
regional States. During that meeting my aims will be to
provide an overview of the relation of the Group’s final
report of 10 August, deliver a briefing on my October
visit to the region and promote a general discussion on
the effectiveness of the sanctions regime and ways by
which to increase its contribution to peace and stability
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
(spoke in Arabic)

Looking forward, the coming months will be a
critical period for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In that context, the Committee will remain
vigilant and ensure that its work and that of the Group of
Experts contribute to peace and stability in the country.
Towards that goal, I intend to continue collaboration
with the relevant United Nations interlocutors with
a view to obtaining updated information on various
aspects of the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo that are relevant to the Committee’s mandate
and promote further synergy in its work.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The Committee also remains committed to
maintaining its dialogue with its interlocutors from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and those in the
wider region in order to promote further collaboration
with the Committee and the Group of Experts. In that
context, the Committee will consider the possibility
of a second mission to the region by the Chair in late
October to visit the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to speak with representatives of the Government

Today’s meeting cannot be a meeting like any
other. The killings, last March, of Zaida Catalán and
Michael Sharp deeply struck and saddened us. The
presence of the families of Zaida and Michael in the
Chamber today reminds us again, if there were such
a need, of the dreadful nature of these crimes. On
behalf of France, I would like to address Mrs. Maria
Moresby, Mrs. Elizabeth Moresby, Mr. John Sharp and
Mrs. Michele Sharp to express once again our sincere

4/22

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the President for organizing today’s meeting and for
his briefing as Chair on the activities of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) — the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Sanctions Committee — in recent months.

17-26116

17/08/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

condolences for the loss of their children and sister and
to express our admiration and gratitude for Michael’s
and Zaida’s remarkable work. The entire United Nations
family shares their sorrow. They can rest assured that
France is at their side in this time of trial.
As France did in its national capacity, the Security
Council, too, condemned these killings in the strongest
terms. It has repeatedly called for an in-depth
investigation to identify the perpetrators of the crimes
and bring them to justice. In that regard, we would like
to thank the Secretary-General for transmitting the
findings of the Board of Inquiry that was established last
April. The elements that the Board of Inquiry provided
have caught our attention, including its finding that
further research and investigation are required. In that
regard, we renew our call for the Secretary-General
to establish, as soon as possible and as he is able to
do, a special investigative mechanism to enable the
competent legal authorities to effectively prosecute
these crimes and achieve justice. In Guinea in 2009 and
South Sudan in 2016, for example, similar mechanisms
proved particularly useful in shedding light on related
dire events before the Council. We owe it to the memory
of these two experts that justice be done. We owe it to
their loved ones, to the many groups of experts set up
by the Council and to all United Nations personnel and
to the long-suffering Congolese people themselves.
Today’s meeting is also of particular importance
because the current situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains a major source of
concern. In that regard, I welcome the presence of the
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Léonard
She Okitundu. The final report of the Group of Experts
(see S/2017/672/Rev.1), which is of a high quality despite
these particularly tragic circumstances, underlines
once again the gravity of the situation and the risks of
its continuing deterioration.
The violence in the Kasaï region, which remains at
an unsustainable level, is compounded by the spread of
insecurity to Tanganyika, the increase in intercommunal
conflicts in these areas and even the escape of prisoners
in unusual proportions. Civilian populations continue
to be the primary victims of this growing insecurity,
as is illustrated by the flow of displaced persons and
refugees. The Deputy Secretary-General highlighted
this point last week: the humanitarian situation remains
very difficult, especially for women (see S/PV.8022).

S/PV. 8026

Reversing this unhappy dynamic necessarily calls
for increased efforts to prevent impunity on the part of
perpetrators of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law, irrespective of their
affiliation. It is up to the Congolese authorities to get
involved, including by fully cooperating with the team
of international experts set up by the Human Rights
Council last June. The team, established by consensus
and with the consent of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, must be able to enjoy unrestricted access to the
places and persons concerned in order to identify those
responsible for the violations committed.
As the deadline for holding elections approaches,
the accumulation of delays in the implementation of
the 31 December agreement generates questions and
tensions that cannot contribute to the country’s peace
and stability. The agreement, which is the framework
agreed by all the Congolese parties for the transition
towards the holding of elections, remains the only
credible road map for an end to the crisis in the country.
As the Council recalled in its presidential statement of
26 July (S/PRST/2017/12), it is urgent that the agreement
be implemented in good faith and in all its components.
It is up to the Congolese authorities to take all necessary
measures as soon as possible to ensure that credible and
inclusive elections are held as agreed in the agreement
no later than December 2017. It is particularly urgent
for the electoral calendar to be released.
The tragic deaths of Zaida and Michael remind us
of the responsibility we must collectively exercise to
put an end to the violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. A large number of civilians have already
lost their lives. Faced with this intolerable threat, we call
on all Congolese political actors to be responsible and
to act decisively in order to respect the commitments
made last December. The stability of the country and
its inhabitants depends upon it, as does that of the
region as a whole.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to start by thanking you, Mr. President, for the
dedication you have shown as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) and in ensuring that Michael Sharp’s and
Zaida Catalán’s important work continues. The Group
of Experts has done, and will continue to do, excellent
work, and I am honoured that we can demonstrate
this commitment — voice this commitment — in
the presence of Michael’s and Zaida’s families in the
Chamber this morning. We are humbled by the presence

17-261165/22

S/PV.8026

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

here today of Mr. and Mrs. Sharp and Mrs. Maria
Moresby and Mrs. Elizabeth Moresby.
To Zaida’s and Michael’s families, I would like
to say that the Security Council sits on the front lines
of conflict resolution and that their children and their
sister gave their lives working to find peace and resolve
conflict. They pursued truth and justice, and we owe it
to them to also pursue truth and justice and investigate
their murders.
Michael and Zaida worked to shed light on the
horrific crimes plaguing the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We, in turn, must shine a light on their
murders and pursue a full understanding of the events
surrounding their deaths. The murder of United Nations
officials cannot end with an administrative inquiry into
their deaths. There needs to be a genuine investigation
that uncovers the facts surrounding this case.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s intention to
pursue a follow-on mechanism to the Board of Inquiry
under his own authority, and we urge him to waste no
time in establishing the mechanism. There is no time for
delay. We must urgently continue our efforts to uncover
the truth surrounding Michael’s and Zaida’s deaths.
While Michael and Zaida are no longer with us, their
work through the Group of Experts must continue. As
highlighted by the Group of Experts, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo needs to do
more to strengthen legitimate trade in natural resources
and to reduce illicit trafficking in those resources.
Illicit trafficking strengthens armed groups and corrupt
officials, and therefore perpetuates conflict. Regional
countries and organizations and all Member States
must work together to reduce such illicit trafficking.
While the investigations of the Group of Experts
have helped us to understand the nature and means of
illicit trafficking and the funding of armed groups, their
work needs to continue in parallel with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo elections and a peaceful transition
of power in order to bring real peace to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Without a democratic transition,
we can expect continued cycles of widespread violence.
The Congolese people are upset with their Government
and are tired of waiting for the elections called for
by their Constitution. We call upon the authorities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to announce
the timeline for the overdue elections and to stick to
it. In the absence of an elections timeline, the United
States will pursue stronger sanctions in the Council,
6/22

17/08/2017

and we will take measures to increase the pressure on
and hold accountable those who undermine peace and
stability or democratic institutions and processes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, or who are working
on behalf of or supporting already listed individuals.
Finally, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is responsible for providing security for its citizens,
who continue to suffer violent attacks and sexual and
gender-based violence, who are fleeing their homes in
the tens of thousands and who struggle to meet their
basic needs as they are deprived of their livelihoods and
resources. While many of the attacks are perpetrated by
armed groups, we are concerned that the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues
to support and profit from those armed groups and to
commit human rights violations with impunity. Those
actions and the continued delay in elections call into
question the legitimacy of the current Government.
Our work is not yet done, just as the work of Michael
and Zaida and the Group of Experts is not yet done. We
must continue to find ways to seek peace and justice in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for Michael and
Zaida, just as Michael and Zaida attempted to do.
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your briefing as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It is highly appreciated.
Let me start by acknowledging the presence of the
families of Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp.On behalf
of Sweden and me, personally, I extend our deepest
condolences and heartfelt to them.
I would also like to acknowledge His Excellency
Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Once again, we strongly condemn the murders of
Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp. It is intolerable that
those tasked by the Council to investigate violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law are brutally killed. Zaida Catalán
was the humanitarian expert of the Group of Experts.
She was recognized for conducting her work with skill
and integrity and for standing up for human rights and
international humanitarian law. The same commitment
and dedication led her to become a strong advocate
for the human rights of the Congolese people. We
17-26116

17/08/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

know that Michael Sharp was a deeply appreciated
coordinator of the Group and that he brought with him
equal dedication.
We
recognize
the
particularly
difficult
circumstances under which the colleagues of Zaida
Catalán and Michael Sharp worked to finalize the report
(see S/2017/672/Rev.1), and we commend them for
their indispensable work. In honour of Zaida Catalán,
Michael Sharp and of their colleagues, we would like
the focus of today’s meeting to be on their report and
on how we can bring peace and justice to all those who
suffer in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Sweden welcomes the report, which illustrates the
fragile and worrying security situation in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
its ethnic dimensions. In that context, information
about ex-combatants being re-mobilized is worrisome.
The reintegration of former combatants, notably child
soldiers, must be significantly improved and attention
given to the needs of both female and male combatants.
As a partner and donor to the Congolese disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process,
Sweden supports the recommendation by the Group
of Experts to revise the implementation of the DDR
programme, with a particular focus on job creation and
professional training.
Revenues from conflict minerals fuel the ongoing
insecurity. Sweden is pleased that our hard work has
resulted in a European Union regulation that requires
importers of conflict minerals to control their supply
chains. This is one example of relevant instruments
in the fight against the international trade in conflict
minerals. It is clear that more needs to be done.
Conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is not confined to the east; it touches both Kasaï and
Tanganyika. The report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of
4 August recounts a terrible situation in the Kasaï
region, with violations and abuses of human rights
and violations of international humanitarian law. That
includes summary executions, extrajudicial killings,
the recruitment of children into militias and horrifying
testimonies of mutilations, sexual violence and rape.
The scale of the violence has a direct negative impact
on peace and security. There must be no impunity for
those crimes.
The Kavumu case in South Kivu province,
with 42 incidents of aggravated rape of children, is

S/PV. 8026

another example of barbaric crimes being committed
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Sweden
welcomes the arrest of a number of suspects for those
crimes. Thorough investigation and prosecution is
necessary in order to ensure justice for those victims.
In that regard, we would welcome further collaboration
among the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Sanctions Committee.
That could entail sharing information more regularly,
including through meetings, on groups and individuals
that meet the criteria for listing.
Most important, though, the sanctions regime
must be upheld and implemented by all parties, and
the Group of Experts must have the adequate means
to carry out its mandate. Sweden supports the Group’s
recommendation to extend the mandate to 18 months
and to allow time for information-gathering under a
more stringent security regime.
There can be no peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo without democratic progress. We continue
to call for the full implementation of the New Year’s Eve
agreement, in good faith and by and with all Congolese
stakeholders. Free, fair, credible and inclusive elections
remain the only viable and peaceful way out of the
current political crisis, which otherwise, as the conflict
in Kasaï illustrates, fuels further conflict and instability.
To promote peaceful development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we would like to underline the
importance of joint efforts by the African Union and
the United Nations, such as the recent high-level visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo led by the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Mohammed. In the
same vein, we welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. She Okitundu here today. We look forward to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s close cooperation
with the United Nations and the Council going forward.
One of the recommendations of the Group
of Experts is that the United Nations continue its
investigations into the murders of the experts. We
share that view. No stone should be left unturned in
our efforts to deliver justice for those who lost their
lives in the service of the United Nations. Now that the
Board of Inquiry has delivered its report, we welcome
the fact that the Secretary-General is looking into
which follow-up mechanism would best serve our joint
efforts to establish the truth and bring the perpetrators

17-261167/22

S/PV.8026

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to justice, as well as supporting the ongoing national
investigations. We support the establishment of such a
mechanism by the Secretary-General.
Separately, we must draw lessons from possible
failures in the system, and we will carefully study the
Board of Inquiry’s conclusions and recommendations
in this regard. It is the Council’s duty to ensure the
safety of the United Nations personnel mandated by it.
What happened to Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp
should never happen again.
Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): I should like to thank
Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for his briefing and his leadership.
The Chair’s statement and the final report of the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (see S/2017/672/Rev.1) depict the grim reality
on the ground. Illicit trade in natural resources,
arms smuggling, the fragmentation of illegal armed
groups, human rights abuses, ethnic clashes and
atrocities committed by foreign and local armed
groups remain widespread in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Moreover, a drastic
destabilization in the Kasaï provinces demonstrates that
no part of the country is immune from such outrages.
At the same time, one cannot deny that the
existing sanctions regime has played an important role
in mitigating some threats. For instance, it reduced
opportunities for armed groups to benefit from illegal
involvement in the exploitation of natural resources,
particularly for tin, tantalaum and tungsten. However,
the gold sector lags behind and the lack of traceability
systems leaves an opportunity for smugglers to profit
from that gap.
Despite some positive trends, the overall situation
does not show signs of significant improvement. We are
therefore deeply concerned about further deterioration
of the security environment in the country on the
whole, which is evidently interconnected with the
political stagnation.
The international community and the Council must
spare no effort in assisting the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to move towards the stability, peace and
security that its people deserve. The holding of elections
in 2017 remains an important element in that endeavour.
8/22

17/08/2017

The same applies to accountability. The killings
of two members of the Group of Experts must not
remain unanswered. We want to express our deepest
condolences to the families of the victims present here.
Those who committed these crimes have to be brought
to justice. In that regard, following the SecretaryGeneral’s recent letter on the executive summary of
the Board of Inquiry report, we would like to call upon
the Secretary-General to act in a swift manner and to
establish a respective follow-up mechanism under his
own authority, as his predecessor did in response to the
Terrain Hotel tragedy in South Sudan.
Finally, in terms of the Committee’s modus
operandi, we do not understand the situation when
recommendations addressed to the Council by the
Group of Experts that this very Council has established
are prevented from reaching it. We call on all Committee
members to work constructively in full cooperation
with the Chair and each other to ensure the effective
functioning of the body.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your very detailed briefing as Chair
of the Committee. I would also like to align myself with
my colleagues in addressing the families of Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalán. On behalf of my Government,
I would like to once again pledge our sympathy and
solidarity as we join them in their grief. Italy hopes that
those responsible for the deaths of the two members
of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo extended pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2293 (2016) will be swiftly brought to justice
and tried.
In that connection, and in welcoming the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we appeal once
again to the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to expeditiously and thoroughly investigate
those murders and to cooperate with the investigations
carried out by Sweden and the United States. As for the
United Nations investigation, following the SecretaryGeneral’s letter to the Council, we support the efforts
of the Secretary-General to ensure justice and we
encourage him to implement an effective follow-up
mechanism without delay, after consulting with the
Congolese authorities.
Today’s meeting seeks to analyse the results
of the work of Michael Sharp, Zaida Catalán and
their colleagues — precious work that will help us
17-26116

17/08/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

understand the complexity of the Congolese reality. As
you just pointed out in your briefing, Mr. President, the
final report of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (see S/2017/672/Rev.1) provides
a detailed analysis of the persistence of negative forces,
especially in eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where armed groups foment instability,
namely, by exploiting the country’s natural resources.
Italy is therefore deeply concerned about that illicit
exploitation. As the Security Council has repeatedly
mentioned in its resolutions, putting an end to that
illegal trafficking is critical to the peace and security of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Government
in Kinshasa has taken several measures to better secure
the supply chain of minerals and to implement a tracking
system. We encourage the Government to redouble its
efforts, especially with regard to the trafficking of gold,
in which, according to the latest report of the Group of
Experts, certain members of the Congolese army have
been implicated. We therefore urge the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to prosecute
them for those illegal activities in order to send a clear
message against impunity.
As for imposing sanctions on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we are ready to work with the
chairmanship of the Committee and to participate in
dialogue with regional countries, which, in our view,
play a key role in ensuring an effective regime.
Michael and Zaida lost their lives as they were
investigating human rights in the greater Kasaï region.
For months, the southern provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have been plunged into a cycle of
violence and murder. Italy hopes that the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will carry
out a swift and transparent investigations to establish
the facts and circumstances for the human rights
violations and abuses committed in the Kasaïs over
recent months. In that regard, while recalling that the
Congolese authorities have the primary responsibility
of protecting their population, we hope that they can
cooperate with the international Group of Experts
appointed by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The perpetrators of
those crimes must be prosecuted and convicted.
At the political level, Italy is concerned about
the lack of progress in the implementation of the
31 December 2016 agreement, which remains the only
credible road map for resolving the crisis and supporting

S/PV. 8026

the legitimacy of the transitional institutions. In
that connection, we call on the Government and the
political forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to rapidly implement the agreement and to ease
tensions, in keeping with that agreement. In our view,
those are essential steps to organizing democratic and
transparent elections. We believe that we must urgently
set the electoral timetable and accelerate the preparation
of peaceful, credible and inclusive elections — to be
held as soon as possible and in accordance with the
Congolese Constitution and the agreement I have just
referred to.
In conclusion, Italy continues to attach great
importance to the rigorous implementation of the
sanctions regime. We remain committed to working with
the other Council members to renew the regime. The
Group of Experts report that has been submitted for our
consideration will also serve as a vehicle for honouring
the memory of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would first like to
extend my thanks to Egypt in its capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004). Japan appreciates your
leadership and proactive engagement, Sir, including
with regional States and organizations.
We join our colleagues in welcoming the final
report (see S/2017/672/Rev.1) of the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo extended
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2293 (2016),
whose tireless efforts have been vital to the Committee’s
work. That informative report will play an important
role in reviewing and shaping the Democratic Republic
of the Congo sanctions regime going forward.
We especially appreciate the dedication of the
Group of Experts despite the extremely challenging
environment following the loss of two of their
colleagues, Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp. Zaida and
Michael’s professional and insightful work contributed
significantly to the work of the Group of Experts.
Japan would like to once again pay tribute to Zaida and
Michael and to extend its deepest condolences to their
families, some of whom are here today.
We continue to believe in the importance of a prompt
and thorough investigation to bring the perpetrators
of those killings to justice, as noted in the Council’s
recent presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/12). We
call on the Secretary-General, in his official capacity,
to establish a special follow-up investigation without

17-261169/22

S/PV.8026

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

17/08/2017

delay. We must avoid the recurrence of any such
tragedy in the future. Ensuring the security of experts
working for the sanctions committees is indispensable
for sanctions regimes.

that the Security Council will continue to follow the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region closely. We will remain ready to act promptly
if necessary.

I would underscore that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo today stands at a critical juncture,
with profound and interlinked political and security
concerns. We reiterate to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo the importance of
holding peaceful and credible elections, leading to a
democratic transfer of power by the end of this year, in
line with the 31 December political agreement.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional
Integration of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We would like to thank the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) for his
detailed briefing on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo sanctions regime. We greatly appreciate his
leadership of the Committee and share his assessment
of what is happening in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes region. We support his
proposal for visiting the country and the region at the
end of October. Similar visits have already shown the
relevance of that practice.

We are also deeply alarmed by the deterioration of
the situation in Kasaï and the persistence of insecurity
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including grave human rights violations
and intercommunal violence. The political leaders of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo must urgently
address those concerns.
As Japan stated at the Security Council briefing
on United Nations sanctions two weeks ago (see
S/PV.8018), sanctions are not tools for punishment, but
rather a means to support national efforts to maintain
and consolidate peace and stability. Given the political
challenges and worsening security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, sanctions have
a particularly important role to play in helping to
deter, mitigate and end violence. The full and faithful
implementation of the sanctions regime, including
the recommendations made previously by the Group
of Experts, is in the interests of all stakeholders in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the
international community, including States in the region.
Today, 14 years after the establishment of a sanctions
regime in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
are still struggling with its lack of implementation.
It is therefore essential to ensure that the Committee
can revitalize the engagement of all stakeholders and
continue working on concrete measures to improve
compliance and efficiency. In that regard, we urge the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other relevant
countries to continue and enhance their cooperation
with the Committee and the Group of Experts.
As the deadline for holding elections by the end of
this year approaches, the political and security situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is growing
increasingly volatile, and may also have a major impact
on the entire Great Lakes region. Japan is confident
10/22

We would like to express our sincere condolences
and sympathy to the family members of Michael Sharp
and Zaida Catalán present here today. They gave their
lives while fulfilling their mission in the name of a goal
they sincerely believed in — that their work could bring
peace to a conflict-torn African country. We believe
that their killers and all who were involved in that
barbarous incident will be found and punished as they
deserve, while we, in memory of Michael and Zaida,
should redouble our efforts in working for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Sanctions are an important element in the Security
Council toolkit. However, such restrictions cannot and
should not be an end in themselves. Their job is to help
to achieve the political and diplomatic settlement of a
conflict. We share the concerns about the worsening
situation in the Kasaï provinces, where the escalating
confrontation between the authorities and armed tribal
groups is alarming. There can be no question that the
Government and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should take additional steps to mitigate the
situation. However, we would like to warn against any
sweeping attempts to blame the Congolese military
and police for everything that is happening through
an alleged disproportionate use of force. It is the
members of the opposition Kamuina Nsapu sect who
are responsible for the attacks on Government officials,
schools and polling stations and the recruitment of
child soldiers. Of course, that should not be an excuse
17-26116

17/08/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

for human rights violations by any of the parties,
who should rather await the results of the authorities’
official investigation.
In our view, it is crucial to ensure that all
the Congolese parties consistently implement the
comprehensive political agreement of 31 December
2016, if stability is to be maintained in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, we would like to note
that the modalities of its implementation, as well as
any possible corrections to the timing of the elections,
are the exclusive prerogative of the Congolese people
and should be addressed only through a dialogue
between the authorities and the opposition without any
outside interference.
We agree with the opinion of Egypt’s Permanent
Representative that the illegal exploitation of natural
resources continues to be one of the main challenges
facing not just the Democratic Republic of the Congo
but the entire Great Lakes region. And while the
financial fuelling of insurgents through this kind of
activity is steadily declining, it is essential to ensure
that the countries of the region can consolidate their
efforts to come up with realistic ways of dealing with
the problem. We see good potential in this area for the
1533 Committee’s work.
We noted the timeliness of the 1533 Committee’s
open meeting on 4 August and commend Egypt’s
efforts in organizing it. At the meeting we looked at
the statement by the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that the United Nations
Mission issued a fraudulent certificate of conformity
for exporting Congolese gold, in contravention to the
certification procedure for exporting precious metals
out of the country. We hope that this issue will be
comprehensively investigated.
We took note of the summary in the report circulated
to the Council on 15 August (see S/2017/672/Rev.1) on
the work of the United Nations Board of Inquiry into the
death of the sanctions experts. We would like to draw
attention to its first recommendation, which supports
the idea of conducting a transparent and comprehensive
criminal investigation under the jurisdiction of the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and with the support of Member States. We have been
in favour of that format from the very beginning. Our
optimism is buttressed by the attitude from Kinshasa,
which is already cooperating with the United States

S/PV. 8026

investigation and is prepared to do the same with
Sweden’s representatives.
Lastly, we would like to comment on one of the
Group of Experts’ recommendations, about extending
its mandate by a year and a half owing to the Congolese
authorities’ tightened security rules. We think this
would be counterproductive and could send the wrong
message to Kinshasa, as if we had no expectations
of seeing rapid improvement in the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We should remember
that the sanctions’ job is to stimulate political dialogue
and that decisions to extend or remove them must be
made based on real progress.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Today we have been
discussing the work of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo extended pursuant
to resolution 2293 (2016). Tragically, their report (see
S/2017/672/Rev.1) comes in the wake of the murder
of two United Nations human rights experts, Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalán.
I am glad that we are meeting in the open today.
This is not an issue to discuss behind closed doors. We
owe it to the families of Michael and Zaida, and their
interpreter Betu Tshintela, to speak loudly and clearly
in the Chamber, express our deepest condolences and
reiterate our firm resolve to see their killers brought to
justice. That is a message that needs to go far beyond
the Chamber — indeed, far beyond the borders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — because it was
we in the Council who asked for the information that
Michael and Zaida went to gather. We asked them
to be our eyes and ears. Wherever in the world the
men and women of the United Nations are murdered,
wherever in the world they are harmed and abducted,
we cannot stay silent and we cannot stand aside. We
must ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes face
the fullest consequences of their actions. We need to
ensure accountability.
We took the first step to that end through resolution
2360 (2017), with new designation criteria for those who
kill United Nations personnel. The Secretary-General
took the second step by commissioning a Board of
Inquiry, which has uncovered more details. But more
needs to be done. I therefore welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s call in his letter to the Council for a followon mechanism, and we urge him to take action swiftly
towards a further investigation so that we can uncover
the truth for Zaida and Michael and for the safety of

17-2611611/22

S/PV.8026

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

all United Nations personnel around the globe. Five
months after the murder of Michael, Zaida and Betu,
accountability is yet to materialize. Those who ordered
their killings remain at large.
Zaida and Michael were two of the most pre-eminent
experts on the Kasaï regions. Tragically, it appears that
their very expertise made them a target. The violence
they sought to eliminate was brutally turned against
them. Let there be no mistake: they were killed for
shining a light on the horrific human rights situation in
the Kasaïs, and we must not let that light go out.
First and foremost, that means recognizing the
link between the political and security situations.
Uncertainty and inertia over the implementation of the
31 December agreement is only fuelling instability and
violence. With the Vice-Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo here
today, let us all agree that the December agreement must
be fully implemented. If implementation continues
to falter, we worry about what will happen next. We
need only look to the first half of this year and the 430
officially recorded human rights violations linked to
the electoral process. That figure is higher than that for
the whole of 2015.
As the report of the Group of Experts (see
S/2017/672/Rev.1) shows, such violence is fuelling
further violence. I am appalled at the reports of child
rape in Kavumu. I am glad that some of the militia
responsible have been caught and put on trial; that is
welcomed. But without political stability, the tide could
turn and those positive trends could be reversed.
There are already clear warning signs, such as
the growing reports of widespread sexual violence,
including by the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo in the Kasaïs, of the widespread
recruitment of children by the Kamuina Nsapu militia
or of continuing violence in the east. We should all be
concerned that armed groups continue to fund their
hateful crimes by stealing natural resources. Such
crimes must stop and those responsible must be held
to account.
We need to recognize that we have tools at our
disposal to help that happen, such as the sanctions
already imposed by the Council. They must be fully
implemented if they are to be effective. We also have
a responsibility to keep sanctions under close review.
Those who engage in or support acts that undermine the
peace, stability or security of the Democratic Republic
12/22

17/08/2017

of the Congo can and, if needed, will be sanctioned by
the Council. The Human Rights Council international
investigative mechanism will also play a crucial role
in the Kasaïs. Let us therefore all urge the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to cooperate fully with its work.
I would like to thank the Committee that you chair,
Sir, for its work and for the report. I would also like to
thank you personally for the sensitive and effective way
in which you have steered our work.
Finally, we owe it to Zaida, Michael and the rest of
the Group of Experts to continue to use their reporting
in our decisions. As we have heard so clearly today, it is
reporting for which the highest price has been paid and
it must not be a price paid in vain.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank you, Sir, for your briefing in your
capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We commend the fact that the
1533 Committee, under your leadership, has worked
very efficiently and produced excellent results. China
will continue to support you in your efforts.
China welcomes the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mr. Okitundu, to the Security Council.
China was concerned over the murder of members
of the Group of Experts and would like extend its
deepest condolences to the families. The safety of
United Nations personnel must be ensured. Any attack
on United Nations personnel is unacceptable.
So far this year, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has worked to further the
peace process and established the new transitional
Government. It has worked actively to strengthen its
capacity in the areas of governance and security. China
welcomes those efforts. At the same time, however,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to
face various challenges in the political, security and
humanitarian spheres, in particular in the eastern part
of the country, where armed rebel groups are active.
That is one of the main causes of instability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region
as a whole.
Ensuring the stability of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is an important foundation for furthering
the political process and carrying out national
reconstruction. It is a pressing task for the international
17-26116

17/08/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

community to urge all parties in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular certain opposition
parties, to put an immediate end to the violence,
continue to be committed to the political process
and support the political agreement reached. China
commends the active role played by African regional
and subregional organizations, such as the African
Union and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, as well as by neighbouring countries,
to find a solution to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We encourage parties in the
region to maximize their respective advantages in the
quest for a peaceful solution. The Security Council
must enhance its coordination efforts in order to send a
united and clear message and to forge synergies in the
international community.
In order to help resolve the issues in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the international community
must fully respect the Government’s leading role.
Solutions designed by the international community will
be effective only when they respect the Government’s
leadership and the choices of the country’s people.
To date, the Security Council has adopted various
measures, which focus on the illicit activities of the
armed groups and have garnered a number of results.
At the same time, we must note that sanctions are
not an end in themselves; they are a means to an end.
They should serve to achieve peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
China appreciates the importance that the
Committee attaches to cooperation between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and regional
organizations. We welcome the Chair’s plan to visit
the country in October. We hope that the sanctions
Committee will continue its consultations and maintain
contact with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, as the situation evolves,
will examine sanctions measures in a timely manner
and play an active role in helping the Government and
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
achieve peace and stability in the country on their own.
The Chinese Government has always supported
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and, to the extent possible, has provided
assistance to the country. China is ready to work with
the international community in continuing to play a
constructive role for peace, stability and development
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

S/PV. 8026

Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation thanks you, Sir, for convening
this briefing and presenting us with a detailed report
(S/2017/672/Rev.1) on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which you are chairing effectively and objectively.
The Senegalese delegation would like to join
previous speakers in expressing its appreciation to the
Group of Experts for their outstanding work in drafting
the report, which was submitted to us. That work is
especially precious since it was carried out in particularly
difficult and painful circumstances, clouded this past
March by the murders of two members of the Group,
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán, whose families are
honouring us with their presence at today’s briefing. I
would like to take this opportunity to reiterate to these
family members and to the members of the Group our
heartfelt condolences, profound sympathy, solidarity
and support during this trying time, which they are
undergoing. Our same heartfelt feelings go out to the
delegations of the United States and Sweden.
I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. His presence is an additional illustration of
the resolve of his country to pursue its constructive
engagement with the international community, in
particular with the security Council, to respond to
the security, political, economic, humanitarian, and
development challenges, which concern us all.
Today’s meeting also makes it possible to highlight
the work that the Group of Experts achieved in a
particularly difficult environment, marked — as I
have just said — not only by the deaths of two of their
own, but by the heightened level of threats, particularly
security threats.
The decrease in cases of violence linked to the
electoral process throughout the country, mentioned
in the report, in addition to the progress noted in
voter registration are encouraging developments that,
by their nature, are conducive to a positive dynamic
leading towards peaceful, democratic and transparent
elections. In that context, we call once again on the
Congolese political stakeholders to resolutely step up
their commitment towards a peaceful political transition
by consensus that is respectful of the aspirations of the
Congolese people within the framework of the rules and

17-2611613/22

S/PV.8026

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

laws of the country. I would nevertheless also like to take
this opportunity to urge the international community
to provide the Democratic Republic of the Congo the
necessary and pledged resources — especially financial
resources — with a view to implement the political
process launched following the political agreement,
which was signed on New Year’s Eve 2016.
With regard to the final report of the Group of
Experts under consideration, it need be noted that
the situation with regard to the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a matter
of concern with the active presence of armed groups,
which remain the primary source of insecurity and
threats for civilians. Such resilience on the part of those
groups, which moreover tend to multiply despite the
combined efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the armed forces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, concerns us
and reminds us that, in addition to military efforts,
methodical and far-reaching work remains to be done
so as to cut them off from their main sources of revenue
and various outside sources of support.
In that regard, the investigation of the Group of
Experts is particularly informative in noting possible
contributions by the diaspora to armed groups
covered by the sanctions regime through websites. We
encourage the Group to continue in that direction so as
to establish the scale and extent of those operations and,
depending on the situation, make recommendations
aimed at ending their financing. In that regard, we
would underline that the cooperation of Member States
is essential for the full implementation of sanctions, in
particular in this specific case.
In that context, the Senegalese delegation would
like to point out the resurgence of the ex-Mouvement
du 23 mars, detected since mid-January, in order to
stress the importance of strengthened regional and
subregional cooperation so as to definitively eliminate
the threat of that armed group’s reconstitution. The
same concern arises with regard to the remobilization
of the Mai Mai groups involving former combatants
who participated in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme.
As the Group of Experts has recommended, we
must also stress the need to assess and recalibrate
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, especially with regard to the reintegration
14/22

17/08/2017

component. Indisputably, although the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is primarily
responsible for that, the work cannot be properly carried
out without the renewed contribution of partners,
including MONUSCO — which implies financial,
logistical and technical support.
The issue of natural resources play a prominent
role in the final report of the Group of Experts and is
a recurring theme. In particular, the illegal trade and
exportation of natural resources continue to provide
considerable income to armed groups and fuel the
instability and insecurity in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, while, at the same
time, financing criminal networks inside and outside of
the country. Accordingly, that important issue was the
timely subject of a meeting of the Committee pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which you chair, Sir, held on
4 August at your initiative. It was a very informative
meeting that allowed for discussion on specific aspects
of the sanctions regime with key stakeholders and
partners, namely, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the region.
At that meeting, through those exchanges, it
became clear that cooperation on the international,
regional and subregional levels can and must play a
role in the various mechanisms to combat the illegal
exploitation and commerce of natural resources, and
that the capacity of the region and the Conference
must be strengthened so as to implement effective and
integrated control and traceability systems. As the report
notes, the effectiveness of the traceability systems and
the implementation of due diligence rules have halted
the aims of armed groups that seek to profit from the
exploitation of tin, tantalum and tungsten — the famous
three Ts. Henceforth, although the system remains to
be perfected in connection with dealing with cases of
corruption and fraud, the same efforts and cooperation
that were effective in dealing with the three Ts must
also serve as a model for the gold-mining sector, which
is considered the most lucrative source of income for
armed groups and criminal networks.
As we know, trafficking in natural resources is
not the only challenge facing us in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. For there is also
the illicit trafficking of weapons in violation of the arms
embargo, which is one of the main causes of insecurity.
In that regard, the solution could also come from
17-26116

17/08/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

strengthened cooperation on the international level and
among countries of the region so as to dismantle the
trafficking network and the supply chain of weapons
and ammunition to negative forces. Strengthening the
capacities of those countries in connection with the
storage and management of their arsenals, as well as
improving traceability systems, is an important part of
the response to those challenges.
With regard to cases of violations of international
humanitarian law, my delegation would like to reiterate,
as stated in the report, that the unconscionable killing
of the two experts mandated by the Security Council
constitutes an attack on this body and against the
United Nations itself. It is a serious violation of
international humanitarian law. Senegal, in the light
of its involvement in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, can only express its deep concern at the
threats to the United Nations personnel on the ground.
In this regard, my country supports the investigative
and procedural efforts of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in collaboration
with the United Nations and other interested parties,
in accordance with Congolese legislation, in order to
shed full light on these two murders and to bring the
perpetrators to justice. In the same vein, with respect
to vulnerability, particularly of women and children,
in the prevailing atmosphere of insecurity, especially
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Kasaï region, my delegation recalls the provisions of
resolution 2360 (2017), adopted last June, which calls,
inter alia, for
“all those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations or abuses of human
rights including those involving violence or abuses
against children and acts of sexual and genderbased violence, to be swiftly apprehended, brought
to justice and held accountable” (resolution 2360
(2017), twenty-fifth preambular paragraph).
In that regard, my delegation wishes to hail and
encourage the leadership of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, who spoke to us a few days ago about her
joint visit with the African Union, highlighting the
timeliness of reconciling efforts the United Nations,
on the one hand, and the Congolese authorities, on the
other, in order to prevent and stop the recruitment and
use of children as well as violence, including and sexual
violence, perpetrated against them, while combating
impunity of perpetrators of such acts (see S/PV.8022).

S/PV. 8026

Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): Mr. President, we
would like to thank you for convening today’s meeting
to hear your insightful briefing on the final report of
the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2017/672/Rev.1).
We are honoured to have his Excellency Mr. Léonard
She Okitundu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, among us and
welcome him to our deliberations. We also recognize
the presence of the parents of Michael Sharp — Mr. John
Sharp and Mrs. Michele Sharp — as well as the mother
and sister of Zaida Catalán, Mrs. Maria Moresby and
Mrs. Elizabeth Moresby. I would ask them to accept our
sincerest and most heartfelt condolences for their tragic
and irreplaceable loss. Michael and Zaida made heroic
sacrifices by giving their lives for peace and security in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We honour their
memories by offering our highest commitment to the
noble ideals they lived for.
We highly esteem the extensive work of the
Committee pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) and
commend its leadership and the Group of Experts
on the ground as they address the challenges facing
the country. Your trip to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Sir, and continuous efforts to maintain a
constructive dialogue with the local authorities and
regional and international partners make an invaluable
contribution to strengthening peace and stability in
the region.
On the political front, we are concerned at the
increasing popular dissatisfaction with the political
process, deepened by the worsening socioeconomic
situation and increasing insecurity in Kinshasa and other
main urban centres. We encourage the Government and
the signatories of the political agreement to make every
effort to reach consensus for its implementation and
to hold timely, credible and transparent presidential,
national and provincial legislative elections. We
therefore urge the National Electoral Commission of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to work closely
with the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
uphold internationally acceptable electoral regulations,
engaging all interested sides.
While we see considerably reduced exploitation of
and trade in the country’s natural resources, we need
to close all loopholes in the implementation of the
sanctions regimes and overcome the impediments of

17-2611615/22

S/PV.8026

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

corruption and the weakening of State institutions that
block our success. The fight against illicit trafficking in
natural resources is critical to enabling the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to move beyond conflict towards
peacebuilding and development.
Concerned with increasing violations of human
rights, especially conflict-related sexual violence
against women and children, we call for strict
monitoring, improved protection services and better
law enforcement, with a view to fighting impunity. We
therefore need a comprehensive assessment of effective
implementation of measures imposed by resolution 2360
(2017), including future engagements with concerned
States on the implementation of those measures and
recommendations of the monitoring group.
We strongly condemn the activities of all armed
groups operating in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and their violations, especially those involved
in attacks on the civilian population, United Nations
personnel and humanitarian actors. We therefore call
for the comprehensive and voluntary disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation,
reintegration
and
resettlement of Congolese and foreign militia for the
long-term stability and economic development of
the country.
Finally, Kazakhstan, like others, is committed
to achieving peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We understand that there is no simple or
quick formula for completing all the large-scale tasks
of conflict prevention and stabilization. We therefore
call for the effective implementation of Security
Council resolutions and the political agreement of
31 December 2016.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your briefing in your capacity as Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would also like to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Léonard
She Okitundu, and thank him for his participation at
today’s meeting. Like my colleagues before me,
I wish to express my special gratitude for the
presence in the Chamber of the mother and father
of Michael Sharp and the mother and sister of Zaida
Catalán, to whom I wish to reiterate and convey
personally the condolences of the Government of
Uruguay. The appalling event that ended the lives of
16/22

17/08/2017

the two members of the Group of Experts reminds us
of the difficulties and tragedies faced by many victims
of violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
also reminds us of the constant sacrifices made by all
United Nations personnel on the ground, whether they
are soldiers, police officers or civilians.
Acts of sacrifice and selflessness, such as those
of Zaida and Michael, are worthy of our constant
remembrance and our utmost gratitude and respect.
Uruguay remains firmly committed to the development
of all necessary investigations to identify those
responsible for such cowardly acts and closely follows
all new developments in the matter. On this point, we
take note of the Executive Summary of the United
Nations Board of Inquiry transmitted to the Council
this week and we encourage Council members to
continue to examine in detail the content of the report,
in particular the recommendations contained therein.
Mr. President, I would like to acknowledge your
outstanding work and the active role you have been
playing as the Chair of the 1533 (2004) Committee.
Of the various Committee activities that you have
mentioned, I would like to highlight in particular its
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo last year,
meetings with neighbouring countries and meetings
held with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. Uruguay encourages
you to continue with this work for the rest of the year,
and we support your plan to organize another visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the next
few months.
I would also like to express our gratitude to the
Group of Experts, which, in spite of recently having to
deal with extraordinary and very painful circumstances,
has once again managed to produce a substantive final
report (S/2017/672/Rev.1) that is very helpful for the
work of the Committee and the Council. We share the
various assessments offered by the Group of Experts.
We are concerned about the activity of armed groups,
the violations of human rights and the lack of concrete
progress in the political process.
In conclusion, Uruguay would like to once again
reiterate how urgent it is to fully implement the political
agreement of 31 December 2016, in its entirety, in good
faith in order to organize peaceful elections that are
credible, inclusive and timely, by December at the latest.
17-26116

17/08/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): My delegation wishes to
express its appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your
comprehensive briefing and for the excellent work that
you have been doing as Chair of the Committee pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also wish to thank you for
your comprehensive briefing on its activities as well
as those of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are pleased to welcome the
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We also acknowledge the presence of the families
of Miss Zaida Catalán and Mr. Michael Sharp, the
two selfless members of the Group of Experts who
were mercilessly killed while on United Nations duty.
We take this opportunity to once again pay tribute to
them for their courage and dedication in discharging
their duties under extremely challenging circumstances
that, unfortunately, cost them their lives. We express
our deepest condolences to the families for their
tragic loss and hope that everything possible will be
done to bring the perpetrators of this heinous crime to
justice. In this regard, we take note of the findings and
recommendations of the Board of Inquiry, and we look
forward to the discussion on the matter next week.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is indeed
facing enormous challenges. Political tensions persist
in relation to the implementation of the December 2016
agreement although there is still hope that it can pave
the way for the holding of elections and the end of the
transition period. As the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/672/Rev.1) indicates, the proliferation
of violence in different parts of the country continues to
erode State authority, weaken institutions and hamper
the socioeconomic development of the country, which,
in effect, prolongs the situation of conflict. However, we
realize that the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is very complex. The African Union and the
countries of the region have an enormous responsibility
to assist the country to regain peace and full stability.
That can be done provided the other challenges are
also addressed.
The negative activities of the armed groups in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have been fuelled by
the illegal exploitation of the mineral resources of the
country, especially gold and diamonds, which suffer
from a lack of traceability. In this connection, there is a
need to vigorously monitor the incidence of fraudulent

S/PV. 8026

use of gold and diamond exports, as well as the illegal
taxation of local populations. The open briefing held on
4 August on the illicit exploitation of national resources
was indeed very relevant to the Committee. The work
of the Group of Experts on this matter will continue to
be extremely vital.
The human rights and humanitarian situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as so
many colleagues have mentioned, is no doubt also of
serious concern. Various forms of violence are being
committed against civilians, particularly women and
children, in the Kivus, Kasaï and Tanganyika regions.
The briefing received from the Presidential Adviser
on Sexual Violence and Child Recruitment in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the informal
consultations held by the Committee with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
were very important.
In general we appreciate the work that the
Committee and the Group of Experts have been doing
to try to address the many difficult and complex
challenges facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and to promote peace and stability in the country. In
this regard the continuous efforts being made to consult
with the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and countries of the region, including within the
framework of the Peace and Security Council, as well
as to forge greater synergy and cooperation with other
regional and international partners is commendable.
We take note of the Chair’s intention to visit the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in October, and we
hope the visit will provide an opportunity to understand
the current dynamics and facilitate the implementation
of the various measures outlined in the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Let me conclude by assuring the Chair of the
Committee of Ethiopia’s continued support and
cooperation to him in the effective discharge of
his responsibilities.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, my delegation wishes to
acknowledge your work as Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and thanks you for
your briefing on the Committee’s work.

17-2611617/22

S/PV.8026

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

My delegation would also like to welcome His
Excellency, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Regional Integration of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Léonard She Okitundu.
Bolivia welcomes and highlights the work of the
Group of Experts for their efforts to promote lasting
peace and stability in this brotherly country, in
accordance with the provisions of the Council. We
recognize and extend our deepest sympathy to Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalán, the experts who lost their
lives in the fulfilment of their duties. We express our
condolences to and solidarity with their families, who
are present at this meeting.
We are concerned about the lack of results in the
investigation, which should provide the information
necessary to identify those responsible for that tragic
crime, so that they may be tried and punished by the
competent courts.
Bolivia takes into consideration that the challenges
faced by both the Group of Experts and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have increased
exponentially. Both face the violence of local armed
groups that, according to the final report of the
Group of Experts (S/2017/672/Rev.1), has started up
again. Moreover, they face foreign armed groups that
maintain alliances with local groups, encouraging
the recruitment of new and ex-combatants, and
putting at risk the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. Furthermore, the Group of
Experts has identified that, although the mechanism to
track minerals such as tin, tantalum and tungsten has
prevented the benefits of mining from going to armed
groups, there are still deficiencies in its implementation.
We therefore encourage the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to continue to work on the effective operation of
this mechanism.
The report also points out that the gold sector does
not have a tracking mechanism; as such there is no
effective monitoring of the trade in this mineral, which
facilitates contraband and generates illegal financial
flows that are later legitimized. Bolivia reiterates the
need to fight against tax havens that allow the integration
of illicit gains into the world financial system.
The challenges of managing natural resources are
reflected in the history and the current situation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such resources are
among the factors that influence the prolongation and
18/22

17/08/2017

changing dynamics of the conflict, which are reflected
in the fragmentation of armed groups that operate in
an increasingly coordinated manner, with humanitarian
consequences for populations that, in many cases, are
forced to abandon their homes.
Bolivia expresses its concern over the systematic
looting of natural resources in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by armed groups, some members of the
armed forces and multinational companies that exploit
areas rich in diamonds and gold without oversight.
Monitoring areas rich in natural resources and their
sovereign administration is critical to promoting a
cessation of hostilities and economic development.
When a country maintains effective control of its
resources and there is political, it is possible to undertake
a structural change leading to stabilization and the
strengthening of the rule of law. The lack of control
over natural resources, added to political instability, are
challenges that should be resolved in the first instance
by the Congolese people. In that respect, it is important
to work to harmonize and coordinate the efforts of all
actors in respect of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
With respect to the effectiveness of the sanctions
regime, Bolivia believes that the latter should not be
an end in themselves. Sanctions should be used as
the last resource following a failure to implement the
provisional measures set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations, and should be imposed only when
there is a threat to international peace and security
or an act of aggression. Bolivia also believes that the
design and preparation of sanctions must be regulated
by just and transparent procedures, allowing the clear
establishment of the conditions required of the States
or parties on which they are imposed. These measures
should be subject to periodic evaluations that allow
a balance to be struck between their effects and the
adjustments necessary to modify them in connection
with the evolution of the situation.
We stress that the only entity encharged with this
task is the Security Council, which must do so with the
aim of improving the desired results and to guarantee
the maintenance of international peace and security. The
tendency to implement and impose unilateral sanctions
seriously jeopardises multilateralism and threatens the
international order, undermining the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
17-26116

17/08/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We believe that the commendable initiatives
undertaken by the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in the framework of the strategic concept for
the joint operations of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
could be replicated in Central Africa. The Group
addresses terrorism and transnational organized crime
by operating in border areas, based on a strategy and an
institutional framework supported by the international
community. We believe that this is a viable option
worthy of consideration.
With respect to the political agreement signed on
31 December 2016 between the Government and the
opposition, Bolivia commends the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman
Sambo Sidikou, to implement the agreement, including
the meeting held with the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Bolivia encourages the efforts to build consensus
in the Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales
de la République démocratique du Congo and the
Majorité présidentielle. We call on the parties to
engage in inclusive dialogue focused on respect for
the Congolese Constitution, taking into account the
points of view of all and including the establishment
of the follow-up mechanism and the implementation
of confidence-building measures. The best tribute we
can pay to Michael and Zaida is to continue to work
for peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give
the floor to the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister
of Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the
Congo): (spoke in French): I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month of August 2017, and to
welcome, through you, the friendly country of Egypt,
with which the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
enjoyed excellent relations for many years. I thank
you for this opportunity to address the Council at this
meeting, which is considering the final report of the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2017/672/Rev.1).
I also take this opportunity to express to the
Security Council the recognition of the people and
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV. 8026

for the support and assistance they receive from the
United Nations and, more specifically, from the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
Lastly, allow me to express my delegation’s
appreciation to the Group of Experts, which continues
to devote itself courageously and tirelessly to the cause
of my country. The quality of its work, despite some
shortcomings linked to human nature, deserves to be
highly praised.
This is also the place to offer a solemn thought in
memory of the two United Nations experts, Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalán, who were murdered in the
central Kasaï region. The Government of my country
and the Congolese people as a whole strongly condemn
this despicable act, and I want to reassure the United
Nations that the perpetrators of this crime will be
severely punished.
I cannot continue my statement without addressing
myself to the parents of Michael and Zaida, who are
in the Chamber. On behalf of the Government of my
country, I would like to convey our deeply shared grief
for the immense loss of the dear ones whom they have
loved and whom nothing in the world can replace.
Our Government and our people wish to express our
compassion for the misfortune that has struck them and
reiterate our deepest condolences. Michael and Zaida
certainly worked in the service of the United Nations,
but also indirectly in that of my country, to which
they rendered valuable services by traveling across its
territory to denounce all obstacles to peace. They did
their work not only with passion, but also with love.
They paid with their lives so that the troubled regions
of my country might find peace. Our duty, in honouring
their memories and giving meaning to their sacrifice,
requires us to pool our efforts so that the peace they so
fervently desired and sought becomes a reality for our
people as a whole.
I take note of the essential nature of the final report
of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and thank you, Sir, for the briefing you
have just given. I should have liked to limit my remarks
to the content of the report alone, but the Council’s
attention to the situation in my country requires me to
speak on a number of questions that will surely be of
interest to its members. In that context, I shall briefly
review the political situation, the electoral process, the

17-2611619/22

S/PV.8026

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

security situation in general and particularly in the
Kasaï region, as well as human rights issues.
The political situation, as members know, remains
dominated by the implementation of the political
agreement of 31 December 2016. Indeed, under the
aforementioned agreement, a Government of national
unity led by the opposition is already at work. Internal
disagreements within certain political parties of the
opposition, inherent in any political process, in no way
detract from the Government’s legality resulting from
its investiture by the National Parliament. Moreover, the
recent seating of the members of the National Council for
Oversight of the Agreement and the imminent adoption
of the law on the organization and functioning of that
body will enable the process under way to continue its
progress towards the organization of elections. In this
regard, it should be noted that operations to update the
electoral register have developed to our satisfaction.
Indeed, out of the expected 42 million voters, the
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI)
has already registered more than 39 million, that, 90 per
cent of the total number.
In the provinces of Kasaï, which have suffered
heavy human and material losses as a result of the
crimes and violence perpetrated by the terrorist militia
Kamuina Nsapu, the deployment of equipment, with
the support of MONUSCO, and the training of electoral
agents have already begin. Registration operations
themselves will begin by the end of this month. As soon
as the enrollment process is completed, the Government
will request the urgent consideration of the revision of
the electoral law and the review of the distribution of
seats at the next parliamentary session.
My delegation wishes to reassure the Council that
the elections will indeed take place in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in accordance with the electoral
calendar to be published by the CENI. It goes without
saying that, in accordance with the agreement of
31 December 2016, the CENI, the National Council for
Oversight of the Agreement and the Government will
shortly evaluate the progress of the preparations to
assess the exact period of the three scheduled elections:
the presidential, national legislative and provincial
legislative elections.
With regard to the security aspect, the report under
review highlights the continued presence of some
foreign and national armed groups in the eastern part
of our country. To address this situation, the Forces
20/22

17/08/2017

armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC), with the support of MONUSCO, is pursuing
military operations against these groups. With
particular reference to Allied Democratic Forces, it
should be noted that since the dismantling of their main
bastions, their operational capacities have substantially
decreased. A certain lull has thus been observed in
what was their range of operation.
With regard to the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda, my delegation considers it
important to recall the case of the 340 combatants of
that negative force who voluntarily surrendered to the
FARDC three years ago. As Council members know,
these fighters remain to this day in transit sites at
Kanyabayonga in North Kivu, Walungu in South Kivu
and Kisangani in Tshopo. The repeated appeals to the
international community for their repatriation to their
countries of origin or resettlement in a third country
outside the countries of the Great Lakes region have so
far received no favourable response. My Government
calls once again on the international community,
which has always insisted on the eradication of that
negative force, to become involved in order to achieve
a definitive solution.
It seems to me important to recall here also the
situation of the combatants of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition, which
MONUSCO has confined to Munigi in North Kivu
and Dungu in Haut-Uélé. My country, which wishes to
live in peace and maintain good relations with South
Sudan, also calls on the United Nations to assume its
responsibility to resolve this situation by repatriating
these ex-combatants to their country or facilitating
their settlement in another host country.
As regards former members of the Mouvement du 23
mars, it should be noted that they continue, in violation
of the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region and the Nairobi Declaration, to freely
engage in their political and military activities in the
neighbouring countries to which they have fled. My
Government has never ceased to denounce the bad faith
of these ex-rebels. It condemns their military activism
and calls once again to the attention of the Council the
need to consider imposing sanctions on the leadership
of that movement. My Government reaffirms its
determination to continue to fulfil its commitments
and calls on other parties concerned to do the same for
17-26116

17/08/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

sake of the stability of my country and of the region as
a whole.
In addition to all this, I must point out that the
illegal exploitation and plundering of natural resources
are also among the causes of the armed conflict and
instability that persist in the east of my country. My
Government has undertaken efforts to reverse this
situation, in particular by clearing mining sites and
setting up a national commission against mining
fraud. It will be agreed that these efforts alone are not
enough to end this situation. It is therefore important
for the neighbouring countries and the international
community to join in these efforts. My country is asking
the United Nations to take appropriate steps to develop
a sanctions mechanism for defaulting States, including
suspension or embargoes on trade in minerals, similar
to the measures taken under the Kimberley Process.
I cannot close this chapter without mentioning the
case of the terrorist insurgents Kamuina Nsapu. This
mystical-religious movement was born in August 2016
in the territory of Dibaya, in the province of Central
Kasaï, following a conflict over customary power
created by a certain Jean Prince Pandi, alias Kamuina
Nsapu, who had declared himself to be atraditional
chef. He died on 12 August 2016 in clashes between
his militia and the security forces. His followers, who
spread terror and death in the provinces of Central
Kasaï, Kasaï, Kasaï Oriental and Lomami, used
civilians, especially children and women, as human
shields after drugging them. They gather in small
groups to attack public buildings that symbolize the
authority of the State, such as police stations, army
facilities, administrative and CENI offices, as well as
the infrastructure of the Catholic Church.
Today, the authority of the State is virtually
restored throughout that part of the national territory.
Particularly after the tour carried out by the Head of
State to reassure the populations of all the affected
provinces of Kasaï. The major remaining challenge
is of a humanitarian nature, related to internally and
externally displaced persons, whose management
requires the urgent mobilization of all partners for
substantial assistance.
In discussing the Kamuina Nsapu militia, I believe
it would be appropriate to give a brief overview of the
progress of investigations in the provinces affected
by that phenomenon. Following a deterioration of the
situation, the President of the Republic, His Excellency

S/PV. 8026

Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, in his address to both
Houses of Parliament in Congress, expressed his resolve
to restore State authority in that part of the country,
stressing that the crimes committed by militiamen
against peaceful citizens, law enforcement officials
and the United Nations could not go unpunished and
that their perpetrators, who are the subject of judicial
investigations, should be punished in accordance with
the law. In order to give effect to his word, he signed
orders setting up an operational sector in Grand
Kasaï and instructed the Minister of Justice to take
prompt steps to ensure that competent prosecutors and
prosecutors could initiate investigations where nothing
had yet been done, so that justice could be restored to
the victims. The Minister of Justice was also instructed
to expedite the investigations under way som as to
ensure that justice was rendered as soon as possible in
the areas where the militia continued to operate under
the Kamuina Nsapu label.
With regard to the allegations of serious human rights
violations against the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo in the Kasaï area, a National
Board of Inquiry, led by senior military magistrates,
was created by the Government to shed light on this
situation. It was in that context that the Auditor General
announced the arrest of seven soldiers suspected of
war crimes by murder; war crimes by mutilation; war
crimes by cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment;
and denial of an offense committed by individuals
or military jurisdictions, committed in the Mwanza
Lomba massacre in Bena Tshikasu. The incriminated
persons were convicted in the first degree following
public hearings.
As for the mass graves, the joint MONUSCO auditormilitary investigations and audits are continuing.
Regarding the deaths of two United Nations experts,
the events leading to their assassination took place
in Bunkonde, a town 100 kilometres from Kananga,
the capital of Central Kasaï province. Initiated by the
Auditor General of the Congolese armed forces, the
investigation into the murder of these two experts led to
the identification of 16 suspects, 9 of whom are already
in detention. Nineteen hearings have already taken
place, while the next, devoted to a visit to the scene of
the murder, is scheduled for August 21.
In these investigations, Congolese justice is
already working with the United Nations. As part of
this collaboration, MONUSCO provides logistical

17-2611621/22

S/PV.8026

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

assistance to the military prosecutor. In the same vein,
three international experts of Senegalese, Canadian
and Mauritanian nationality, were recently appointed
by the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
accordance with resolution 35/33 of 23 June 2017
of the Human Rights Council, in agreement with
the Congolese Government. These will be assisted
by 19 international experts and experts from the
African Union.
It goes without saying that these experts must be
deployed in strict compliance with the terms of reference
established in the resolution of the Human Rights
Council, namely, that the deployment must be in the
framework of assistance provided to the investigations
carried out the Congolese military justice system. In
the same spirit of openness and transparency, we note
the excellent technical cooperation between the judicial
authorities of my country and the experts from the
United States Federal Bureau of Investigation, at the
request of the American authorities.
As regards Sweden’s request for cooperation to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I should like to
reassure the Council that, just as we have been ready to
cooperate with the American authorities, the Congolese
Government agrees to cooperate with Sweden in the
investigations being conducted by the Congolese
judiciary, despite the fact that we do not have a formal
mutual legal assistance convention between our two
countries. The Minister of Justice has informed the
Swedish Ambassador to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo on this point. The Prosecutor General of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will agree on the
practical modalities for partnership \with his Swedish
counterpart, through appropriate letters rogatory.
In this tragic situation, my country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, has suffered much loss of life.
Law enforcement officers and officials of the CENI,

22/22

17/08/2017

administrative and customary authorities have been
beheaded. Ruthless militia have killed women, men and
children. All these innocent victims deserve justice.
That is why the Government of my country will spare
no effort to ensure that the perpetrators of all these
crimes are arrested and punished.
Before concluding, allow me to express the position
of my Government on two of the recommendations
formulated by the experts, as contained in the report
before us. I refer specifically to the recommendation
on the establishment of an independent international
investigation into the murder of the two experts and
that requesting the extension of the Group’s mandate to
30 December 2018.
My Government does not think it is a good idea
to set up such an inquiry in that, in accordance with
35/33 of the Human Rights Council and for reasons
of transparency, we are already cooperating with
established United Nations mechanisms and with the
inquiries being conducted by the appropriate authorities
of the countries of origin of the two victims. As to the
request for an extension of the terms of reference of
the Group of Experts, my Government considers that
this issue has already been resolved in resolution 2360
(2017) of 21 June, which extended the mandate of the
Group until 1 August 2018.
I would like to conclude by expressing my gratitude
to the Chairman of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the work he has done since he
assumed his post. I would also like to thank the Group
of Experts for its commitment and determination in the
exercise of its mandate. To all members of the Council,
I reiterate the gratitude of the Government and people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

17-26116
