UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1106
29 October 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 29 OCTOBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
28 October 1999 (see annex), which I have received from the Permanent
Representative of Australia to the United Nations.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-32234 (E)

291099

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/1106
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 28 October 1999 from the Permanent Representative of
Australia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1264 (1999) of
15 September 1999, I attach the third periodic report on the operations of the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) (see appendix).
I would appreciate
your making the report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Penny WENSLEY

/...

S/1999/1106
English
Page 3

Appendix
Third periodic report to the United Nations on the operations
of the International Force, East Timor
13 to 26 October 1999

I.

Introduction

1.
In the period since the last report to the Security Council, and a month
after the initial deployment of the International Force, East Timor (INTERFET),
the multinational force has moved into the Ambino enclave, providing a presence
throughout all East Timor regencies. On 22 October, independence figure
Xanana Gusmao returned to East Timor. Following a meeting with the Commander of
INTERFET, Gusmao visited Falintil Headquarters and conducted a tour of Dili,
with INTERFET providing security.
2.
Although the western border regions pose a challenge to the maintenance of
peace and security, the situation in East Timor has greatly improved over that
facing INTERFET upon its arrival. The success of INTERFET in meeting its
mandate, together with the Indonesian People’s Consultative Assembly agreement
to revoke the 1978 decree incorporating East Timor into Indonesia, and the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) of 25 October 1999,
establishing the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) are important steps in the early deployment of a peacekeeping
operation.
3.
While militia elements cannot be entirely removed from the equation, their
capacity to destabilize East Timor has been reduced to a very low level. Where
militias are active INTERFET has demonstrated its ability to respond quickly and
deal effectively with these incidents.

II.

Cooperation with the Government of Indonesia

4.
The most significant development in the period since the Government of
Indonesia invited an international force to restore security in East Timor is
the agreement of the People’s Consultative Assembly (MPR) to revoke the 1978
decree incorporating East Timor into Indonesia. The remaining Tentara Nasional
Indonesia (TNI) forces are expected to withdraw from East Timor shortly and
assets jointly controlled by INTERFET and TNI will become the responsibility of
INTERFET. This is a welcome development and an important milestone in the
transition to a United Nations transitional administration and peacekeeping
operation.
5.
Cooperation between INTERFET and TNI continues with a joint investigation
of the border incident at Motaain (see S/1999/1072, para. 14). The report will
be forwarded to the Secretary-General.

/...

S/1999/1106
English
Page 4

III.

Restoration of peace and security

6.
INTERFET is represented by forces from Australia, Brazil, Canada, France,
Germany, Ireland, Italy, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Republic of
Korea, Singapore, Thailand, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and the United States of America. As at 25 October, INTERFET had
approximately 8,000 personnel deployed in East Timor.
7.
Since the second report to the Security Council was tabled, only one
significant security incident has occurred involving INTERFET. On 16 October,
an INTERFET patrol was attacked by an estimated 20 armed militiamen near the
town of Bobonaro, approximately 12 to 15 kilometres from the border with West
Timor. INTERFET sustained no casualties in the action, but three militiamen
were reported killed, with a further three wounded.
8.
On 22 October, INTERFET entered the separate East Timor enclave of Ambino.
Weapons consisting of pipe guns and knives were confiscated. Oecussi, the major
centre of the enclave, was essentially deserted, with the church remaining as
the only significant structure. Three local East Timorese were evacuated by
INTERFET to Dili for treatment of wounds caused by militiamen and suspected to
be approximately one month old.
9.
On 22 October, Xanana Gusmao returned to Dili. His return is an important
indicator of the restoration of peace in the territory, and particularly Dili.
Mr. Gusmao has discussed the need for reconciliation and has publicly called for
militiamen to peacefully reintegrate themselves into East Timorese society.
INTERFET is providing his personal security.
10. Dili continues to show signs of stability and security, with more than
70,000 displaced residents returning to a secure environment. The Dili market
has reopened. Attention is turning to the rebuilding of civil institutions.
The major impediment remains the lack of suitable accommodation as a result of
the destruction that followed the announcement of the ballot.
11. Overall, the INTERFET coalition has achieved a very significant proportion
of its mandate concerning the restoration of peace and security, with the key
indicators being the increased level of security in towns and on roads, and the
reduced incidence of violence against INTERFET. While small groups of
militiamen remain in East Timor, their ability to physically threaten the local
population is largely gone. When security has been threatened, INTERFET has
responded quickly and effectively to resolve the incident, and has achieved
these results with the minimal use of force. On the basis of progress to date,
the expectation is that INTERFET will have achieved its mandate in time for the
transition to UNTAET.

IV.

Protection of and support for the United Nations Mission
in East Timor

12. The progress made by INTERFET on the restoration of peace and security
means that UNAMET activities are now unhindered by the security concerns. With
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1272 (1999), INTERFET will extend
/...

S/1999/1106
English
Page 5

its support to members of UNTAET. INTERFET welcomes the decision on the UNTAET
deployment, recognizing the urgency of restoring the broader aspects of civil
administration, absent since violence first erupted early in September.

V.

Facilitation of humanitarian assistance operations

13. The ability to distribute humanitarian assistance safely continues to
increase with the growing level of general security throughout the territory,
and the pace of security restoration has outstripped the pace of aid
distribution in some cases. Humanitarian relief efforts are ongoing in most
parts of East Timor, including the border regions in the west. Humanitarian
assistance in the Ambino enclave will have commenced by the time the present
report is presented to the Security Council.
14. The major humanitarian challenges facing the relief effort in East Timor at
present are the return of large numbers of displaced persons (from both internal
areas and West Timor) and the commencement of the wet season.
15. INTERFET continues to open western border areas for humanitarian aid
convoys distributing food and non-food aid. These western border regions remain
relatively hazardous for returnees from West Timor, although TNI appears to be
providing protection for some of these convoys. Aid agencies are providing
regular assessments of urgent humanitarian needs, infrastructure and the
logistics situation in most districts of East Timor. To date, over 14,000
displaced persons are estimated to have returned to East Timor by sea, land and
air, including the arrival of over 3,000 persons in Dili and Baucau by sea and
air on 25 October. More than 100,000 East Timorese are expected to re-enter the
territory over the coming months.
16. The onset of the wet season will impose additional burdens on the people of
East Timor and the various aid organizations. Of concern is the need to provide
sufficient shelter. Transport on already poor roads will become more difficult.

VI.

Observations

17. As East Timor becomes more secure and the population returns, the lack of
many aspects of civil administration becomes more apparent. There is growing
demand for increased civil services as well as the reconstruction and
reconciliation of society. As the United Nations commanded peacekeeping
operation is integral to the transitional authority, the commencement of
detailed planning and early liaison between the commander of the peacekeeping
operation and the Commander of INTERFET would assist the transition greatly.

VII.

Outlook

18. The adoption of Security Council resolution 1272 (1999), authorizing the
presence of UNTAET in East Timor, is welcome. INTERFET has an established
presence throughout East Timor, including the Ambino enclave. The security
situation has improved dramatically since 20 September, the date of the initial
/...

S/1999/1106
English
Page 6

INTERFET deployment. Militia challenges to the mandate of INTERFET are isolated
and are dealt with quickly. The continuing build-up of INTERFET forces will
further improve the overall security situation. The Commander of INTERFET is
confident that the conditions are approaching a time when it would be
appropriate to hand over INTERFET to the UNTAET military component.
19. Consequently, INTERFET would welcome the early deployment of the United
Nations peacekeeping operation Force Commander and his key staff in order to
coordinate planning between the United Nations peacekeeping operation and
INTERFET. The early deployment of the UNTAET peacekeeping operation’s
headquarters would facilitate a transfer of forces and responsibilities.

-----
