S/PV.7185

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7185th meeting

Wednesday, 28 May 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oh Joon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-41159 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1441159*

Ukraine

S/PV.7185

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: On 25 May, according to reports,
slightly more than 60 per cent of Ukraine’s eligible
voters cast a ballot in the country’s early presidential
elections. An unprecedented number of national and
international monitors observed the polls and concluded
in statements that the election, to quote one statement,
“was characterized by high voter turnout and the
clear resolve of the authorities to hold what was a
genuine election largely in line with international
commitments and with a respect for fundamental
freedoms in the vast majority of the country. This
was despite the hostile security environment in two
eastern regions”.
At the same time, the numbers across Ukraine
varied considerably, even in areas under full
Government control, with lower participation in Odessa
and elsewhere in southern Ukraine. In parts of eastern
Ukraine, eligible voters were denied their right to vote
due to the seizure or blocking of polling stations, the
destruction of electoral equipment, intimidation and
violence. The United Nations is deeply concerned by
the actions of those who have attempted to derail the
elections and prevent citizens from having a say in their
country’s leadership.
According to preliminary results, Mr. Petro
Poroshenko won in the first round, obtaining 55 per
cent of the vote. This morning, the Secretary-General

2/19

28/05/2014

spoke over the phone to congratulate the President-elect
on having received a strong mandate from the people,
who expect him to move quickly to steer the country
away from political, economic and social instability
and towards security, greater prosperity and genuine
democratic governance. The Secretary-General
welcomed President-elect Poroshenko’s stated intention
to engage immediately in dialogue and de-escalation.
He affirmed that exercising restraint and reaching out
to eastern Ukraine was critical.
Despite what we at the United Nations hope will be
the beginning of a new chapter for Ukraine, violence
rages on in parts of the east, causing loss of life and
injuries. Since the last Security Council consultations
on the issue, held on 21 May, both Luhansk and
Donetsk oblasts experienced a dramatic increase in
deadly fighting. As a result, the numbers of casualties
and wounded continue to increase on both sides, with
civilian causalities reported as well. While we are
unable to confirm the details, the Secretary-General
is concerned by reports of scores of casualties; by
suggestions regarding the circulation and use of heavier
weaponry in the east; and by allegations of arms,
fighters and trucks entering Ukraine.
On 22 May, dozens of Ukrainian servicemen were
killed and many others wounded in an ambush by
unknown armed persons at a military checkpoint in the
city of Volnovakha.
On 26 May, fierce fighting ensued between
Government forces and armed groups when armed
militia stormed and attempted to seize control of
the Donetsk international airport. Ukrainian forces,
after conducting an air and land operation, are now
reportedly back in control of the airport, but sporadic
fighting continues close to the airport.
We are aware of video footage purporting to show
a United Nations-marked helicopter allegedly being
used inside Ukraine. The United Nations is unable
to determine the veracity of the images. I would note
that the Ukrainian authorities have affirmed to the
United Nations that no helicopters with United Nations
markings are being used in operations being conducted
inside Ukraine. We recall that it is the responsibility of
all troop-contributing countries that provide contingentowned equipment to peacekeeping missions to remove
all logos and signage bearing the United Nations name
once such equipment has been repatriated to the home

14-41159

28/05/2014

Ukraine

country or is no longer used for official United Nations
purposes.
In a deeply disturbing and alarming development,
following the capture of four Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) monitors on
26 May, today the OSCE headquarters in Kyiv lost
contact over several hours with an additional 11 OSCE
monitors, who were assumed to have been captured or
held by an armed group in Donetsk oblast. Following
my phone conversation earlier today with him, the
head of the OSCE monitoring mission, Ambassador
Apakan, just informed me that the 11 monitors have
been released in Donetsk. There is still no news of the
four monitors who have been held for the past two days.
The Secretary-General is appalled that international
staff have again been put in such grave danger. He
calls for their immediate release and appeals to all with
influence to assist.
The Secretary-General remains committed to
helping find a peaceful resolution to the crisis in
Ukraine and to assisting the country in prevailing over
the many difficult challenges that lie ahead. In that
vein, he appeals to the international community to use
the outcome of the elections as an opportunity to unite
in support of a peaceful, stable, prosperous and united
Ukraine.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing this afternoon.
We congratulate the Ukrainian people on the
success of their historic presidential elections on
Sunday, 25 May. The elections have been endorsed
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) as having been held largely in line with
Ukraine’s international commitments and with respect
for fundamental freedoms. After the turmoil of recent
months, that is an outstanding achievement, which
demonstrates the determination of the Ukrainian people
to exercise their democratic rights and to set Ukraine
on a new path towards stability. They have produced
a Government whose legitimacy cannot be questioned
and that deserves the full support of the international
community. The decisive victory of Mr. Poroshenko
sends a clear signal that the Ukrainian people are united
in their demand for reform.

S/PV.7185

We congratulate Mr. Poroshenko on his election. We
welcome his commitment to reaching out to all regions,
to normalizing relations with Russia and to working to
restore stability and calm. The United Kingdom remains
firmly committed to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the whole of Ukraine. We
look forward to working with Mr. Poroshenko and the
Ukrainian Government in their efforts to build a safe,
independent and prosperous country. We also pay tribute
to the staff of the Ukrainian Election Commission and
to the OSCE for their tireless commitment to ensuring
that the elections were a success, and particularly to
those who face threats of violence and intimidation in
the east of the country.
The high turnout on Sunday offers a powerful
rebuke to those illegal armed groups that sought to deny
the citizens of Donetsk and Luhansk their democratic
rights and that continue to pursue an armed campaign to
destabilize eastern Ukraine. Opinion polling in March
showed that 79 per cent in the east of Ukraine wanted
to vote in the elections. In May, despite the rising levels
of intimidation against election officials, activists and
ordinary citizens, 62 per cent still wanted to vote. It is
deeply regrettable that many in Donetsk and Luhansk
were prevented from doing so. The elections gave
Ukrainians the opportunity to express their views in a
peaceful and democratic manner.
It is telling that the response of illegal armed
groups to that display of national unity was an attempt
to seize control of Donetsk international airport. While
Ukraine sought a national consensus through the ballot
box, those groups immediately resorted to violence.
We respect the Ukrainian Government’s right to
respond to such armed attacks, to protect its citizens
and to reassert control over its sovereign territory. No
country could possibly accept illegal armed insurgents
taking control by force of public buildings and a
key national infrastructure, such as an international
airport. The Ukrainian authorities have acted with
admirable restraint in the fact of repeated provocation.
We continue to urge them to ensure that their security
response remains measured, proportionate and respects
the safety and security of non-combatants.
Since 21 February, the Ukrainian authorities have
repeatedly demonstrated that they are committed to
deep-rooted reform of Ukraine’s political system and
to making a decisive break with past corruption and
injustices. The issue of granting greater autonomy to
Ukraine’s regions has been on the agenda from the

14-411593/19

S/PV.7185

Ukraine

start. In line with its commitment and those undertaken
in Geneva, on 17 April they embarked on an intensive
effort to initiate an inclusive national dialogue. That
process represents a genuine opportunity for all
Ukrainians to address their grievances peacefully.
There can therefore be no justification for armed groups
to continue to press their cause through violence. We
therefore call on the insurgents to lay down their arms,
renounce violence and join in this debate. We also call
on the Russian Federation to take immediate action to
prevent illegal crossings of insurgents and weapons
across its border into Ukraine.
We are deeply concerned by two separate incidents
of abduction involving monitors from the OSCE special
monitoring mission in eastern Ukraine. We welcome
the release of 11 monitors after their detention earlier
today in Donetsk, but four others who went missing
on Monday are still unaccounted for. The detention of
OSCE personnel is completely unacceptable, and we
call for their immediate and unconditional release. The
special monitoring mission has a vital role to play, often
under difficult circumstances. We pay tribute to their
continuing work.
Sunday’s elections provide us all with an
opportunity to look past the turmoil of recent months
and to focus on the future. We welcome the recent
statements by the Russian Federation of its intention
to respect the right of the Ukrainian people to choose
their new President and its commitment to reduing the
threat of further external intervention in Ukraine’s
internal affairs by withdrawing its forces from the
Ukrainian border. Those are positive steps towards
de-escalation, but more action is needed. Continued
instability is not in the interests of the people of
Ukraine or in the interests of its neighbours and those
countries that value their relations with Ukraine. The
actions of illegal armed groups have resulted in scores
of tragic and unnecessary deaths and the disruption of
the Ukrainian economy and public services in the east.
That is hurting the very people that those groups claim
to represent and is denying them a voice in determining
Ukraine’s future.
Following the Geneva agreement of 17 April
and the OSCE road map of 7 May, we have a viable
political framework in place. Ukraine has already
made much progress towards implementing these
agreements, including notably the adoption on 20 May
of the memorandum of peace and concord. Our focus
must now be on promoting an inclusive, transparent

4/19

28/05/2014

and accountable national dialogue as an alternative
to violent insurgency. We welcome the three rounds
of dialogue that have already taken place with OSCE
facilitation. That national dialogue should allow all
parties to contribute their views on issues such as
decentralization, local self-governance, language and
national minorities, balance of powers, State society
relations and Ukraine’s role in Euro-Atlantic and EurAsian security.
The past few months have seen deep divisions
in the Security Council over Ukraine. Some of those
divisions will undoubtedly persist; in particular, along
with the overwhelming majority of the international
community, the United Kingdom will not recognize or
accept Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea. However,
Sunday’s elections provide the Council with a basis for
coming together behind some key principles: respect
for the will of the people of Ukraine, recognition of the
legitimacy of the new authorities in Ukraine, rejection of
armed insurgency and attempts to destabilize Ukraine
and undermine the rule of law, and strong support for
the efforts of the authorities in Ukraine to tackle the
many formidable challenges that confront them in an
inclusive and democratic manner.
The frameworks are in place to take those principles
forward. The United Kingdom urges all Council
members and the international community as a whole
to join wholeheartedly in a concerted, constructive and
united international approach.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his update on the situation in
Ukraine, which by all accounts remains tense. The
armed attacks of last week that led to the deaths of
16 Ukrainian soldiers near Donetsk represent a very
serious escalation of the crisis. We condemn attacks
against security forces carrying out legitimate orders.
We note the conduct of presidential elections on 25 May
and the outcome. We see the election of a new President
as a significant first step towards the normalization of
the situation in Ukraine. Issues of human rights still
need to be addressed, as do improving the economy,
fostering inclusiveness and strengthening national
cohesion and reconciliation.
An improvement in bilateral relations between
Russia and Ukraine remains central to resolving the
crisis in Ukraine. That is why we welcome the decision
of Russian President Vladimir Putin to respect the
outcome of the elections in Ukraine. We also welcome
the offer of Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov
14-41159

28/05/2014

Ukraine

to start a dialogue with the incoming leadership of
Ukraine. President-elect Poroshenko has also indicated
that he will reach out to Russia. Those are encouraging
signs that convince us that the doors to a diplomatic
solution remain open.
We reiterate our position that dialogue among
all concerned parties and stakeholders is the path to
sustainable peace, security and stability in Ukraine.
We urge all armed groups in eastern Ukraine to lay
down their arms, refrain from violence, and desist
from occupying public buildings, erecting road
blocks, illegally detaining international officials and
challenging the authority of the State. We restate our
position that the declaration of a people’s republic
of Donetsk and other separatist and secessionist
pronouncements violate the Constitution of Ukraine
and are therefore of no legal effect. We call on all
concerned to respect the independence, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine, in line with the
Charter of the United Nations.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): We thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman for the briefing he has just provided to
the Council.
Jordan welcomes the successful holding of
presidential elections in Ukraine, despite the
exceptional circumstances in the country caused by the
illegal actions of lawless individuals and rebels seeking
to prevent a successful voting process. It is our hope
that the elections will signal a return to stability in
Ukraine and lead it down the road to democracy. We
commend the efforts of the Ukraine Government to
ensure successful elections by eliminating obstacles in
order to allow all Ukrainians to vote for their future.
Now that Ukrainians have been able to vote fully
and freely, the international community must respect
their choice. We urge the international community to
recognize the results of the election and to work with
President-elect Petro Poroshenko so as to enable him to
meet his people’s aspirations to a better future.
We express our concern about continuing acts of
violence and criminality in eastern Ukraine, especially
in the Donestk region, where there have been a number
of casualties. Jordan reaffirms Ukraine’s legitimate
rights, guaranteed under international law, to protect its
territorial integrity, sovereignty and the security of its
citizenry. The exercise by the authorities of their right
to calm tensions and restore stability must be in line
with international law and international humanitarian

S/PV.7185

law. We reaffirm our call on all influential parties to
persuade the rebels to lay down their weapons and to
withdraw from the buildings and facilities they are
occupying.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his comments
today and for his engagement on the Ukrainian issue,
including through trips to Ukraine.
Ukrainians turned out in historic numbers on
Sunday, uniting to express their political will to choose
freely their own future. The United States congratulates
the people of Ukraine on having voted in large numbers
to express their clear desire for a united, democratic
and peaceful Ukraine. The election reaffirms Ukraine’s
commitment to the democratic process. We look
forward to working with President-elect Poroshenko
and the people of Ukraine to build on this victory for
democracy in order to create a more unified, secure,
transparent and prosperous Ukraine.
We note the importance of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) judgement
that the election was largely in line with Ukraine’s
international commitments and demonstrated respect
for fundamental freedoms in the vast majority of
the country. Thousands of independent electoral
observers — international and domestic — supported
the OSCE determination. We thank the OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, the OSCE
Parliamentary Assembly, the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe, the European Parliament,
the NATO Parliamentary Assembly and the other
international and non-governmental organizations and
observers who contributed to the effort.
But as we celebrate the successful 25 May
presidential election, we must also condemn the actions
of those who sought to derail the voting in parts
of eastern Ukraine. In particular, we condemn the
actions of pro-Russian armed separatists operating in
Donetsk and Luhansk, who attacked district election
commissions and polling stations and intimidated
election workers, notably through abductions, death
threats, forced entry into private homes, the seizure
of equipment and election materials, and the shooting
of a candidate proxy. Those illegal actions constituted
attempts to obstruct the election and to interfere with
citizens’ rights to participate.
Yet even in those two regions of the east where
pro-Russian separatist groups sought to disenfranchise

14-411595/19

S/PV.7185

Ukraine

the population, some courageous Ukrainians
endeavoured to vote. The United States commends the
resolve of the Ukrainian people to participate despite the
threats, provocations, and violence. We take particular
note of the Central Election Commission, which
established special accommodations to enfranchise
voters in the areas where separatists worked to disrupt
voting, by allowing citizens to vote at alternate
locations, and which made voting arrangements for
Crimeans to vote outside of Ukraine’s Crimea region,
which remains under Russian occupation.
President-elect Poroshenko and the Ukrainian
Government have many challenges before them. We are
heartened by the President-elect’s stated goal to make
national reconciliation a priority. Forging a common
political vision will be essential. In that regard, we
welcome the Ukrainian Government’s intention to
continue the OSCE-supported national unity round
tables, which have allowed Ukrainians from all regions
and all political views to come together to discuss their
differences and their common interests in a peaceful,
unified and stable Ukraine. We also welcome the
Rada’s 21 May memorandum of understanding and
peace, which calls on all citizens to abandon radical
actions and hatred and to protect, promote and build a
democratic, sovereign and united Ukraine.
We are also encouraged by President-elect Poroshenko’s
willingness to seek greater decentralization for the
regions, to pursue constitutional reforms following the
election and to engage in dialogue with Russia. Since
the Russian Federation has stated that it will respect
the will expressed by the Ukrainian people, we urge
Russia to recognize the results of Sunday’s election
and begin to engage constructively with President-elect
Poroshenko and the Ukrainian Government to resolve
the crisis.
Despite the progress made with Sunday’s election
we are deeply concerned by the increased violence
in Donetsk and Luhansk, including the seizure of the
Donetsk airport by separatists, and we are disturbed
by ongoing reports that separatists continue to carry
out criminal actions in parts of eastern Ukraine. We
recognize that Ukraine must uphold law and order on
Ukrainian territory, and we call on the separatists to
disarm and end the violence. Of particular concern
are reports of the detention of international monitors
from the OSCE after they were stopped at separatist
checkpoints in the Donetsk region. We condemn the
abductions and call on Russia to use its influence with

6/19

28/05/2014

the separatists to secure the the immediate release of
the monitors and their unimpeded access throughout
Ukraine. We also remain concerned by reports that
armed groups and weapons continue to cross the border
from Russia into Ukraine. We believe Russia can and
must act to stem such provocative actions along the
Russia-Ukraine border.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my Government’s
continued support for the aspirations of the people
of Ukraine to a prosperous, sovereign, independent,
and united Ukraine, including the Crimea region,
with strong ties to both East and West. We remain
committed to working with Ukraine and other partners
in order to seek de-escalation and a peaceful resolution
of the conflict and to respect the territorial integrity of
Ukraine.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing.
China has taken note of the presidential election
held in Ukraine on 25 May and respects the choice made
by the people of Ukraine. At present, he continuing
problems and occasional outbreaks of armed conflict
and violence in Ukraine have resulted in heavy
casualties and loss of life, about which China is deeply
concerned.
Regarding the situation in Ukraine in general, I
would like to stress the following points.
First, China adheres consistently to the principle
of non-interference in other countries’ internal affairs
and respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all countries, including Ukraine. We urge all parties
in Ukraine to remain calm and restrained, bring an
immediate halt to the violence, avoid harming innocent
people and prevent the further escalation of tension and
worsening of the situation. China hopes to see stability
return with the early restoration of law and order in the
country.
Secondly, the crisis in Ukraine involves complex
historical factors and ethnic conflicts. A political
solution is the only way to defuse it. We hope all the
parties will continue with dialogue and negotiations
and will push for a settlement of the crisis through
political means, by giving full recognition to the
legitimate rights, interests and aspirations of every
region and ethnic group in the country, accommodating
all parties’ legitimate concerns and achieving a balance
of interests among them.
14-41159

28/05/2014

Ukraine

Thirdly, China supports the international
community as it continues to use its good offices to
ease the situation in Ukraine. It is an urgent priority that
all parties refrain from making threats and imposing
sanctions and return to the consensus of the four-party
Geneva talks to ensure full implementation of that
consensus and, on the basis of that agreement, resume
the four-party talks and allow political dialogue to play
the major role in reaching a negotiated settlement to the
crisis, seeking common ground while avoiding conflict
and confrontation.
Fourthly, China has always adopted a fair and
objective approach on the issue of Ukraine and has
advocated a three-principles initiative that we had
proposed for a political solution to the Ukraine crisis.
We have continued, in our own way, working with all
parties. We are in favour of any option that is conducive
to easing tensions and promoting a negotiated political
settlement, and we are willing to continue our
constructive role.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, , Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his
intervention.
Luxembourg welcomes the holding on 25 May of
the presidential election, during which the Ukrainian
people expressed their will. The election featured a high
voter turnout and a clear willingness on the part of the
authorities to organize a genuine election, conducted
largely in line with international commitments and
with respect for fundamental freedoms. In the vast
majority of the country’s regions the election passed
off under good conditions. Despite the hostile security
climate, voting was held successfully in 9 of 22 and 2
of 12 electoral districts in the regions of Donetsk and
Luhansk respectively. Despite the situation in eastern
and southern Ukraine, including Crimea, participation
was generally high. The election observation mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), in which Luxembourg has been an
active participant, gave the conduct of the election an
initial generally positive assessment.
The success of this elесtiоп is due first and
foremost to the citizens of Ukraine. Their choice was
clear. They voted for a united, stable Ukraine enjoying
full sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Luxembourg condemns the violence that has
gone on for several weeks, particularly in the Donetsk

S/PV.7185

and Luhansk regions, where several towns and
administrative buildings remain under the control
of separatist armed militias. We are concerned about
the numerous cases of killings, torture, beatings,
kidnappings — especially of journalists — committed
by well-armed and well-organized anti-Government
groups.
We also condemn in the strongest terms the
abduction of 15 observers deployed with the OSCE’s
special observation mission in the Donetsk region. We
welcome the release today of the 11 observers who
had been arrested, but we remain concerned about
the fate of the four observers who have been missing
since Monday. They should be released safe and sound,
immediately and unconditionally.
At this crucial moment for democracy in Ukraine,
we call on Russia to translate into action its declarations
of respect for the will of the Ukrainian people. As the
Heads of State and Government of the European Union
said yesterday, we expect the Russian Federation to
cooperate with the new, legitimately elected President,
to continue withdrawing armed forces from the
Ukrainian border and to use its influence with the
armed separatists to calm the situation in eastern
Ukraine. Russia should give priority to preventing the
movement of separatists and arms in Ukraine.
Ukrainians have given a strong mandate to
President-elect Poroshenko, who must now commit
to resolving the crisis through the rule of law and
dialogue initiated by the Ukrainian Government. In
that context, we commend the holding of three round
tables organized by the Government, with OSCE
support, in Kyiv, Kharkiv and Mykolaiv. We encourage
the Ukrainian authorities to use the legitimacy of the
newly elected President to pursue this national dialogue
with the general public and civil society in every region
of Ukraine.
The Ukrainian Parliament’s adoption on 20 May
of the memorandum for peace and harmony, which
identifies priorities in the area of decentralization
and guarantees of respect for the status of the Russian
language, is an important step in the right direction.
Prompt constitutional reform towards decentralization,
which should unite all parties, while benefiting from
the Council of Europe’s expertise in that area, is a key
aspect of that process. The rights of national minorities
must be fully respected, in accordance with the rules in
force at the Council of Europe.

14-411597/19

S/PV.7185

Ukraine

We reaffirm our commitment to the Geneva
statement of 17 April. We commend the role of the
OSCE special observer mission in contributing to the
implementation of that statement, as well as the efforts
of the Ukrainian authorities in that direction. We
again call on the Russian Federation to take steps to
fully implement the joint statement. We unreservedly
support the additional efforts of the OSCE and its
Chairman-in-Office, given that Ukrainians must have
ownership of the process.
We support the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and his team. We strongly hope that, with
the consistent and joint support of the international
community, the holding of the presidential election
on 25 May and the selection of a new President with
unquestionable legitimacy will make it possible for
Ukraine to start afresh and emerge from a crisis that
has lasted too long. The citizens of Ukraine aspire to
democracy, the rule of law, peace and prosperity. Their
choice, like the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and independence of Ukraine, must be respected.
Ms. King (Australia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing.
Australia congratulates Ukraine on the successful
holding of presidential elections on 25 May. The high
turnout, in which millions people cast ballots across
the country, reflects the determination of the Ukrainian
people to chose their own Government without
interference. It is a demonstration of their commitment
to a sovereign, democratic and independent Ukraine.
We commend the work of the Ukrainian electoral
authorities and the willingness of the Ukrainian political
parties to participate and support the electoral process
in difficult circumstances. We also commend the
observer mission of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for its efforts across the
country. We welcome the OSCE’s preliminary findings
that the elections were held in line with international
standards and respect for fundamental freedoms. We
congratulate President-elect Petro Poroschenko, who
has been given a clear mandate to govern Ukraine.
Regrettably, not all Ukrainians were able to
vote. In two areas in eastern Ukraine, pro-Russian
separatist forces prevented many polling stations from
opening, depriving of their right to cast their ballots.
We commend the efforts of the Ukrainian authorities
to perform their electoral duties in those areas in the
face of threats, intimidation and violence. Due to the

8/19

28/05/2014

unlawful annexation of Crimea, the Ukrainian citizens
in that region were unable to cast their votes at all. We
applaud those who travelled from the Crimean peninsula
specifically in order to vote elsewhere in Ukraine. That
was a clear expression of support on their part for a
democratic and unified Ukraine.
The restoration of stability in the east presents
a very serious challenge for the new Ukrainian
Government. Pro-Russian groups continue their efforts
to destabilize the region, attacking Ukrainian forces,
occupying administrative buildings and targeting
major infrastructure, such as Donetsk airport. Reports
that militants have attempted to cross the border from
Russia into Ukraine in the past few days are deeply
concerning. It is essential that Russia control its borders
to prevent any such incursions. In such circumstances
of continued destabilization and the use of force by
separatists, the Ukrainian authorities have the right to
protect their own citizens and to re-establish control
over their territory. They should continue to do so in a
manner proportionate to the circumstances.
Given the current instability, the efforts of
journalists and monitors are particularly crucial. We
condemn the continuing attacks by separatists on
journalists, as the OSCE Representative on Media
Freedom, Ms. Mijatović, stated on 23 May. Journalists
are deliberately targeted for doing their job of trying
to tell the outside world of the events taking place in
Ukraine. We condemn the killing of an Italian journalist
and his assistant near Sloviansk on 24 May. We are also
deeply concerned about reports that the four missing
OSCE monitors in the Donetsk region are being held
by separatists. They must be released immediately.
While we, of course, welcome the safe release today of
11 OSCE monitors, we share the Secretary-General’s
concern that international staff in Ukraine continue
to be placed in great danger. We agree with him that
the detention of international staff is completely
unacceptable.
The conduct of the presidential elections on 25 May
was a central element of the OSCE road map for the
stabilization of Ukraine. The country now has the
opportunity to secure a stable and peaceful future. We
welcome the President-elect’s commitment to travelling
to the east and to engage closely with the communities
there to overcome their differences. Such an inclusive
approach will be crucial to ensuring a successful
constitutional reform process.

14-41159

28/05/2014

Ukraine

We welcome President Putin’s statement that Russia
will respect the election outcome. It is now time for
serious dialogue between Russia and Ukraine and an
express commitment on the part of Russia to Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. That is so clearly
in the interest of both countries. As Australia’s Foreign
Minister, Julie Bishop, said on 26 May, Australia
stands with the people of Ukraine, who have shown
through the election their commitment to democracy
and political and economic stability and to determining
their own Ukrainian future. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s desire to see the international community
unite in support of a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Ukriane. Australia looks forward to working with the
new Ukrainian leadership.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too, thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
The Ukrainian crisis has recently seen a turning
point with the election of Mr. Poroshenko as President
of the Republic. On Sunday 25 May, the Ukrainian
people at last made its voice heard through the free and
transparent elections despite the violence by separatist
armed groups in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in
the east of the country. In the first round, there was a
rapid and clear result. We welcome Mr. Poroshenko’s
victory. We affirm that we are fully ready to work
with him. From the first round, with its high turnout,
the election demonstrated to us the aspiration of most
Ukrainians for unity.
I would like to briefly come back to the elections.
First, they were free, as there were no fewer than 21
registered candidates. That number speaks to the vast
array of policies on which all Ukrainians were urged to
vote on Sunday in order to build their future. There was
not only one candidate or a predetermined outcome.
Next, they were tansparent, as 2,784 international
observers were accredited to ensure their smooth
conduct. Yesterday, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) reported that the
election respected democratic norms. The Presidentelect is therefore fully legitimate. We will closley
review the results of the Central Electoral Commission
and the assessment to be made by the OSCE Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights on the
conduct of the elections. In passing, I note that the
results also affirm, as if it were necessary, the extent
to which the propaganda condemning the influence of
the fascists in Ukraine was baseless. The two parties of
the extreme right received less than 3 per cent of votes.

S/PV.7185

The elections are therefore good news, given that
their conduct was threatened on many occasions.
However, we recall that they took place in a
particularly difficult security context. The situation in
the Donbass region remains of great concern. Human
rights violations and restrictions on the freedom of
the press are increasing. Two journalists were killed
last Saturday. Four OSCE monitors were abducted in
Donetsk and are still being detained. They must be
released immediately. Donetsk airport was occupied
by armed separatist groups, before being retaken by
Ukrainian forces. The armed separatist groups must
immediately cease their activities. We call on all those
who have influence over them to use that influence to
allow for a return to calm. Finally, let us no forget that
Crimea remains occupied.
In this tense situation, Sunday’s elections represent
nonetheless an opportunity. Mr. Poroshenko, who
will take the reins of Ukraine in early June, will have
three priorities: to restore calm, establish an inclusive
Government and undertake reforms. Those three
priorities should be based on national dialogue, which
must be extended and deepened.
Today, for Ukraine, there is no other way forward
than the path of unity and reconciliation. In that
context, we hope that Mr. Poroshenko will work to
consolidate the unity of his country by continuing the
process of Ukrainian national dialogue launched with
the support of the OSCE on 14 May, and by supporting
the implementation of the memorandum on peace
and harmony, adopted by the Rada on 20 May. Those
initiatives, which provide for inclusive constitutional
reform for decentralization and guarantee the status of
the Russian language, are steps in the right direction.
The process must first and foremost be led by
Ukraine itself, with the support of the OSCE. The
European Union stands ready to support those efforts,
as recalled by the Heads of State in their declaration
at the Council of Europe yesterday. However, it is up
to the international community as a whole to stand by
Ukraine in a useful way in writing the next pages of its
history.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing on the latest
developments in Ukraine and the status of the issues
being dealt with by the good offices of the United
Nations. Argentina continues to follow the situation

14-411599/19

S/PV.7185

Ukraine

in Ukraine very closely and remains concerned by the
developments in the eastern regions of the country.
With regard to the election process of last Sunday,
Argentina, as a matter of principle and of general policy,
does not comment on the results of elections, which are
by their very nature under the exclusive jurisdiction of
each State. We reiterate that due respect must be paid
to Ukraine’s conduct of its internal affairs, without
any type of interference or intervention, be it military,
political or economic, in matters that are under its own
jurisdiction. Argentina respects the decision of the
people of Ukraine.
We have repeatedly emphasized the need to
establish conditions conducive to restarting the
urgent dialogue process. We hope that the presidential
elections held on 25 May will contribute to that and
to a decrease in tensions by decreasing the risk of
new violent confrontations and decreasing the spiral
of violence, which if it continues, would have severe
repercussions on the stability not only of Ukraine, but
also the region. The actions of armed groups, unilateral
actions and the human rights violations and abuses will
only deepen the crisis and put the security and living
conditions of the civilian population at risk.
We are concerned about reports of the disappearance
of four members of the international observers team
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, who have not been heard from since Monday.
In that connection, we call on all parties concerned to
take every possible step to ensure that the observers
are immediately released unharmed. In particular,
Member States with influence on the parties should
bring positive pressure to bear to that end.
We are convinced that the only solution to the crisis
in Ukraine is political and diplomatic. Therefore, we
reiterate our call on all parties to exercise maximum
self-restraint and contribute to a constructive dialogue.
In that vein, the effective implementation by all parties
of the measures agreed on in Geneva continues to be
necessary to making progress in a dialogue process,
which will encourage confidence between the various
communities and assure all Ukrainians throughout the
country that their main concerns and rights will be
cared for.
Any violation or abuse of human rights is
unjustifiable. The cases of killings, torture, abduction,
harassment, illegal detention and intimidation must be
investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice.

10/19

28/05/2014

We therefore call on all the national and regional
authorities of Ukraine to take effective steps not only
to prevent human rights violations and protect human
rights, but also to ensure that all security forces respect
those rights.
Once again, we reaffirm that the international
community should, on the one hand, focus its efforts on
ensuring that the parties enter a constructive dialogue
with full respect for human rights, international
humanitarian law and respect for the rights of all
minorities and, on the other, act strictly within the
framework of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations, with the objective of achieving
domestic peace in the country and creating a climate
conducive to sustainable, inclusive and prosperous
development.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the report of Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman and for the convening
of this meeting.
My delegation closely followed the elections that
took place on Sunday, 25 May, in which Mr. Poroshenko
was declared the winner. We value the cooperation
extended to the provisional Government of Ukraine,
especially the support provided by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) by sending
more than 1,000 electoral observers and logistical
support, which was fundamental to the success of the
elections.
We believe that the elections are a crucial step in
the political process, which should restore the stability
of the country on the basis of inclusive dialogue with
full respect for minorities, human rights and the rule
of law. Nevertheless, we deplore the fact that the
electoral process did not cover the entire territory of
Ukraine. We call on those groups that sought to prevent
the elections from taking place normally to join the
building of a new future in their country in which
all groups and minorities will feel involved. We also
recognize the major responsibility of the Ukrainian
authorities, both the current and the elected ones, to
undertake the political process in an orderly fashion.
In that context, we deplore the violent events that took
place in Donetsk in the days after the election, and we
express our concern at the consequences of a potential
escalation of the crisis.
Nevertheless, the political process has not
come to an end with the elections. The fundamental

14-41159

28/05/2014

Ukraine

responsibilty falls to the Ukrainian authorities, but
equally important is the contribution of countries
of the region and regional organizations to continue
cooperating in the finalization of the process. We also
underscore the various initiatives of the SecretaryGeneral and, definitely, those of the entire United
Nations system, which has sought a political solution
from the very beginning of the crisis.
We call on both the Government and separatist
groups to establish common ground on the basis of
which a dialogue can take place, thereby putting an end
to all current areas of violence. We reiterate our support
for the calls of the Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights, Mr. Ivan Šimonović, for accountability
for all human rights violations and abuses and for the
perpetrators, whoever they may be, to br brought to
justice.
Finally, Chile once again reaffirms the need to
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. A new phase is beginning in
Ukraine. Accordingly, a new era of cooperation should
begin in the Council in order to enable it to help establish
the conditions for the Ukrainian people to pursue their
sovereign future in peace and democracy.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing.
Chad welcomes the holding of presidential
elections in Ukraine on 25 May and its turnout of more
than 60 per cent. The Ukrainians were able to vote
freely and elect Mr. Petro Poroshenko in a transparent
manner, with 55 per cent of the vote in the first round.
We congratulate the Ukrainian people and their new
President-elect, Mr. Poroshenko. Despite the challenges
in the eastern part of the country, where the ballot
was disrupted by ongoing violence, the elections went
smoothly. Chad hopes that the elections, whose proper
conduct was attested to by all international observers,
will endow the new President-elect with the legitimacy
and authority necessary to establish trust among all
components of Ukrainian society and preserve unity of
the country while respecting its diversity.
The election of the new President-elect marks a
major step in the consolidation of democracy and starts
a new phase that should allow a process of stabilization
and economic recovery in the country to be initiated
through dialogue. The international community must
support the new Ukrainian authorities in meeting the

S/PV.7185

numerous challenges before them. While we welcome
the important step taken in the presidential elections
in Ukraine, Chad remains concerned by the situation
in the eastern part of the country. Chad condemns the
ongoing acts of violence in the east, which have led
to several deaths and the kidnapping of four monitors
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), whose immediate release we demand
from their captors. Chad reiterates its call for the
immediate cessation of fighting and invites all the
parties to refrain from the use of force and to favour a
peaceful way out of the crisis through dialogue.
In that regard, the task of bringing peace and
reconciliation to all the Ukrainian people falls
principally on the new President-elect in his capacity
as President of all Ukrainians without exception. In
that context, we invite the armed groups to lay down
their arms and start direct negotiations with the new
Ukrainian authorities in order to restore peace and
preserve the country’s unity. We believe that frank and
open dialogue is the best response to all expectations
and anxieties. Unilateral proclamations of independence
on a part of the Ukrainian territory will not call into
question the integrity and sovereignty of the country to
which Chad remains committed.
In that perspective, Chad recognizes the importance
of the mediation of the international community in
general, and of the United Nations, the OSCE and
Ukraine’s neighbours in particular, in the search for a
peaceful result to the crisis in Ukraine. Chad gives its
full support to all good offices.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank the President
for convening today’s meeting. I also thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing on the situation in Ukraine.
Rwanda welcomes Sunday’s presidential elections.
We congratulate President-elect Petro Poroshenko for
his decisive victory that will provide him with the
legitimacy required to end the Ukrainian crisis.
As reported by several national and international
monitors, including the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), elections in most
of Ukraine were free, fair and peaceful, with a high
turnout of over 60 per cent, despite reported cases of
polling irregularities and disruptions. However, it is
unfortunate that Ukrainians in some areas in the eastern
part of the country were denied the right to vote.

14-4115911/19

S/PV.7185

Ukraine

We commend the President-elect for his
commitment to continuing the political dialogue,
including with the separatists in eastern Ukraine. We
recall that the Geneva declaration of 17 April provides
a good basis for that dialogue. We are also encouraged
by the Mr. Poroshenko’s pledge to engage the Russian
Federation in talks. We are equally encouraged by the
willingness of the Russian Federation to engage in
dialogue with the new Ukrainian leadership. In that
regard, we reiterate our support for the SecretaryGeneral and his good offices, aimed at finding a
political and diplomatic solution to the crisis. We are
convinced that he will seize the momentum to achieve
a breakthrough with the support with the parties
concerned.
Meanwhile, the continuing violence in the east,
especially around the city of Donetsk, where a fierce
battle for control of the airport took place, is alarming.
We are also concerned about the killing of journalists
and the abduction of international monitors representing
the OSCE. We take note of the release of 11 monitors
and call for the immediate release of the remaining
four monitors who were abducted on Monday. We
urge all armed protesters to disarm and respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine.
Rwanda recognizes the legitimate right of the
Government of Ukraine to restore law and order in
the east and on the whole territory of Ukraine, as was
reaffirmed by the President-elect. However, we call
on the Ukrainian authorities to exercise that right in
a proportionate manner, bearing in mind that the only
sustainable way out of the crisis is through a political
and inclusive dialogue as well as constitutional reforms
aimed at further decentralization and the promotion of
equality and rights of minorities, including cultural and
linguistic rights.
Let me conclude by saying that the Ukrainian
presidential elections of last Sunday were a turning
point, as they have provided the country with a
legitimate leader who has enough political capital to
make peace among Ukrainians and to in the region. We
call on the international community, particularly the
United Nations, the European Union, the OSCE and the
Russian Federation, to support the new leadership in
that political and diplomatic process.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): The people of
Ukraine have spoken. Last Sunday, they cast their
votes for the future of a united Ukraine in an election
12/19

28/05/2014

that was widely recognized as free and fair and in line
with international standards by numerous international
observers. As Ilkka Kanerva, head of the delegation
sent to the elections by the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) said, “The impressive turnout ...
offered a powerful rebuke to those who would challenge
Ukraine’s unity and progress”.
Intimidations, kidnappings and seizures of ballot
boxes and voting premises by pro-Russian separatists
could not stop those who care for their country from
expressing their will democratically and freely through
a ballot box, in stark contrast to those who only know
how to impose their will at gunpoint. Everywhere,
including south-eastern Ukraine, the lead of Presidentelect Petro Poroshenko was clear and obvious, leaving
no room whatsoever for speculations regarding the
legitimacy of the election.
Importantly, Ukraine’s Sunday election demolished
the myth of Ukraine’s radical extremism, which has been
staple fodder for a repulsive anti-Ukrainian propaganda
campaign. It is time to put to rest once and for all the
shameless incitement against and demonization of
Ukraine and the Ukrainian people, which have done
enormous damage to relations between the two nations
and led to bloodshed under false pretexts on Ukraine’s
soil.
The people of Ukraine have spoken. Sunday’s
election results confirmed what we knew all along.
While many in eastern Ukraine have legitimate
grievances regarding their socioeconomic conditions
and the relationship between the centre and the regions,
they do not seek Ukraine’s fragmentation. On the
contrary, the overwhelming majority of Ukraine’s
citizens, including those in the east and south of the
country, see their future in a united and democratic
Ukraine.
The challenges facing the new President and
his Government are enormous, as they will have to
overcome decades of neglect and pervasive corruption,
restore the rule of law, rebuild trust and confidence
among the citizens and regions, as well as between
the citizens and their Government, by implementing
comprehensive and inclusive political and economic
reforms. The national dialogue meetings and the
recently adopted memorandum on peace and concord
offer good grounds for openness and inclusiveness,
as well as the involvement of the broadest groups of
Ukraine’s society as the country seeks to break away
14-41159

28/05/2014

Ukraine

from the corrupt legacy of past rule. We wish the
President-elect and the people of Ukraine all the very
best in that important endeavour.
At the same time, we stress once again that
Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity are non-negotiable and must be respected by
all. We welcome the statements by Russia’s leaders
that they will respect the outcome of Ukraine’s vote.
It is now time for them to walk the walk. It is time for
Russia to discard its propaganda war against Ukraine
and to engage in a genuine and meaningful dialogue.
We urge Russia to fully withdraw its troops from the
Ukrainian border and to stop the free flow of arms,
weaponry and foreign fighters into Ukrainian territory.
Ukraine’s borders and air space must be respected.
In view of Russia’s influence on and contacts
with illegal armed groups, it is key that Russia
unequivocally denounce, condemn and disassociate
itself from the militant separatism plaguing Ukraine’s
south-east. Such steps are essential to helping restore a
sense of trust between the two neighbouring States and
to embark on a path of de-escalation, on the basis of
the 17 April Geneva statement and with the continued
monitoring and support of the international community
on the ground.
Crimea’s occupation has led to growing numbers of
internally displaced persons, who now number nearly
10,000. The countless acts of violence committed by
heavily armed separatist groups — such as ongoing
banditry and looting, extortions, intimidation,
abductions, beatings, torture, bloody ambushes
and killings — are in direct violation of the human
and social rights of the people they falsely claim to
represent. The separatists in eastern Ukraine defy the
very basic principles of national and international law
and flaunt their contempt for human rights. Cases of
illegal self-proclaimed people’s courts sentencing local
officials to death, followed by actual executions, have
been reported. The increasing involvement of foreign
fighters, including Chechen mercenaries, is deeply
worrying and may, if unchecked, spin out of control.
The false and dangerously misleading narrative of
fighting Ukrainian fascists continues to be exploited.
The deliberate targeting of journalists, including attacks,
beatings and abductions, as well as the confiscation and
destruction of their equipment, have been reported. A
young Italian journalist lost his life. Such attacks must
be firmly condemned. Only a few days ago, the selfproclaimed mayor of Sloviansk confirmed that his

S/PV.7185

group alone held some 40 hostages. The overall number
of hostages and forced disappearances is obviously
higher and remains a cause of serious concern. For
example, 12 high-ranking police officers were abducted
by armed separatists in the Luhansk region on 26 May.
International monitors are increasingly under
attack, including the abduction on Monday, 26 May, of
four representatives of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) special monitoring
mission, which was the second such incident in
two months. Earlier today, we received alarming
information that another 11 OSCE monitors had been
detained by pro-Russian separatists on their way from
Donetsk to Dnipropetrovsk. They have now been
released. Lithuania strongly condemns all interference
with the work of international observers and urges all
parties to ensure that they can carry out their important
work in safety and security.
No country would sit idle and watch indifferently
as groups of insurgents armed with illegally obtained
weapons, increasingly with the help of foreign
mercenaries, go about disrupting the functioning of the
State and its very statehood by intimidation, violence
and force. In the face of the ongoing onslaught against
the State of Ukraine, we stress Ukraine’s legitimate
right to defend its statehood and territorial integrity
from illegal separatist groups that have taken up arms
against their own country and demonstrate utter disdain
for its Constitution, its laws and its people. While
reiterating our commitment to Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, we stand ready to
support its new leadership and the people of Ukraine on
the path of democratic reforms and peace. The people
of Ukraine have spoken. Each and every one of us must
respect their choice.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The 25 May elections were a step in the right
direction. As the President of Russia, Mr. Vladimir
Putin, stated before they were conducted, “we respect the
elections of the Ukrainian people”. However, we would
stop short of the euphoria that our Western colleagues
have demonstrated. Elections are not a panacea. In
evaluating them and their potential consequences, there
is a need to take into account the events that preceded
them and the context in which they took place. We
cannot forget the havoc wreaked by those who opposed
the legitimately elected President or the coup d’etat
carried out with outside support and help from national
radical forces. We cannot forget the tragedies that took

14-4115913/19

S/PV.7185

Ukraine

place in Odessa on 2 May and in Mariupol on 9 May.
We cannot remain deaf to the mortar fire in the southeast, where punitive operations are being carried out.
We have to recognize that the elections were
not totally free and democratic. A heavy influence
was brought to bear, including the threat of physical
violence, in favour of certain candidates, while others
were forced to withdraw from the electoral race. The
elections saw the violent suppresion of the mass media.
The consolidation of the population was achieved
essentially through the marginalization and terrorizing
of entire regions and the spreading of anti-Russian
propaganda.
However, today we cannot simply discuss the
electoral process in one particular country. The
Security Council has the entirely different mandate of
bearing primary responsibility for international peace
and security. When a portion of Ukraine is essentially
at war, we in this Chamber should be talking about how
to end the violence and to move the situation onto a
more peaceful front by faciliating negotiations among
all Ukrainian parties.
For Russia, that task is of particular importance,
given that the military operations are taking place
extremely close to our borders. Security Council
members should call upon Kyiv to finally acknowledge
the need to take the interests of all citizens of the
country into account and to put a swift end to the
punitive operations in the east and south. That is what
is its citizens expect and what is required of Kyiv in
line with its obligations under the Geneva declaration
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) road map. It would allow for genuine,
nationwide dialogue to agree on comprehensive
constitutional reforms. Genuine dialogue is needed
rather than punitive operations behind the smoke screen
of round tables organized without the participation of
representatives of the east and south of the country.
It is interesting that immediately after the elections,
the memorandum on peace and concord was somehow
forgotten. Instead of seeking agreement among citizens,
they are assaulted by insults. Russia is blamed for every
possible problem. There are calls for to end the punitive
operations swiftly by intensifying them. People are
being pushed into the army and the so-called national
guard. Those who do not want to kill their own people
are dealt with. There has been increasing use of air
assets, tanks, armoured vehicles and mortar guns, and
the chaotic bombing and artillery fire against civilian
14/19

28/05/2014

targets, including schools, kindergartens and hospitals.
In spite of the calls of the leaders of besieged cities,
peaceful citizens are not allowed to leave military
areas. There are no secure humanitarian corridors,
and the Ukrainian authorities are taking no measure
fo r the evacuation of children or the unification of
separated families. The provisions of the 1989 (2011)
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
are violated, as are the basic safeguards stipulated in
Additional Protocol II of the Geneva Conventions.
We regret to note that some Council members
continue to justify, in all possible ways, the military
actions of the Kyiv powers. Today, indeed, a colleague
qualified actions in that context as admirable in
manifesting restraint. We would like to say: You shall
answer to God, ladies and gentlemen.
There is much evidence in the mass media and
video material on the use by Ukrainian forces of
helicopters displaying United Nations markings.
The latest such instance was observed as recently as
26 May in the skies over the Luhansk region. We call
upon the United Nations Secretariat not to be passive in
situations where United Nations rules are violated but
to deal with the issue and take active measures to put an
end to those practices that discredit the United Nations.
A simple negation of the facts by the Kyiv authorities
is not enough.
The road map of the OSCE contains plans to
investigate all cases of mass killings. However, there
has been no progress in that respect. The investigation of
the incidents of 18 through 20 February in the Maidan,
including repercussions of the case of the sniper, have
not fared any better. There has been no response to our
urgent calls for an international investigation into the
tragic events in Odessa on 2 May, when, as is known,
an unidentified lethal chemical substance was used, nor
of the incident of 9 May in Mariupol. The Ukrainian
side is avoiding serious interaction with international
structures on this issue.
Representatives of the mass media face ongoing
threats and persecution by the Ukrainian authorities,
who prevent them from carrying out their professional
activities and investigating the chaos in the country.
Today everybody knows of the outrageous detention of
journalists from the Russian television channel “Life
News” and the cruel treatment they suffered. We have
lost count of the cases of journalists who have been
refused entry into Ukrainian territory or expelled
on far-fetched pretexts. We express condolences to
14-41159

28/05/2014

Ukraine

the families of the Italian journalist and his Russian
companion, who died at the hands of the Ukrainian
forces.
We are seriously concerned about the situation of
the two groups of OSCE observers. One group included
a Russian citizen. We will do everything we can to
find and liberate those who have not yet been freed.
Nevertheless, we call attention to the fact that primary
responsibility for the security of the observers attaches
to the Ukrainian side. However, Kyiv has not yet
concluded the internal State procedures for ratification
of the memorandum of understanding with the OSCE
guaranteeing the inviolability of staff of international
missions. Ambiguity in the status of OSCE observers,
who have been working in Ukraine for more than two
months, is a genuine threat to their security.
In conclusion, we truly hope that the presidential
elections of 25 May will nevertheless mark the
beginning of a new, more constructive period in the
internal political life of the Ukrainian State. However,
for that, it must be backed by specific actions for broad
national agreement. Ukrainian politicians have many
times violently taken advantage of their people. It is our
hope that this will not occur during the current crucial
period of the country.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Republic of Korea.
My delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing. The Republic of
Korea congratulates Ukraine on holding successful
presidential elections on 25 May. We are pleased to
note that the elections were carried out in a fair and
transparent manner, with a high turnout, despite the
challenging security environment in the eastern part of
the country. We believe that the election represents a
step forward in the de-escalation of tensions.
In the light of that, we call on all sides to respect
the results of the election and cooperate with the newly
elected President and his Government. At the same
time, we condemn election-related violence by illegal
armed groups, including the forced closure of the
district election commission and the intimidation of
election officials.
We hope that the Ukrainian Government will
now take this invaluable opportunity to lead an
inclusive and transparent constitutional process that
reflects the interest of all Ukrainian people, including
minorities. In that regard we welcome President-elect

S/PV.7185

Petro Poroshenko’s announced plan to visit the eastern
regions and to pursue cooperative solutions with all
sides. In addition, the series of round tables as part of
the national dialogue is also a welcome development.
We believe it is essential to any sustainable solution to
the crisis.
Despite the positive steps, we remain deeply
concerned over the continuing escalation of tensions
in eastern Ukraine, including the recent fighting
between the armed separatist groups and Ukrainian
security forces. We are also concerned over abductions
of members of the OSCE monitoring mission near
Donetsk. The safety and security of the members of the
missions must be fully guaranteed.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight that the
stability and prosperity of Ukraine is critical not
only to peace in Europe but also to the international
community. We once again reaffirm our full support
for Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting on the current situation
in Ukraine. I thank Mr. Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing. I thank all Council members
for supporting the elections held by Ukraine on 25 May
and for the kind recommendations and encouragement
to the new Government and President-elect regarding
their plans in consolidating Ukraine.
I thank the Council for sharing assessments of the
elections, which coincide with the assessments of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), one of the largest observer commissions. The
OSCE stated that the presidential elections in Ukraine
on 25 May were free, democratic and held in full
conformity with national legislation and international
standards. It has become an historic success of the
Ukrainian people and their democratic State.
On 25 May, the people confirmed their readiness to
protect their native land from existing external threats
and their desire for peace and a European future, as well
as an absolute rejection of Russian aggression. The vast
majority of Ukrainian citizens — from all regions of the
country, including occupied Crimea — participated in
the vote at more than 90 per cent of the country’s polling

14-4115915/19

S/PV.7185

Ukraine

stations, thereby confirming the full representativeness
and legitimacy of their will.
It is important that the election results crushed
all anti-Ukraine propaganda clichés. Were all the
Ukrainian fascists or Nazis, when the so-called
“ultra-nationalist” candidates gained minimum support
in the elections? Where are all the phantom supporters
of succession or of the federalization of Ukraine, when
almost 90 per cent of the voters from all regions of the
country, including occupied Crimea, cast their ballots
for the candidates that stand for a unified Ukraine
and its European integration? All participants in the
presidential campaign acknowledged that it had been
democratic and legitimate.
Mr. Petro Poroshenko received major support in all
regions of Ukraine, including the eastern and southern
regions, which confirms the strong will of the whole
population of Ukraine for unity of the nation. The
President-elect secured full legitimacy to fulfil his
mandate on behalf of the entire Ukrainian nation.
Among his top priorities is to achieve stabilization
and reconciliation of the eastern regions of Ukraine,
which suffered from Russian propaganda and illegal
activities of Russian insurgents and mercenaries. The
President-elect has already announced that he plans
to visit the Donbass region immediately after his
inauguration, a clear signal to all in eastern Ukraine that
their voices will be heard as long as they are peaceful.
The 2014 presidential campaign was conducted at a
time of social and political tensions, security challenges
that Ukraine is facing for the first time in its modern
history. Unfortunately, owing to the occupation of the
territory of the autonomous republic of Crimea, it was
impossible to set up electoral commissions and conduct
the presidential election there. At the same time,
citizens of Ukraine living in the occupied peninsula
were given the opportunity to vote at polling stations
in Kherson, which is close to Crimea, or at any other
polling station in Ukraine.
The complex security situation in Donetsk and
Luhansk significantly undermined the election process
in those cities. According to the statement of preliminary
findings and conclusions by the special monitoring
mission, which can be found on the web page of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), serious problems were found in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions, including intrusions into district
electoral commissions and their eviction and closure by

16/19

28/05/2014

armed groups, and intimidation of election officials,
which included abductions, death threats, forced entry
into private homes, seizure of equipment and election
materials, and the shooting of a candidate proxy.
“These illegal actions constituted an attempt
to prevent the election [and] deny citizens the
fundamental right to freely participate and elect
their chosen representatives.”
After the election, Kremlin officials promised to
respect the choice of the Ukrainian people. In the light
of what is happening now on the Russian-Ukrainian
border and in the region, we are taking that with a grain
of salt. On 21, 24 and 26 May, dozens of armed people
attacked Ukraine’s borders from the Russian side. Forty
vehicles carrying armed personnel attempted to break
through the Ukrainian frontier. We have still not had a
reasonable answer from the Russian side to the question
of what hundreds of men from the Chechen battalion
are doing in Ukraine. They are not concealing their
identity; they speak freely with reporters and admit that
they have come from Russia to protect interests. What
interests are Chechens going to protect in Ukraine?
Those of the Greek Orthodox or of Slav ethnicity? We
have also raised the question about what hundreds of
heavily armed Russian Cossacks are doing in Ukraine,
particularly those from the Wolves Centurion, a group
with a notorious Second World War past. They are
not concealing their identity either; they have been
operating in Sloviansk and Kramatorsk, and before that
they were in Crimea.
Another question is why most of the leaders of
the illegal, self-proclaimed authorities in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions are Russian citizens. Aleksandr
Borodai, the self-proclaimed prine minister of the
so-called Donetsk People’s Republic, is a Russian
citizen from Moscow. Igor Strelkov Girkin, a military
commander of terrorists in Sloviansk, is a Russian
citizen and a Russian military intelligence special
forces officer. Igor Bezler, a military commander of
a terrorist group based in Horlivka, is also a Russian
citizen and a colonel in the Russian army, as he has
publicly admitted. Who authorized those Russian
citizens to represent the people of Donbass, to speak
on their behalf and call on them to sacrifice their lives
and kill their compatriots? On election day, 25 May, a
pro-Russian insurgent group attacked a polling station
in Novoaidar. As a result, one was killed and Ukrainian
law enforcement detained a group of 13 people whose
leader appeared to be a Russian citizen.

14-41159

28/05/2014

Ukraine

Despite some hints of conciliatory rhetoric on
the part of our Russian neighbour, which happens
to be one of the permanent members of the Security
Council, its aggression against a sovereign United
Nations Member State has continued. In the wake of
the election, we witnessed another brutal violation of
Ukrainian territory by armed insurgent groups from the
Russian side. Despite warnings passed on by Ukraine
through diplomatic channels regarding a concentration
on Russia’s border with Ukraine of up to 40 trucks
containing armed personnel, the Russian side took
no steps to prevent their breakthrough into Ukrainian
territory. On 27 May, around 4 a.m., a convoy consisting
of several trucks and passenger cars made an attempt to
cross the State border. After an exchange of fire with
Ukrainian border guard servicemen, part of the Russian
motorcade managed to break through and proceeded in
the direction of the town of Antratsyt. This happened
while Russian border guards did absolutely nothing.
Moreover, there is every reason to believe that the
armed groups’ penetration into Ukrainian territory is
organized, financed and encouraged from the Russian
side.
Furthermore, the Russian Federation has failed to
condemn Russian citizens’ participation in mercenary
activities in Ukraine and has done nothing to prevent
armed groups’ illegal penetration into the eastern part of
Ukraine, thus conniving in such actions. We are in fact
dealing with blatant aggression against Ukraine from
the Russian side in the form of exporting instability into
the territory of another country. Our law enforcement
officers in the eastern regions of Ukraine are currently
dealing with skilled, armed mercenaries who are ready
to plunder, intimidate, torture and murder Ukrainian
citizens. Today, armed pro-Russian groups began to
attack peaceful citizens. They fired on a school and
a residential area of Sloviansk. We have had no sign
of any Russian condemnation of such acts. Instead,
Russia has offered its humanitarian assistance to the
population of eastern Ukraine, citing alleged appeals
from local citizens and organizations. We would like to
say to the Russian side that the only thing Russia can
do for the people of Ukraine is to stop supporting the
illegal military groups.
We appreciate the mediation role the SecretaryGeneral has taken on with his recent statement on
the peaceful settlement of the situation in the eastern
region of Ukraine. The Ukrainian Government stands
for a peaceful solution to the current situation. Peace
can be achieved if the Russian side stops pouring

S/PV.7185

professional mercenaries into Ukraine with the aim
of destabilizing the situation in eastern Ukraine and
stops encouraging separatism. We call on the Security
Council and the international community to demand
categorically that the Russian Federation cease its
practice of provoking instability, withdraw all Russian
armed forces, paramilitary organizations and groups,
and citizens from Ukraine and fulfil their obligations
undertaken under the Geneva agreement on Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Russia to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): You looked at me, Mr. President, and I
decided that I would say literally just a couple of words
after all. Needless to say, I will not respond to the array
of facts or pseudo-facts presented by my Ukrainian
colleague, but I want to point out for the umpteenth
time that the representative of Ukraine is ignoring the
role of his own people. All his claims are directed at
Russia, but the situation in eastern Ukraine arose at the
very least after the Government overthrow in Kyiv on
22 February. We all know that perfectly well, and so
do our Ukrainian colleagues, of course, but they prefer
to ignore it, because they do not know what to say to
the Ukrainian people. We again heard about the idea
of Ukrainian unity. We have already expressed our
concern in our statement, which I will not reiterate.
However, blaming Russia will not resolve the issues of
the Ukrainian people.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Ukraine for a further statement.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian): As the
Council knows, the Ukrainians are very patient people.
We always find a way to agree. But in order to agree,
there must be stability. In order to achieve stability,
there cannot be a fuelling of instability. I asked many
times what hundreds of armed Chechens were doing in
Ukraine. What was their purpose? Had they come to to
protect Ukrainian orthodoxy, or Slav ethnicity? I asked
why hundreds of Cossacks in Crimea had come to
destabilize the situation. That does not help us to resolve
the issue but destabilizes the situation. Moreover,
they are not hiding that or concealing who they are.
I wondered what the Wolves Centurion, which was
established in the 1950s and then formed the Cossack
corpus of the Nazi Special Service, had come to do.
To fight the fascists — those who themselves support
Nazism? It is not very clear. It is unclear to us all what
may happen if suddenly citizens of another country

14-4115917/19

S/PV.7185

Ukraine

appear in our country. A group of 200 people gathered
in the streets, calling itself a people’s republic and
saying that they would lead it. That is what happened
in Donetsk. A Russian citizen called himself Prime
Minister. What does that help? Does it foster dialogue?
Clearly not.
So today, when our sides have at least exchanged
some views and if we see that there may be a solution as
a result of a bilateral dialogue, we need to find a way to
speak to those people. Why should Russia not also speak
to them? Why does Russia not explain to them what it
is doing in their country? It could be called mercenary
activities rather than assistance. That is fuelling the
flames of separatism, and it has continued for a long
time. It is true that the Government did not do anything
for 20 years to resolve the difficulties of the region. It
is true that it is a depressed region, where there are no
jobs. It is true that a State policy should address that.
That has been said. However, it is necessary to assist
and not seek to destabilize the situation.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Russian Federation for a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I think that the representative of Ukraine
making ironic comments about the Chechens is
pointless. I do not understand. He could talk to them.
Perhaps that could lead to a diaologue with the people
in the southeast of Ukraine. But I will not go further
into that issue.
I will say that I liked the fact that at the very
end of his remarks, he nevertheless gave an objective
assessment of what is happening in southeast Ukraine.
He talked about the poverty of that region. That is
something that we should discuss. But talking about
artillery strikes and bombardments will not resolve the
poverty.
I do not know whether the Ukrainian television
showed it or not, but when the the people of Donetsk
and Luhansk turned out for the referendum on 11 May
it was not just a handful of people. It is a region of,
I believe, 7 million residents in Donetsk and Luhansk
together. Absolutely nothing was done to engage in a
respectful dialogue with them. I do not know. If there
have been some events that have drawn attention to
the region, I hope that that will lead to constructive
actions. But we have not seen that. Stop the military
operations. Then perhaps we would help to establish
a dialogue. That is what we have always said. Let us

18/19

28/05/2014

move forward and start a dialogue. Russia is ready to
assist in establishing a dialogue.
Russia came to Geneva and we drew up an
agreement. But what did we see the Ukrainian
authorities in Kyiv do? We saw them undertake punitive
operations in violation of that agreement. So what
happened to dialogue? We have always been ready to
assist in setting up a dialogue and stand ready to do so
now. So we hope that the military operation will stop
as soon as possible, because how can we help while it
continues? How can we assist in establishing dialogue
in the southeastern regions if there is killing there? It is
very difficult for us to talk about dialogue.
As is known, in our country there are many ties with
Ukraine, and 3 million of its people are dual citizens
of Ukraine and Russia. Whether they have Russian
passport and Moscow residency is not significant
because they may have 30 relatives living in Ukraine,
and so on. So that is what I mean. It is very difficult to
say who is Russian, who is Ukrainian and who is half
Russian and half Ukrainian.
We all know that. Let us try to end on a constructive
note. We agree that in that region there is a very difficult
socioeconomic situation.
The Ukrainian representative also mentioned
Crimea. As he asked a question, I, too, will ask
one. That is, why was the water shut off in Crimea?
Why was the water supply in Crimea stopped? The
economic situation is still bad 25 years after Ukrainian
independence, and the water is shut off?
It is clear that there is a poor socioeconomic situation
in the east of the country. Let us together try to solve
the issue. Let us cooperate. Can Russia and the Ukraine
cooperate economically? Does the representative recall
those serious proposals that we made? They were
ongoing right up to time of the coup d’état that took
place on 22 February. So Ukraine turned its back on
all that. Now Ukraine talks of closing the border with
Russia and leaving the Commonwealth of Independent
States. It can clearly do that. There would not be free
trade with us. But as for the issues of bilateral relations
and cooperation in our region, what we now see is a
military operation near the Russian border fanning the
flames of anti-Russian rhetoric or policy. That is not
constructive.
I hope that Ukraine carefully reads the statements
made by our Government. There are very constructive.
I hope that the representative has listened closely to
14-41159

28/05/2014

Ukraine

our statement today, which, in addition to its possible
criticism also contains a number of constructive ideas
as part of our policy on Ukraine.
So we would like to turn the page as soon as
possible, but much depends on Ukraine. First, it must
stop the military chaos in the east of the country.
I have already said this, but it was of course very
difficult to listen to everything. The representative
of Lithuania said that an Italian journalist had been
killed but not by whom. The whole way in which
when the Ukrainian armed forces do something, it is
not mentioned. The representative of Luxembourg,
who always talks a great deal about the humanitarian
matters, spoke little about that.
I recall the meeting on Crimea, when Ukrainian
soldiers were killed. Some people thought they
died as a result of Russian bullets. Then when the
pro-Russian forces made it known that they were sniper
bullets, the Security Council immediately expressed
its condolences. Now dozens of people, including
residents, are being killed in the east of the country.
Some Council members say that the Kyiv authorities are
showing exceptional restraint. That is very surprising.
Why are we gathering today? If it is for the
Security Council to undertake its political function,
let us demonstrate how to put an end to the violence
as quickly as possible. I perhaps heard another useful
point from my Ukrainian colleague when he welcomed
the mediation efforts of the Secretary-General. The
Secretary-General could perhaps immediately stop
the violence because the Ukrainian representative will
soon welcome his role in ending the violence in the east
of Ukraine. Let us do that in order to put an end to it.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Ukraine, who has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian): I have
listened to the statement made by the representative of
the Russian Federation, and I believe that the easiest
way for his side to move forward would be as follows.
He has told us what we should do, so I should like to tell
him what Russia should do.
The Russian Government, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs or whoever makes the decisions should appeal
to their people, and first and foremost to the Chechen
leadership. Instead of conducting manoeuvres during
the presidential elections in Donetsk, those hundreds

S/PV.7185

of Chechens should immediately leave Ukraine. That is
the first requirement.
Secondly, with respect to the hundreds of Cossacks
in Ukraine, as I recall the President of the Russian
Federation took a decision regarding the presence of
the Russian army. The presence of those Cossacks is
therefore subject to a dual interpretation. It would thus
be only right for Russia to call on them, too, to leave
my country. Such an appeal could also be directed to
Russian citizens who, for lack of direction, sign on as
mercenaries. It would also be right to warn them against
acting on their impulses.
With respect to Crimea, we have been in contact
with the occupying Power concerning the issue of
water. This is an economic problem, but the most
pressing issue in Crimea has yet to be resolved. Crimea
is Ukrainian territory, and we must resolve the issue
of its restoration to Ukraine. That is our principled
position. No one is rejecting Crimea. That is an issue
we could consider together in negotiations.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked to make a final statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am not certain how the representative of
Ukraine wishes to engage in dialogue with us, but we
believe that negotiations should address the broader
agenda of our relations. They cannot be dictated by
Kyiv on one, two, three or four specific points; they
should be based on a broad agenda concerning our
relations. I believe that there are good prospects for
interraction between our two countries, so we should
seek to develop them constructively and to find a way
out of this difficult juncture in our relations and in the
history of Ukraine as soon as possible.
Russia did not cause the events in Ukraine, but
we remain ready to help Ukraine find a solution if it
can make the appropriate decisions. A very interesting
and positive opportunity is available to Ukraine now
that it has elected a President, who will shortly assume
his mandate. He must take the right decisions, rather
than measures that would only perpetuate the current
stalemate.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

14-4115919/19
