XVI.

RF.SOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE PROPOSALS OF THE
GENERAL COMMITl"EE
this subject, in order to assist governments in de-

26(1) .ESTABLISHMENT oF Two ad hoc

tennining their short tenn and long term agricultura! policy.
Thirty-third plenary meeting, 14 February 1946.

CoMMITTEES

The General Assembly decides to establish two
ad hoc committees as follows:

(a) League of Nations Committee to consider
the possible transfer of certain functions, activi- 2 8 (1) •RECONSTRUCTIOH OF CoUHTRIES MEMties and assets of the League of Nations;
BERS 0F THE UHITED NATIOHS OEVASTATED
(b) Permanent Headquar-ters Committee to
BY WAR
consider the site of the permanent headquarters
Considering:
of the United Nations.'
that the war of aggression waged on the terriEach Member will have the right to be repretories of many Members of the United Nations resented on each of these two Committees.
sulted in the destruction of vast areas of these counEighteenth plenary meeting, 26 /anuary 1946.
tries on-an unprecedented scale;
that these peace-loving nations, which suffered
such an extensive damage, represent nearly onehalf of the total population of the world;
27(1). WORLD SHORTAGE OF CEREALS
that the vast areas representing a big consuming power are virtually eliminated from the normal
The damage caused by war and the dislocation
flow of world trade, so that the whole world econof agricultura) production resulting from the shortomy must be seriously affected;
age and dislocation of labour, the removal of
that the great scale of destruction resulted in
draught animals, the shortage of fertilizers and
most cases in a dangerous lowering in the standard
other circumstances connected with the war have
of living and in the health of the population, in a
caused a serious fall in world production of wheat.
substantial loss of productive capacity and sorneIn addition, a large number of countries, inclw:ling
times in the complete destruction of the normal
sorne of those which are normally the largest p~
economic activities of the respective countries;
ducers of grain, have suffered serious droughts and
that in order to make good the destruction and
have therefore reaped abnormally small crops. The
so to restore the shaken world economy vast
supply of rice is also so short as to threaten a !amamounts of new capital goods must be invested in
ine in certain areas. There is, moreover, a serious
risk of grain production in the coming season being
the destroyed areas;
that in most cases it would be impossible to deal
insufficient to prevent continuing hunger. For
these reasons the world is faced with conditions
with the work of reconstruction with the necessary
which may cause widespread suffering and death
speed and efficiency if the affected countries were
limited in this respect to their interna) resources
and consequently set back ali plans for reconstruction.
and possibilities alone;
that only a full-scale and whole-hearted co-operation of ali the United Nations can bring about
The General Assembly therefore:
the right solution of this grave problem;
l. Urges ali governments and peoples to take
immediate and drastic action, both directly and
the General Ássembly:
through the international organizations concerned,
1. recognizes the problem of full reconstruc~on
to conserve supplies, by securing adequate collecof the countries belonging to Members of the
tion of crops from the producen, by saving food
United Nations which suffered substantial war
and avoiding waste, and to ensure the maximum
damage as a grave and urgent matter which should
production of grain in the coming season;
be given very high priority among post-war problems;
2. Notes that severa! of the United Nations
have recently announced measures to reserve grain
2. decides to discuss generally this matter under
supplies for direct human consumption and to separagraph 17 of its agenda and to transmit it, at
cure increased production;
the second part of the first session of the General
Assembly, for a close examination by the Second
3. Urges ali governments to publish as ful! inCommittee, which shall present to the ~neral Asformation as possible regarding -their own supplies
sembly a report resulting from this examination.
and requirements of cereals and the steps they
have taken or are prepared to take to achieve the
3. asks the Economic and Social Council to
objectives expressed in paragraph I;
place this subject on the agenda of its first meeting,
as an urgent matter in the economic and social
4. Requests the international organizations confield, according to paragraph 10 of the provisional
cerned with food and agriculture to publish ful!
agenda of the fint meeting of the Council, as proinformation in their possession on the world food
posed by the Preparatory Commission.
position and the future outlook, and to intensify
efforts to obtain as ful! information as possible on
Twenty-second plenary meeting, 2 February 1946.
1

0n the proposal of the General Cornmittee, the General
A.sembly, at its thirty-third p!enary meeting held on
Thursday, 14 February 1946, decided to amend the tenru
of refrrence of the Pennanent Headquarters Committee
toread:
"to consider the site of the permanent and temporary headquarten of the United Nations and other
matten directly connected therewith."

29(1). DATE OF THE NEXT MEETING OF THE
GENERAL AsSEMBLY

Urgent problems brought before the General
Assembly at this session are now being considered
by the appropriate organs of the United Natiom

38

established during the present session, which organs
General to place the question of the organization of
will continue their work between sessions of the
an international press conference upon the agenda
Assembly.
of the second part of the first session of the General
If other problems arise with which the General
Assembly.
Assembly should urgently concern itself, a special
Twenty-sixth plenary meeting, 9 February 1946.
session could be convened under rules 3 and 4 of
the provisional rules of procedure.
The prac!ical probl~ms rai~ed by tbe present 32(1).RELATIONS 0F MEMBERS 0F THE UNITED
schedule of 1mportant mtemat10nal confercnces of
N
S
concern to the Members of the United Nations,
ATI0NS WITH PAIN
and those concemed in completing arrangements
l. The General Assembly recalls that the San
at the temporary headquarters render difficult the
Francisco Conference adopted a resolution accordfulfilment of the proposals of the Preparatory
ing to which paragraph 2 of Article 4 of chapter II
Commission.
of the United Nations Charter "cannot apply to
Therefore the General Assembly resolves that:
States whose regimes ha.ve been installed with the
1. The present session of the General Assembly
help of armed forces of countries which have
shall be adjoumed in February on a date to be
fought against the United Nations so long as these
subsequently detennined and shall be known as the
regimes are in power."
first part of the first regular session.
2. The General Assembly rccalls that at the
2. The second part of the first regular session of
Potsdam Conference the Governments of the
the General Assembly shall be convened on the
United Kingdom, the United States of America
first Tuesday after 2 September 1946 in accordance
and the Soviet Union stated that they would not
with rule 1 ánd supplementary rule B of the provisupport a request for admission to the United Nasional rules of procedure.
tions of the present Spanish Government "which,
3. Supplementary rules e, F and G of the prohaving been founded with the support of the Axis
visiona! rules of procedure shall apply for the secpowers, in view of its origins, its nature, its record
ond part of the first regular session of the General
and its close association with the aggressor States,
Assembly rather than rules 7, 11 and 13. Referdoes not possess the necessary qualifications to jusences elsewhere in the supplementary rules or in
tify its admission."
resolutiqns of the Assembly and its Committees to
3. The General Assembly, in endorsing these
the "second part of the first session" shall be contwo statements, recorrmends that the Members of
strued to refer to the second part of the first reguthe United Nations should act in accordance with
lar session.
the letter and the spirit of these statements in the
Twenty-sixth plenary meeting, 9 February 1946.
conduct of their future relations with Spain.
Twenty-sixth plenary meeting, 9 February 1946.

30( 1l. APPLICATIONS FR0M NATIONALs oF NoNMEMBER STATES F0R PERMANENT EMPL0YMENT WITH THE lNTERNATI0NAL
SECRETARI.11,T

33 (1 l. TERMS 0F OFFICE 0F MEMBERS 0F
COUNCILS1

Resolved that it is the sense of this Assembly that
members of Councils elected in January 1946
under the provisional rules of procedure shall hold
office for twelve months and that elections of their
successors shall be held at the second part of the
first regular session of the General Assembly.
The Secretary-General is requested to report at
the opening of the second part of the first regular
session what, if any, changes in the rules he deems
necessary to give effect to the foregoing.
Thirty-second plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

The General Assembly instructs the SecretaryGeneral:
1. To receive and file su.ch applications for employment with the Secretariat as may be received
from nationals of non-member States.
2. To infonn the governments of non-member
States making enquiry with regard to application
for employment that such applications will be received and filed, but that employment can only
take place in accordance with the regulations of
the Secretariat.
Twenty-sixth plenary meeting, 9 February 1946.

1

Thi• que•tion, originally discu•sed by the General Assembly at its twenty-cighth meeting on 10 February 1946
on the ba,is of a report of the Sixth Committee ( document A/38), was rcferred to the General Committcc for
further consideration. The General Committee, in rcporting its findings to the General Auembly ( document
A/51) •ubmitted thi• new ,ewlution. In paragraph 1 the
pcriod of "twenty months" proposed by the General Committee, was altered by a vote of the General Auembly to

31 (1) .ORGANIZATION 0F AN lNTERNATIONAL
PRESS CONFERENCE

The General Assembly instnlcts the Secretary-

"twelvc months.,,

39
