United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8900 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8900th meeting

Tuesday, 9 November 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liang Hengzhu
Ms. Mägi
Mr. Hubin
Mr. Mathur
Mrs. Murray
Mr. Olanda
Mr. Soumana
Ms. Moe
Mr. Skachkov
Ms. Andrews
Ms. Chelbi
Ms. White
Mr. Turner
Mr. Phan

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Exclusion, inequality and conflict
Letter dated 15 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/883)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security
Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May
2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by
the COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented
by a compilation of annexes (S/2021/935) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-32798 (E)
*2132798*

S/PV.8900 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed
at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Flashing lights on
the collars of the microphones will prompt speakers
to bring their remarks to a close after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the convening of this
meeting, and we welcome, Mr. President, your presence
here among us at this meeting.
There are Powers in the international order that, by
promoting exclusion and inequality, act as true makers
of conflicts. Their attempts to impose a particular
vision of the world undermine global diversity and lead
them down the path of coercion. Those conflicts are
usually the result of attempts to impose rules of conduct
that are contrary to international law and violate the
Charter of the United Nations.
The making of conflict is driven, guided and
financed by a permanent member of the Security
Council, which, sensing a decline in its influence, seeks
to restore its dominance by intervening in the internal
affairs of other States. To that end, it employs political
destabilization, disregard for the expression of citizen
majorities in elections, the financing of mercenaries and
terrorists and economic coercion by applying unilateral
coercive measures that undermine the authority of the
Security Council. It imposes group unilateralism and
purports to have exclusive moral authority in matters of
democracy and human rights. Moreover, that country
believes that it has a clear destiny that allows it to
engage in espionage and threaten the use of force, in
several cases going so far as the illegal use of force.
Such acts of aggression against sovereign States are
widely known in the world. We have seen how conflicts
are fabricated so that, after plundering the sovereign
resources of nations and plunging them into poverty,
humanitarian appeals are made, or peacekeeping
measures are ordered, that take decades to alleviate the
wounds opened by the initial conflict.
In the case of Venezuela, the implementation of
unilateral coercive measures by the United States of
America demonstrates that country’s violation of the
2/18

09/11/2021

exclusive authority of the Security Council and the
United Nations Charter. The United States Government
has waged an illegal campaign of aggression against
the Venezuelan people, with coercive measures that
lead to poverty, destroy national development and
violate human rights, in order to provoke a crisis that
will allow it to intervene in our internal affairs. Those
actions become crimes against humanity when they
intensify amid the worst pandemic that the world has
suffered in a century.
It is a systematic attack that particularly strikes the
most vulnerable sectors of the civilian population. It is
a policy of cruelty calculated to gain colonial advantage
through suffering and pain. We must also remember
that there are several General Assembly resolutions
that prohibit the use of essential goods, such as food
and medicine, as instruments of political and economic
coercion, and that under no circumstances should people
be deprived of their own means of subsistence and
development. All those resolutions are being violated
by the Government of the United States of America.
In conclusion, while poverty, inequality and
exclusion are structural causes of conflict, there are
countries that fabricate such causes through the illegal
application of unilateral coercive measures in order to
expand their domination over other sovereign States.
The Security Council has at its disposal an effective
tool for conflict prevention if it decides to immediately
suspend all coercive measures applied illegally without
its authority. We make that formal proposal to the States
members of the Security Council in order to strengthen
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We appreciate the convening of this important
open debate, through which Mexico rightly calls on us
to address the interlinkage among exclusion, inequality,
violence and conflict.
For the Dominican Republic, it is only through
a decisive response to those deep-rooted ills that we
can achieve the legitimate aspiration of building
peaceful and inclusive societies for all. The increase in
violence, combined with the ongoing inequalities and
social exclusion in many of our countries, has been the
indisputable result of the crisis brought about by the
coronavirus disease pandemic. We therefore agree that
our response must include multidimensional measures
21-32798

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

to resolve such crises, based on a preventive approach
within the framework of sustainable development and
the protection of people’s dignity.
The first step in that direction is a paradigm shift
forcing us to anticipate and prevent the causes of
violence, conflicts and humanitarian crises and enabling
us to devote ourselves to working for peacebuilding.
Violence, fragility and vulnerability can be addressed
only through a vision for the future that is rooted in
strong institutions, the creation of opportunities, respect
for human rights and the meaningful participation of
young people.
To that end, we must better equip ourselves, from
the local to the international level, for timely action by
using political will to tackle the ills that hold back our
progress, facilitating people’s access to a full life and
bringing together, as we have done today, those who
are the protagonists of such realities, including, most
particularly, women. Taking their perspectives into
account in the design of our actions is still a pending task
in many areas of our work. That will be achieved only
by systematically including them at the negotiations
table and giving them a role in decision-making.
We must acknowledge that, while none of this is
new, weaknesses in our multilateral system persist that
have prevented it from having a major impact on the
lives and safety of millions of vulnerable people. The
new social contract, which is being proposed at the
current juncture, must therefore enjoy the imprimatur
of the people, as well as here within the Organization,
so that our efforts will not be temporary but structural.
Accordingly, we will be able to overcome the obstacles in
our way and open the door to a potential transformation
enabling us to respond to shared challenges. If we are
divided, we will not achieve our goals.
Today, perhaps more than ever, at a time when
many of our countries find themselves overwhelmed by
the socioeconomic and financial consequences of the
pandemic, the United Nations must stand in solidarity
with and help those who are furthest behind, including
those who have been unable to get back on their feet,
owing to limited access to vaccines and the prevalence
of underlying crises. It is not a matter of bailing them
out but of helping them build for themselves a better
and more just and inclusive future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.

S/PV. 8900 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Da Fonseca Fernandes Ramos (Portugal)
(spoke in Spanish): Let me thank the Mexican
presidency of the Security Council for taking this
important initiative.
(spoke in English)
The risk of unrest and conflict is high throughout
the world. As the gains to conflict prevention from
poverty reduction measures become increasingly
evident, it will be crucial to move towards the full
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Fulfilling them will lessen inequalities and exclusion,
which will in turn contribute to a more peaceful and
secure world. United Nations Member States must
reinforce solidarity and cooperation, renewing their
commitment to an effective multilateralism conducive
to more just and inclusive societies.
The Security Council should therefore continue
to support conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
as well as avoid a predominantly military outlook or
management of existing crises. Human rights violations
and abuses are not only a consequence of conflict; they
are also an underlying cause of conflict. We support
close cooperation between the Security Council and the
Human Rights Council to foster the preventive mandate
of both bodies.
The link between poverty and insecurity is
particularly evident in communities afflicted by
terrorism. Terrorist groups exploit long-standing
economic, political and social grievances, with a view
to radicalizing and recruiting militants. That often
takes place online. The most effective response to that
issue involves not only Governments, but also civil
society stakeholders, in particular Internet providers.
We need to develop and implement socially inclusive
policies, Internet monitoring and dialogue with local
communities and religious leaders.
Regional organizations also have a relevant role
to play. As the Council has recently recognized, they
have a vast knowledge of the root causes of conflict
and help ensure local ownership by promoting trust and
dialogue. They can contribute to improving coherence
between development and security policies, which
is most of all needed at an operational level. One of
the major tenets of the Action for Peacekeeping Plus
initiative is the need to keep dialogue open with
local authorities and communities. Partnerships are
essential. The convening role of the Peacebuilding
Commission can be used to mobilize all stakeholders,

21-327983/18

S/PV.8900 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

and the Peacebuilding Fund can be employed to support
the resilience of fragile communities.
In closing, it is worth recalling that women and youth
are disproportionately affected by economic insecurity.
For that reason, their participation in sustaining and
maintaining peace needs to be strengthened. They
should be heard and engaged with when examining the
links between poverty and security, and they must be a
part of all the steps needed to address them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to
congratulate Mexico on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also want to commend
you, Sir, for choosing this topic and theme for the open
debate. I am honoured and happy to be here before the
Council for the first time since the beginning of the
pandemic, with the inclusion of small States like ours.
The work of the Council this year has carried
particular importance, owing to the multiple challenges
that humankind is facing. The pandemic has revealed
our underlying problems, owing to the socioeconomic
crisis, multiplying conflicts and climate change, as
they have aggravated structural weaknesses. It also has
unmasked inequality, exclusion and discrimination,
raising concerns of instability.
There is no better example of inequality than
vaccine inequity. Today less than 10 per cent of the
population in poor nations and less than 4 per cent of
Africa’s population are fully vaccinated. The Security
Council addressed the issue of vaccine inequality
in resolution 2565 (2021), calling for strengthening
international cooperation to facilitate equitable and
affordable access to coronavirus disease vaccines in
situations of armed conflict. But conflicts continue
to rage, and vaccines continue to be scarce in many
poor countries.
The Charter of the United Nations, in Chapter
I, puts prevention at the heart of the responsibility
of the Security Council by identifying its purpose
in the maintenance of peace and security. Although
prevention runs throughout the whole United Nations
document, it has not been one of the success stories of
the Security Council. Conflicts are not resolved. They
are managed today, and not well, if I may say so. It is true
that the Charter focuses on inter-State disputes, while
many conflicts today are within States, which creates
4/18

09/11/2021

tensions, especially over the issue of sovereignty and
the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs
of other States.
It is also true, however, that, although sovereignty
is invaluable, there are issues that, if left unresolved,
might lead to a threat to international peace and
security. Grave human rights violations, atrocities,
crimes against humanity and the uprooting of
populations are a few examples of that. Occupation,
like the continued Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories, is another major source of conflict. The
Security Council can prevent conflict by implementing
its own resolutions.
There is also the exclusion of youth from
decision-making, especially with regard to issues that
affect their future, such as issues involving climate,
jobs and freedoms. Women’s exclusion can leave half
of the public sphere full of resentment and lead to failed
States, as some studies show. That makes it imperative
in the Security Council to prioritize prevention, but
with new approaches that work.
Prevention has to engage the whole United Nations
system. It has to work within the nexus of peace,
security, development, climate and conflict. Peace
and security have to be the thread that ties all of them
together in an inclusive way. It also has to work with
the General Assembly. The close work, cooperation
and coordination between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) are essential in
prevention, but the Peacebuilding Commission has to
widen its scope and the themes that it tackles, adding
more regions to its agenda. Climate and conflict should
be addressed in the PBC and be included on its agenda.
The Middle East is a pertinent example of how
conflicts are the main obstacle to development and
peace. The Middle East is a tinderbox today.
The Security Council can benefit from a United
Nations early-warning system, as well as from a strong
consultations system. Virtual meetings have limited
interaction with other Members over the past year and
have shown that online negotiations were not conducive
to reaching diplomatic compromises or preventing a
slide into conflict. Today, however, with the nearly full
return to normalcy, there should be an added emphasis
on prevention through interactive and in-depth
discussions on areas of concern around the world, not
prepared statements.
21-32798

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

In order to succeed in prevention, the Council
needs good, reliable and objective information
and analysis at its disposal. The absence of such
information or its weakness in terms of its quality or
neutrality can prejudice the work of the Council, but,
most importantly, it can negatively affect the work of
the elected members of the Council, especially small
States that lack resources. Prevention succeeds only
when the Council has the political will to do that.
United Nations offices and officers on the ground
are the best source of such first-hand information and
analysis. Unfortunately, the pandemic has restricted
the work and movement of personnel in many
regions. Nevertheless, it continues to be invaluable.
United Nations analysts should maintain impartiality
and objectivity, while remaining independent and
courageous in not bowing to pressure from or being
too friendly to the country they cover. Pressure from
local authorities, intimidation and threats, including by
expelling United Nations personnel or closing offices,
should not be tolerated. The Security Council needs to
stand firm on that issue and not allow a precedent to
be created.
The Security Council has to uphold its
responsibilities concerning the maintenance of peace
and security around the world. To better do so, it must
address the root causes of conflict and implement its
own mandate, including that of prevention.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, allow me to congratulate Mexico
on its contribution to the work of the Security Council
since January of this year, which is also reflected in
the adoption of a substantive agenda for the month of
November, under its presidency.
I also thank the President of Mexico, the SecretaryGeneral and Lourdes Tibán Guala, representative of the
United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues,
for their substantive briefings earlier today.
For Ecuador, today’s debate is crucial as it allows
the Council and the Organization to focus on the
issue of conflict prevention. With the twin resolutions
2558 (2020) and 75/201 of 21 December 2020, the
Security Council and the General Assembly reaffirmed
that peacebuilding and sustaining peace should be
considered as both an objective and a process in order

S/PV. 8900 (Resumption 1)

to ensure that the needs of all segments of a State’s
population are taken into account. The Security
Council and its members should work together to
facilitate the implementation of the comprehensive
outcome of the 2020 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, including with funding
from the Peacebuilding Fund.
Ecuador
supports
international
initiatives,
including, in particular, those promoted by the United
Nations and the Council itself to overcome the cycle of
food insecurity caused by conflict, which brings with it
the risks of famine and severe malnutrition.
We remain extremely concerned about the food
situation in Haiti, as reflected in the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs humanitarian
response plan, as well as in various reports of the
Secretary-General, which reveal that more than
4 million people have been affected by acute food
insecurity in the country. That is in contrast to the
unjustifiable waste of more than 1 billion tons of food
worldwide every year, according to estimates provided
at the United Nations Food Systems Summit, held on
23 September.
We have only eight years left to achieve Goal 16
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, on
peace, justice and strong institutions. We have even
less time remaining to address the factors that lead to
fragile environments, such as climate change, extreme
poverty and inequality. We agree on the fact that
security and development are mutually reinforcing.
We now need to move forward with a coordinated
international response. As an Organization, we must
promote efforts to improve the security of health
systems and infrastructure. We must promote access to
safe drinking water and sanitation.
We acknowledge that a considerable segment
of the world’s poor live in rural areas and that
rural communities play a key role in development
and peacebuilding.
The Security Council has the responsibility to
support prevention mechanisms, in line with specific
national contexts and priorities. It should also promote
and implement resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, and resolution 2250 (2015), on
youth and peace and security.
Lastly, in coordination with the Economic and
Social Council, the Security Council should take note

21-327985/18

S/PV.8900 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

09/11/2021

of the economic dimensions of conflicts and encourage
initiatives aimed at ensuring stable contexts for the
involvement of civil society, academia and the private
sector in order to preserve or mend the social fabric and
promote more resilient societies.

less than half of the world’s population. Low-income
countries — the majority of them in Africa — have
received only 0.4 per cent of those vaccines. Meanwhile,
global military spending is on the rise, reaching nearly
$2 trillion in 2020.

The survival of the sustaining peace agenda amid
a global crisis requires our cross-cutting action. To
ensure that it is effective, it also requires capacitybuilding in all regions of the world and resolute action
by all States to reduce exclusion and inequality.

Unilateral coercive measures hinder an effective
fight against the pandemic and the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals. To live in peace and
security, humankind needs respect for international
law and national sovereignty, cooperation and mutual
respect; not blockades or sanctions.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The presence of the President of Mexico, His Excellency
Mr. Andrés Manuel López Obrador, as a worthy
representative of the ideals of peace, solidarity, justice
and prosperity in Latin America and the Caribbean and
the world, has enhanced today’s meeting.
We congratulate Mexico and wish it every success
during its presidency of the Security Council.
Amid the global uncertainty and a multidimensional
crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
today’s debate is particularly relevant. International
peace and security are under constant threat from
conflicts, acts of aggression, unconventional warfare,
attempts at regime change and frequent violations of
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
The prevalence of a profoundly unjust and
undemocratic international order, decades of ruthless
neoliberalism, exclusionary capitalism and its
irrational production and consumption patterns, have
placed greed and the petty interests of a few above the
legitimate aspirations of millions of human beings.
The pandemic has exacerbated the global crisis,
leaving the most vulnerable unprotected, while the
profits of the richest continue to increase. For example,
89 million Americans lost their jobs, 45 million fell ill
and 724,000 died from the virus, but the billionaires
in the United States added $2.1 trillion to their already
colossal fortunes. The profound global inequality in
access to and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines is
both regrettable and unacceptable and has widened the
North-South divide.
Of the 7 billion doses of vaccines administered,
more than 80 per cent were sent to member countries
of the Group of 20, whose inhabitants account for far
6/18

It is vital to strengthen multilateralism, ensure
full respect for the Charter and international law
and honour commitments and obligations. We must
promote comprehensive and deep reform of the
Security Council, greater representation for countries
of the South, democracy, transparency and inclusivity
in the Council’s work and its non-interference in the
mandate and functions of the General Assembly and
other organs, so as to preserve the Organization’s
effectiveness and credibility. We must urgently unite
our efforts to promote a just, democratic and equitable
international order that will put an end to exclusion and
inequality for the good of humankind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the pleasure to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and, of course, my
own country, Denmark.
We begin by thanking the Secretary-General and
Ms. Lourdes Tibán Guala for sharing their valuable
insights and welcome today’s timely debate on the
maintenance of international peace and security in
relation to exclusion, inequality and conflict.
Recently, we have witnessed how the coronavirus
disease and the direct effects of climate change have
accelerated existing drivers of conflict, multiplied
security risks and further exacerbated the situation for
the most vulnerable groups and populations. There is
no doubt that global security challenges reinforce each
other and, therefore, addressing the root causes and
drivers of conflict, such as exclusion and inequality,
must be part of prevention and peacebuilding.
Let me share four reflections on the Council’s work
in relation to exclusion, inequality and conflict.
21-32798

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

First, inclusion is key to building sustainable
peace. The Council affirmed that in its twin resolution
with the General Assembly on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture (resolution 2558 (2020)
and resolution 75/201), which calls for the needs of all
segments of the population to be taken into account in
building a common vision for society. Sustaining peace
obliges us to ensure inclusion as part of building peace
and upholding human rights, not least through the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women and
young people in peacebuilding.
Secondly, sustaining peace should build on an
integrated One United Nations approach at all stages
of conflict. In that regard, the Council must ensure
that United Nations peacekeeping operations are able
to further the interlinkages between development,
security and human rights. That calls for more joinedup analysis and effective strategic planning, as well
as making long-term peacebuilding efforts a part of
peacekeeping operations from the outset.
The peace and development advisors seconded
by
the
Joint
United
Nations
Development
Programme-Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs Programme on Building National Capacities for
Conflict Prevention have proven to be an effective tool
in that regard, serving the whole United Nations system
in conflict-affected contexts.
To strengthen efforts across the humanitarian,
development and peace nexus, the Nordic countries
also urge the Council to increase cooperation with
the resident coordinators and United Nations country
teams on the ground, as well as with other international,
regional and local partners, including international
financial institutions, regional organizations and civil
society, throughout the conflict cycle.
Thirdly, the Nordic countries call on the
Council to strengthen its cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission, including by drawing on
its recommendations and its advisory, bridging and
convening roles. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
proposal for a new agenda for peace, outlined in Our
Common Agenda, including the call for Member
States to make greater investments in prevention and
ensure adequate, predictable and sustained financing
for peacebuilding. As part of that, we welcome the
proposal to allocate a dedicated amount from assessed
contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund.

S/PV. 8900 (Resumption 1)

Finally, sustaining peace helps us direct our
attention to the importance of addressing inequality,
exclusion and other root causes of conflict in
peacebuilding. It also helps us to invest in what we
know drives sustainable peace and prosperity, including
targeted work for gender equality.
The Nordic countries stand ready to work
proactively on addressing root causes of conflict and
continue to invest in drivers of peace by following
up on the Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda
report. As the Secretary-General notes in the report,
addressing racism, discrimination and inequality and
ensuring universal access to social protection, health
coverage, education, skills, decent work and housing
are key to preventing exclusion and conflict, as is the
development of a social contract between Governments
and their people wherein all citizens have a say in
envisioning their countries’ futures.
Let us turn exclusion, inequality and conflict into
inclusion, equality and sustainable peace for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate.
This statement is made on behalf of the Pathfinders
for Peaceful, Just and Inclusive Societies — a group of
countries and organizations committed to realizing the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), particularly
Goal 16.
As Pathfinders, our work is based on evidence
that there can be no peace without development and no
development without peace. Justice for all and fighting
inequality and exclusion are central to achieving and
sustaining peace. Equally, preventing conflict and
violence, including sexual and gender-based violence,
is a central enabler for access to justice for all and for
more equal and inclusive societies.
Peace, justice and inclusion catalyse progress
across the SDGs. That also resonates with the
Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda report. We,
as pathfinders, are focusing our urgent attention on
addressing three interrelated areas, which we believe
are key to conflict prevention.
First, we must build more equal and inclusive
societies. We need to address inequality and exclusion
by building solidarity across groups and Governments

21-327987/18

S/PV.8900 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

to deliver visible, material change in people’s lives by
tackling corruption and expanding representation of all
groups in society. Well-designed social dialogue and
truth and reconciliation programmes, including mental
health and psychosocial support, are relevant to postconflict societies and can be used preventively to avoid
the escalation of violence.
Secondly, we must provide justice for all. There
are 1.5 billion people with unresolved justice problems
that contribute to grievances, violence and instability.
Women, children and young people find it hardest to
access justice. Strengthening the rule of law requires
a new approach that allows justice systems to be more
effective, transparent and centred around the most
common problems that people experience.
Thirdly, we must halve global violence We
need a new agenda for peace, as mentioned by the
Secretary-General, that more effectively addresses
violence holistically. The Pathfinders Halving Global
Violence Task Force is a coalition of Governments,
mayors, leading international agencies, dedicated
non-governmental organizations and philanthropic
actors that is drawing together the evidence, tools and
action needed to achieve the goal of halving violence
by 2030.
To that end, the Pathfinders’ input for this meeting
is as follows.
First, the Security Council could avail itself
of broader analyses and benchmarks on trends in
inequality, exclusion and access to justice within
the framework of the field missions mandated by
the Council and request the advice of bodies like the
Peacebuilding Commission to incorporate it in its work.
Secondly, the Council could systematically indicate
to mission leadership the importance of linking
economic and political analysis and support. It could
also stress the value of exploring partnerships between
resident coordinators, governments, international
financial institutions and civil society with regard to
destabilizing socioeconomic factors and psychosocial
dynamics that need to be addressed in prevention
strategies, national development plans and mandate
objectives.
Thirdly, the Council could focus on lessons
learned from inclusive national dialogues that build
trust and from pro-equity and inclusion policies, in
8/18

09/11/2021

particular those bolstering the inclusion of women and
young people.
Fourthly and finally, the rule of law could be
strengthened as a preventative tool by focusing on
overcoming and preventing daily obstacles to access
to justice and by supporting national institutions to be
more responsive to people’s justice needs.
When it comes to peace operations and special
political missions, an emphasis by the Council
on drawing on that type of holistic analysis and
partnership would assist in addressing the risks of
today’s environment and increase the chances of
success of Council-authorized operations and thereby
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we welcome the presiding of His Excellency
Mr. Andrés Manuel López Obrador, President of
Mexico, over this meeting and congratulate friendly
Mexico on its presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November. We also welcome the participation
of the Secretary-General in this meeting and thank the
briefers for their statements.
The State of Qatar has always reaffirmed, in various
international forums, including the Security Council,
its view that preventing conflicts, putting an end to
them after they erupt and ensuring sustainable peace
in post-conflict contexts requires first and foremost
that the root causes of conflict be addressed. They
constitute a fertile environment for the eruption and
exacerbation of conflicts. Exclusion, marginalization,
discrimination and inequality are examples of the
root causes of conflicts. We are therefore grateful to
Mexico for highlighting the issue and for convening
this meeting on the matter.
The reciprocal relationship among peace, security,
development and human rights is not a new concept,
but it must be taken it into account in the context of
United Nations efforts to counter current and emerging
challenges, in particular threats to peace and security.
We are heartened by the fact that the Security Council
is paying greater attention to the various factors that
affect international peace and security, as attested by
its many recent open debates on thematic issues related
to the root causes of conflicts
21-32798

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

The timely efforts to address the root causes of
conflicts can help to address the plight of individuals
and to alleviate suffering. It also saves many resources
needed to address the deteriorated humanitarian and
economic situation as a result of conflicts.
The State of Qatar has made peacemaking and
peacebuilding through the peaceful settlement of
disputes one of its foreign policy priorities. In parallel,
we contribute to the advancement of economic and social
development and human rights, while empowering
women and promoting the rule of law at the local and
international levels.
We have supported the initiatives of the United
Nations to that end and embraced multilateral and
bilateral partnerships. We have provided international
support in areas that have an impact on social cohesion,
which is achieved through education for all, sport for
peace and other programmes in areas of importance.
Furthermore, we have been proactively contributing to
and participating in United Nations negotiations and in
all relevant activities related to international peace and
security, including, inter alia, on human security and
sustaining peace.
The marginalization of certain social groups
undeniably results in heightened tensions, specifically
if there are other destabilizing factors in play. The
absence of peace and security as a consequence of
marginalization and inequality results in greater
exclusion, and this, in turn, fuels a dangerous and
vicious cycle. We condemn policies and measures that
result in marginalization and inequality at all levels;
such policies and measures help no one. Quite the
contrary, the State of Qatar calls for upholding human
rights for all and the promotion of rule of law nationally,
regionally and internationally.
In conclusion, we shall pursue our initiatives
through the United Nations as part of a comprehensive
approach that reflects the links between peace, security,
sustainable development, human rights and rule of law,
with a view to contributing to the fight against threats
to international peace and security regionally and
globally.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): As I take the floor for the
first time during the Mexican presidency of the Security
Council, I would like to congratulate the President and

S/PV. 8900 (Resumption 1)

the Mexican delegation for organizing today’s open
debate on this important topic.
After more than two decades of progress, we are
witnessing with worry some very negative trends.
Economic activity is in contraction, extreme poverty is
on the rise, socioeconomic inequalities are increasing,
and the gender gap is widening while women’s
participation in the labour force is shrinking. The
coronavirus disease pandemic has further exacerbated
these trends, giving rise to tensions and violence and
hampering the development potential in many areas.
In order to be able to help countries to break the
vicious cycle of conflict and the lack of development, we
need to better integrate the humanitarian-developmentpeace nexus into the work of the United Nations.
Sustainable development will remain a mere illusion
in the absence of peace. Therefore, well-coordinated
efforts between different actors, including the United
Nations, aimed at integrating conflict prevention and
peacebuilding and development programmes become
essential. Member States should always prioritize
prevention, support humanitarian action, invest in
development, and pay special attention to the most
vulnerable groups, especially women and girls,
including through best practices in implementing the
women and peace and security agenda.
Albania supports the report of the SecretaryGeneral, Our Common Agenda, as well as his efforts to
reform the United Nations and make it more responsive
to complex and evolving challenges. In response to
the Secretary-General’s call for more support for
the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) and to strengthen
the system’s ability to invest in peacebuilding, the
Government of Albania has made a contribution to the
Peacebuilding Fund for the year 2021. We call on all
Member States, especially those who are in a position
to do so, to increase their contributions to the PBF; even
modest contributions do help make the change.
Albania has prioritized the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which goes
hand in hand with its overall development towards
its integration into the European Union. In this
regard, I would like to highlight the focus put on the
implementation of SDG 16 on peace, justice and strong
institutions. The major action in this regard is our
ongoing justice reform.
No other country has ever taken such a profound,
comprehensive and far-reaching reform to screen the

21-327989/18

S/PV.8900 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

system — to clean the system — in order to create the
conditions for a far more effective, accountable and
transparent judicial apparatus in service of the citizens
and as an indispensable pillar of democracy. As we
move forward, it is proving to be a milestone in the
fight against corruption. The overall achievement of
this sweeping reform is the promotion of the rule of law
at the national level, which is ensuring equal justice for
all.
As an incoming member of the Security Council,
Albania will consistently engage with other members
to better integrate a more preventive approach in the
work of the Council and reverse tendencies towards
exclusion and inequality that destabilize societies and
endanger international peace and security.
In conclusion, Albania will aim for a better
coordination of the Council with the wider United
Nations system, including the Human Rights Council,
as well as other important stakeholders and contributors,
such as relevant regional organizations and civil society
organizations. We are convinced that they bring fresh
perspectives — and value added — to the work of the
Council in its efforts to strengthen peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks Mexico for today’s important
debate, which reflects the Security Council’s increased
attention given to contemporary factors of conflict and
their complex interactions. Inequality and exclusion are
both causes and consequences of violent conflict.
“There can be no peace without development,
no development without peace, and no peace or
sustainable development without respect for human
rights and the rule of law.”
These words of Jan Eliasson, inspired by Kofi Annan,
have been echoed in many speeches, including those
of our colleagues from Ireland this morning (see
S/PV.8900). They remind us that conflict undermines
sustainable development and that no goal of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development can be achieved
in isolation.
While the Security Council has peace and
security as its primary mission, it can and should
also support the United Nations system as a whole in
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, with
particular attention to the following. First, the review
10/18

09/11/2021

of the peacebuilding architecture reaffirmed that the
three-pillar United Nations approach to peacebuilding is
relevant and essential. What does this mean in practice?
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example,
Switzerland supports the Government’s efforts aimed
at fighting impunity. This dissuasive element helps to
prevent violence and improve confidence in institutions.
In its decisions, the Security Council should rely more
on an integrated approach and strengthen cooperation,
collaboration and coordination among the three pillars.
Secondly, violent conflicts and the inequalities that
arise from them can only be avoided in resilient and
inclusive societies where everyone, especially the most
vulnerable, is protected. To this end, the United Nations
human rights system plays a key role. It is an important
early-warning mechanism. For example, the Human
Rights Council reacted swiftly to recent developments
in the Sudan by organizing a special session, calling
on the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights to appoint an expert to the country. Switzerland
encourages the Security Council to integrate such
analyses and cooperate more with human rights bodies,
in particular with the Human Rights Council and its
instruments, and treaty bodies.
Thirdly, strengthening the rule of law is a key
element in promoting peace. The lack of an explicit
mandate for peacekeeping missions to support the rule
of law hinders the achievement of their objectives. As
recent failures have underlined, it is essential that the
Security Council specifies support for the rule of law
in the mandates of peace missions and, for the sake
of coherence, that the General Assembly makes the
necessary resources available to achieve these objectives.
For its part, Switzerland supports the strengthening
of the rule of law, in particular by making police
officers, demining experts and experts in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration available to missions
and at the Secretariat level. Switzerland welcomes the
emphasis placed on the links between peace, security
and development, and calls for a more systematic
consideration of these interconnections in all the themes
and situations dealt with by the Council. As a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission and as a candidate
for the Security Council, Switzerland will continue to
commit to a coherent United Nations system.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
21-32798

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to commend the delegation of Mexico for having
convened this open debate and for submitting the
concept note on the topic (S/2021/883, annex).
Peoples throughout the world continue to suffer
from wars and their devastating consequences.
The coronavirus disease pandemic and the hazards
of climate change aggravate and exacerbate the
challenging security environment.
Violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, the global rise
in hate speech, incitement to hostility and violence
and the spread of various racist extremist groups and
movements, based on ideologies that seek to promote
racial superiority, have an undermining effect in the
eruption, resurgence, protraction and expansion of
conflicts, as well as in post-conflict situations. In
some well-known instances, at the core of dissension
and enmity are policies and practices based on
mono-ethnicity, exclusion and discrimination.
It is important to work on addressing all the root
causes of contention, taking into account that peace,
security, development, human rights and the rule of law
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
The outcome document containing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1) states, inter alia, that there can be no
sustainable development without peace and no peace
without sustainable development. It further reaffirms
a commitment to international law, the need to respect
the territorial integrity and political independence of
States, and the full, permanent sovereignty of States over
their wealth, natural resources and economic activity.
Human rights and fundamental freedoms are
universal and respect for those rights must be accorded
on an equal and non-discriminatory basis. The rule of
law and equal protection under the law for all, without
discrimination, are at the core of the international
human rights protection system. It is necessary to insist
at all levels that the recognition of the inherent dignity
and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of
the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice
and peace in the world.
As to humanitarian relief actions by States and
international organizations, it is well established
and generally accepted that such actions should
be exclusively humanitarian in nature, cannot be

S/PV. 8900 (Resumption 1)

misused for political purposes and should be carried
out in conformity with the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and consent of the affected country, while
fully respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and national unity of States, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
Furthermore, it is important that, acting to break
the cycle of exclusion, inequality and conflict and to
promote inclusive strategies, the Security Council and
other organs, bodies, agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations strictly comply with their respective
mandates. Close cooperation and coordination among
them are critical to enabling the United Nations to
effectively address the existing, new and emerging
threats and challenges.
Providing support to States affected by conflict and
engaged in post-conflict peacebuilding, reconstruction
and rehabilitation must be a commitment of the entire
United Nations system. Coherent global responses
and common efforts, consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, are the most
effective ways to achieve the goals of peace, inclusive
sustainable development and human rights for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate. I
thank the Secretary-General and other briefers for their
insightful remarks.
The nexus between exclusion, inequality and conflict
is well established. The coronavirus disease pandemic
further exposed the growing inequalities — both within
and across our societies.
Against that backdrop, this debate is very timely.
We reiterate the importance of sustained investments
in addressing the underlying drivers of conflicts,
which often include social and development issues.
In that regard, it is critical to ensure synergies
and complementarities among the United Nations
humanitarian response, the sustainable development
agenda, peacekeeping and sustaining peace initiatives.
There is also evident scope for better utilizing
the existing mechanisms of the United Nations for
supporting evidence-based risk assessment, early
warning and mitigation measures. The Council’s role
in that regard is particularly relevant when conflicts
induced by social and economic exclusion and

21-3279811/18

S/PV.8900 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

inequality entail cross-border ramifications or threats
to international peace and security.
In our neighbourhood, we have seen how the social
and political exclusion of Rohingya minorities have
led to a full-blown crisis in Myanmar, with serious
humanitarian and security ramifications for the region.
Indeed, the Council’s response to the early warnings
was inadequate and ineffective and continues to
remain so. Allow me to share some specific thoughts
in that regard.
First, addressing the root causes of conflicts is
critical to breaking the cycle of recurring violence. The
underlying factors of violence vary across economic,
political and cultural spectrums. There must be a
whole-of-United Nations approach to encouraging a
nationally driven and multi-stakeholder solution towards
durable peace. The United Nations development system
and its humanitarian arms have a central role to play in
such efforts. The Peacebuilding Commission, with its
overarching mandates across peace and development
pillars, can also play a pivotal role in conflict-affected
and fragile contexts.
Secondly, United Nations peace operations and
special political missions can bring great strength to
preventive diplomacy. They have first-hand information
from the field that can strengthen early warning systems
against impending crisis. With adequate mandates and
corresponding resources from the Council, they can
also support the peacebuilding efforts of the resident
coordinator and other United Nations agencies in
specific areas, namely, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; security sector reform; justice and
corrections; and so forth.

09/11/2021

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): It is very good to
be back in this Chamber after long months of absence
and almost exclusion.
I thank you, Mr. President, for bringing this topic to
the attention of the Security Council today. Questions of
exclusion and inequality are vital to the Council’s work.
They are also a through line to many of Liechtenstein’s
areas of focus at the United Nations.
I will quickly highlight two in particular and
discuss how they can better relate to the Council’s
mandates going forward.
The first of these is our work on self-determination.
As mentioned by our Kenyan colleagues in the open
debate they put together last month (see S/PV.8877),
many Council situations begin as intercommunal
tensions with roots in ethnic, racial, regional, partisan
and religious differences. Those can often manifest
themselves in exclusion and unequal treatment. We see
a need to address such tensions by fostering forms of
governance that can uphold the rights of communities
within a State, as a way to meet demands for further
internal self-determination and to realize the full
potential of the strength that every country can find in
its diversity. Those ideas are discussed further in our
recent Handbook on the Prevention and Resolution of
Self-Determination Conflicts, on which Liechtenstein
looks forward to engaging further with Member States.

Finally, adherence to international law is
fundamental to ensuring the rule of law at the global
level. The roles of International Court of Justice and
other international legal bodies and tribunals are
instrumental in ensuring international order and
justice. It is imperative that the Council demonstrate
its firm commitment to upholding the sanctity of the
International Court of Justice and other legal bodies.

Secondly, the Council must demonstrate the
mutually reinforcing nature of peace, human rights
and sustainable development in its mandates. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development provides
the most ambitious and most comprehensive human
development and human security programme ever
devised. It acknowledges the need to sustain peace
based on international law, in particular human rights
law, cooperation, solidarity and multilateralism. The
Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda reiterates
the importance of a human security approach across
societies to prevent social divisions and national and
international instability. It also accurately speaks of
a crisis of trust, which has been accelerated by the
pandemic, and calls for a new social contract that
ensures trust, inclusion, protection and participation.
In response, a sharp focus on the rule of law can help
strengthen inclusion, bolster democratic processes and
build public trust in institutions.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.

In the context of peace operations, human rights
and the rule of law can lay the foundations for more

Thirdly, the Council should invest more in
implementing the women and peace and security and
youth, peace and security agendas to ensure inclusion.

12/18

21-32798

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

accountable institutions, while enhancing inclusion
and strengthening democratic processes and the
fight against corruption, in line with Sustainable
Development Goal 16. It is therefore crucial that
mandates for all United Nations peace operations
include strong human rights and rule of law provisions.
While such provisions vary significantly within peace
operations and special political missions, we certainly
see room for improvement across the board.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I would like to thank the
Mexican presidency for organizing this open debate on
such an important and timely issue.
In my intervention, I would like to focus on two
particular aspects of the issue — first, the rule of law and
its link to anti-corruption and, secondly, governance.
At the outset, Slovakia would like to seize this
opportunity to stress once again the importance of the
principle of the rule of law, which we consider to be
the heart of the international order and should be put at
the top of the United Nations agenda on many fronts,
including in the work of this important organ, the
Security Council, which has the key responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. Although
we should discuss ways to improve the rule of law, we
are unfortunately unable to do so due to the ongoing
gross violations of international law, particularly
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, of which we are too often witnesses. It is
therefore crucial that every member of international
community fully abide by its international obligations.
That is even more critical in conflict situations.
Having referred to the principle of the rule of
law, I would like to mention one crucial element
of the struggle for its protection — the fight against
corruption. It is apt to call this negative phenomenon
the cancer of our societies that threatens our democratic
systems. Corruption dismantles people’s trust in
public institutions, puts them at risk of exclusion,
hinders social development and has a disproportionate
impact on the enjoyment of human rights, particularly
by persons belonging to disadvantaged groups and
communities. That is why my Government has
declared the fight against corruption as one of its key
human rights priorities, both domestically and in our
international engagement.

S/PV. 8900 (Resumption 1)

We stress the importance of the rule of law in
safeguarding stable democracy and domestic peace and
fostering social development. As such, we would like to
encourage Member States to intensify efforts to uphold
this basic principle of governance. This approach is a
prerequisite for tackling root causes of conflict. We are
therefore of the view that the Security Council should
continue paying appropriate attention to this issue.
It goes hand in hand with peacebuilding, sustaining
peace and security sector governance, to mention
but a few areas. It also fits very well with our wider
efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, particularly Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 16 and SDG 16+.
This issue is also important because we are
still fighting our common invisible enemy — the
coronavirus disease. The pandemic has exacerbated the
already unfavourable situation of the most vulnerable
groups, pushed millions of people into poverty and
reversed the progress that the international community
had reached in that regard. The situation is even more
alarming in conflict situations, to which we need to
continue paying close attention. In the post-pandemic
recovery, we will have to deal with discrimination
against disadvantaged people living in poverty and
intensify efforts to put human dignity at the heart of
our actions. In the meantime, we have to ensure that
those in need are provided with quick and efficient
humanitarian assistance and protection, including
through our efforts in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the delegation of Mexico,
in its capacity as President of the Security Council for
the month of November 2021, for convening this open
debate. We would also like to thank Mexico in particular
for the statements delivered by His Excellency Andrés
Manuel López Obrador, President of Mexico, the
Secretary-General and the panellists.
From our perspective and having been members
of the Security Council in the 2012-2013 biennium,
the preventive approach must be paramount in order
to maintain international peace and security. In
recent years, Member States have noted the need to
comprehensively address the root causes of conflict and
avoid the multiplier effect of permanent emergencies.
In the face of the global challenges that threaten

21-3279813/18

S/PV.8900 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

humankind, including climate change, it is clear that
countries in fragile situations have Governments with
limited means to help their populations adapt. The risks
associated with climate change can be compounded by
the risks of violence, conflict and exclusion, as well
as by factors related to climate change such as food
insecurity, economic crises and migration.
Over the past months, the coronavirus disease
pandemic has been accompanied by various events that
pose existential threats, exacerbating the loss of lives,
livelihoods and damage to natural and cultural heritage.
It is therefore necessary for the United Nations to adopt
a multipronged approach to address this problem. In
that regard, Guatemala urges the issuance of specific
recommendations to implement concrete actions
to identify and mitigate situations that may cause
large-scale food security emergencies.
Given its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, it is important
that the Security Council integrate climate security
assessments into all mandatory situation reports on
its agenda and that it be able to systematically analyse
weather forecasts in order to identify vulnerabilities
and risks, with the help of regional and national climate
outlooks and robust early-warning systems.
Guatemala reiterates its position that the
Organization’s main effort should be to prevent
rather than react. In that regard, Guatemala reiterates
its support for the mandate of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and its integrated approach. We
believe that it is necessary to strengthen environmental
action in the Commission’s activities and ensure that
they are sensitive to environmental and social conflict
and humanitarian needs such as food insecurity
and migratory flows. We must also ensure that its
interventions are mindful of natural resources. A
preventive approach requires that the PBC strengthen
its mandate with regard to cooperation with regional
organizations like the Organization of American States,
for example, in the case of the Americas.
In order to consolidate peace, we must learn from
the lessons of the past. Our Organization, the United
Nations, must adapt to the current global situation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Oddone (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we would like to congratulate the Mexican
14/18

09/11/2021

presidency on having selected a theme that is so
important to us all.
Our reality is shocking. Never before have there
been so many refugees, displaced persons and people
fleeing worldwide. The nature of conflict has changed.
So has their duration and the parties responsible, but
they persist and are increasingly violent and harmful,
making it ever more difficult to carry out the United
Nations mandates.
At the heart of our concerns is life and the need
for the most essential human rights to be respected.
For Argentina, unrestricted respect for all human
rights is one of the foundations of our State policy. We
therefore reiterate the commitment that we repeat on
every occasion: we are always ready to contribute and
participate in initiatives that are promoted to prevent
and tackle the root causes of conflicts.
The fight against impunity for serious human
rights violations is fundamental to strengthening the
rule of law. Justice and peace are not only compatible
objectives but are also complementary. Argentina
reaffirms the preventive role of accountability
mechanisms. Impartial mechanisms are essential
for the investigation of violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
In some cases, hunger, poverty, exclusion and
inequality can lead to conflicts. Such inequities can
result in situations of violence. Those structural
issues must be addressed comprehensively so that
they do not become a threat to international peace and
security. Argentina therefore believes that adequate
and effective cooperation among the different organs
established by the Charter of the United Nations is
essential, while recalling the specific competences of
each of those organs, such as the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council.
It is also essential to combine cooperation and
efforts to protect and promote the access of the civilian
population, especially the most vulnerable, to all health
services — medical care and maternal and reproductive
health services. Those services are further undermined
by the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and place an additional burden on systems
and facilities already devastated by conflict.
We would also like to draw attention to the fact that
young people represent a large part of civilians harmed
by armed conflict, and that the disruption of children’s
21-32798

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

and young people’s access to education and economic
opportunities has critical implications for lasting peace
and reconciliation. Argentina therefore reiterates its
call on States that have not done so to join the Safe
Schools Declaration, which has already been endorsed
by more than 105 countries.
Protection activities must continue to be included
and strengthened in the mandates of United Nations
field missions, which should be clearly developed and
their operations resourced in an effective and timely
manner. In addition, coordination with the main bodies
of the United Nations system, such as the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the World Health Organization, among
others, is important in order to jointly help to eradicate
hunger, a scourge that is exacerbated by diseases
other than COVID-19. Undoubtedly, improving living
conditions is a decisive factor in preventing violence
and curbing conflicts.
Argentina endorses the importance of dealing with
the issue on a case-by-case basis when a specific threat
to international peace and security arises, in accordance
with the Security Council’s mandate under the United
Nations Charter. In that regard, we reiterate that the
role of this organ should not be undermined, while
encouraging each of the other entities of the system to
work in a coordinated manner and make progress on
issues that may later develop into conflict situations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Mexico’s presidency
of the Security Council during this month. I also wish
to extend to you the appreciation of the Kingdom of
Morocco for having convened this open debate on
the theme “Maintenance of international peace and
security: exclusion, inequality and conflicts”. We
welcome the participation of His Excellency President
Andrés Manuel López Obrador. I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his important briefing, and the civil society
representative for hers.
The conflict landscape is becoming increasingly
complex as gaps, including in development, continue
to widen. Inequalities, exclusion and poverty are all
factors that can lead to, or exacerbate, tensions and
vulnerabilities, which can result in violent conflicts.
It is therefore essential that multilateral action,

S/PV. 8900 (Resumption 1)

particularly by the United Nations and the Security
Council, seek to restore lasting peace and break the link
between conflict and its underlying and exacerbating
causes. The response to that situation must be based on
a cooperative, comprehensive and consistent approach
rooted in humanitarian action, social, economic and
human development and prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding initiatives.
In that context, peacebuilding has a vital role
to play insofar as it can prevent the outbreak,
escalation, continuation and recurrence of violence.
It is therefore incumbent on States to address the root
causes of conflict. In that context, the Peacebuilding
Commission, its country-specific configurations
and the Security Council’s recommendations in the
consideration of the various items on its agenda are of
great importance. In that regard, the Central African
Republic configuration, which Morocco is honoured to
chair, periodically presents its recommendations to the
Council ahead of the mandate renewal of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, as it did
last week.
The coronavirus disease pandemic and its
related consequences should serve as a call for the
international community to strengthen multilateral
action to jointly address inequality, exclusion and
development challenges. In that regard, Morocco
welcomes the Secretary-General’s report Our Common
Agenda, which provides a road map to guide our
actions to address what Mr. Guterres has rightly called
a “surplus of multilateral challenges and a deficit of
multilateral solutions”.
Government authorities, local communities, civil
society organizations, the private sector and regional
organizations all have a role to play in building and
sustaining lasting peace. In that context, joint efforts
and increased cooperation are needed, particularly to
build trust, promote reconciliation and support peace
processes. They are also needed to support the security
of local communities and the capacities of security
forces to ensure a sense of safety and prevent all
forms of violence. They are necessary to ensure fair
and equitable access to basic needs and decent living
conditions and the implementation of development
programmes in areas of tension vulnerable to conflict.
That will contribute to peace, strengthen reliable
judicial systems and effective law to ensure equality
before the law and protect of human rights, strengthen

21-3279815/18

S/PV.8900 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

inclusive policies, gender equality and the participation
of young people for the broadest possible participation
in political decision-making and the guarantee of equal
opportunities for dignified labour without exception.
In line with the guidelines of His Majesty
Mohammed VI, Morocco has prioritized socioeconomic
development and the maintenance and sustaining of
peace, especially in Africa, in its foreign policy. In
that regard, we have participated in United Nations
peacekeeping operations since 1960. We have also
undertaken, and will continue to engage in, many
mediation efforts to pre-empt and peacefully resolve
conflicts on our continent. Furthermore, we tirelessly
strive to promote socioeconomic development in
brotherly African countries through proactive, fruitful,
mutually beneficial South-South cooperation in many
areas. That is of great importance to combating poverty,
exclusion and inequality, while keeping and sustaining
peace and preventing conflict.
Lastly, we remain convinced that sustaining peace
requires the international community’s investment over
the short, medium and long term in a spirit of solidarity
and cooperation in order to address the many challenges
of our time.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): At the outset, let me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November. I wish to thank you for convening this
important open debate. I also wish to thank the briefers
for their insightful and detailed briefings this morning.

09/11/2021

of our development goals at the national and
international levels.
With conflicts becoming increasingly protracted
and transnational, the existing global conflict resolution
architecture must adapt, and we should identify
innovative ways to confront today’s challenges. The
Security Council must continue to identify new and
emerging threats to peace and security and adopt
proactive approaches to addressing them. Conflict
prevention and sustaining peace, however, are not
the responsibility of the Security Council alone. The
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission all have specific
responsibilities to address the conditions that give rise
to conflict.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission, in
particular, in promoting inclusiveness and building
sustainable peace remains crucial. It is therefore
important that we continue to strengthen the
collaboration between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. Successful conflict
prevention also requires collaboration and cooperation
with subregional and regional organizations, such as
the African Union.
It is vital that women be included in political,
economic and social life, as they have proven to play a
key role in influencing society’s inclination for peace.
We must accept that women’s inclusion and meaningful
participation in peace processes have a positive impact
on the implementation and sustainability of peace
agreements.

In various societies inequality and exclusion have
proved to be among the root causes of fragility, violence
and conflict. We need collective will to address
inequality and exclusion and generally create conditions
for the betterment of all people in all countries.

Young people are often victims of multiple and
interlocking forms of discrimination that can lead
to their exclusion from peacemaking and conflict
prevention efforts. The inclusion of young people has
broad benefits. We need, therefore, to invest in their
capabilities to contribute to greater economic growth
and development, diminishing civil unrest and the
promotion of sustainable peace.

The coronavirus disease pandemic has once again
illustrated glaring inequalities in the world. We see
unequal access to vaccines and medical treatments. We
also see some having more resilience to the economic
hardships caused by the pandemic than others. We
need to accelerate the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. In his report
Our Common Agenda, the Secretary-General provides
us with a road map for hastening the implementation

In conclusion, I would like to highlight that
preventing conflict from erupting and degenerating into
full-scale wars remains the best option for promoting
global sustainable peace. Post-conflict educational
provision has been shown to impact positively on the
sustainability of peace, while post-conflict economic
policies, on the other hand, have had a mixed record.
Peace agreements often address grievances believed to
be driving violent conflicts. However, few agreements

16/18

21-32798

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

make specific provisions aimed at addressing key
economic issues like systematic inequalities in
employment. Those are some of the areas on which we
need to give greater focus as we move forward.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Mexico for its initiative in convening this meeting.
We note the growing influence of rising inequality
in conflict-affected countries, which poses the risk
of their relapse into crisis and presents challenges to
international peace and security. On that note, allow me
to share the following points.
First, with regard to promoting inclusivity to bring
about a tangible impact on the ground, a lasting peace
starts with the affected community. In order to end
inequality, we need the involvement of all segments
of society. The international community should work
hand-in-hand to enhance a nationally owned and led
peacebuilding effort. Indonesia firmly believes that all
elements of the community have a stake in strengthening
peacebuilding efforts. That is especially important in
a diverse and plural society. Any peacebuilding effort
would be futile if it were to leave any part of the society
behind. As we have learned from Indonesia’s experience,
promoting peaceful dialogue among different groups
within a society is essential to build such an inclusive
approach and ensure a sustainable peace.
Secondly, with regard to strengthening the rule of
law, in order to support peaceful dialogue and nurture
trust within society, the rule of law is critical. Indonesia
underscores that a nationally owned and led security
sector reform is critical to sustaining peacebuilding
efforts, including to curb injustice and inequality in
conflict-affected countries. Therefore, Indonesia is of
the view that peacekeeping operations can support their
host countries as they embark on their security sector
reforms, especially through the protection of civilian
and police training sessions. In that context, Indonesia
has been including community engagement training as
an essential part of predeployment for our peacekeepers.
Thirdly, concerning the importance of synergy and
partnership, inequality also applies to the capacity of
States to deal with their internal challenges. Partnerships,
including regional and triangular partnerships, play an
important role in bridging the gap through capacitybuilding. To that end, all United Nations bodies need

S/PV. 8900 (Resumption 1)

to effectively and efficiently exercise their respective
mandates. Harmonious coordination in exercising their
distinctly unique mandates is critical to the work of
the Security Council, the General Assembly and other
United Nations bodies in order to address drivers of
violence or other aggravating factors in conflicts. As a
member of Pathfinders for Peaceful, Just and Inclusive
Societies, Indonesia will continue to work together with
all States in halving global violence.
In conclusion, Indonesia would like to reiterate its
strong commitment to being a part of the collective
effort to strengthen joint efforts in maintaining
international peace and security, including through
addressing the impact of exclusion and inequality in
conflict-affected countries.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Tibán Guala so that she might make some
concluding remarks on today’s open debate.
Ms. Tibán Guala (spoke in Spanish): Member States
unanimously have underscored the need to address
corruption by taking tangible actions to eliminate it as
the underlying cause of inequality, poverty, exclusion
and migration, among others. Some have said that the
Security Council must focus on expanding such themes
as climate change, people’s access to basic services as a
fundamental human right, and the inclusion of women
and young people in employment and educational
processes to prevent their involvement in activities
leading to insecurity within States.
In addition, it has been underscored that the
coronavirus disease has negative health consequences
for the global population, but that it has also led to
serious social and economic crises that, if we fail to
address them today, could jeopardize international
peace in the future. In the short term, we must act to
ensure that the majority of the population is vaccinated.
Countries that have already met their goals must act in
solidarity with others that have yet to vaccinate even
10 per cent of their populations.
I have been especially pleased to hear that the
role of women in international peace and security is a
priority matter for all Members and that we must foster
such inclusive discussions with women, young people
and children. Others have also said that there is a need
to ensure that legal protection, human rights and the
rule of law are priorities within States in order to build
peace within every one of them.

21-3279817/18

S/PV.8900 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Lastly, as the President of Mexico judiciously said,
security must not be seen as military might, but rather
as a reflection of social actions to create a society
without fear or conflict.
We welcome Mexico’s proposal to develop a global
plan for fraternity and well-being, which, for now,
sounds like a utopia. However, the willingness and
determination of Member States could make it possible.
We congratulate each State.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Lourdes Tibán Guala for her statement and, of
course, her participation in today’s meeting.
The Security Council has before it the text of a
statement by the President on behalf of the Council on
the subject of today’s meeting. I thank Council members
for their valuable contributions to this statement. In

18/18

09/11/2021

accordance with the understanding reached among the
members of the Council, I shall take it that the members
of the Security Council agree to the statement, which
will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/PRST/2021/22.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. Before concluding, I would again like to thank
all participants who joined us today, including the large
number of delegations from States that are not members
of the Council. I would like to thank member States and
regional groups that submitted written statements on
the subject of today’s meeting. Statements we continue
to receive after the end of the meeting will form part
of the compilation of statements from this meeting. We
await those contributions with great interest.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

21-32798
