S/2018/800

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 August 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 28 of Security Council
resolution 2408 (2018) and paragraph 55 of resolution 2431 (2018), provides
information on the implementation of both resolutions, including on the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers major developments in
Somalia during the period 25 April to 22 August 2018.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The inauguration on 10 May of the new Speaker of the House of the People,
Mohamed Mursal Sheikh Abdirahman, following his election in April , marked the
end of the political impasse of the previous months. At his inauguration, Mr. Mursal
outlined his legislative priorities for the House, including the delivery of a legal
framework for multiparty elections, an intergovernmental relations bill a nd the
completion of the review of the Provisional Federal Constitution. Parliament began
its recess on 9 July and will resume on 10 September.
3.
The National Security Council, comprising the leaders of the Federal
Government and federal member states, met in Baidoa from 3 to 5 June. They reached
a political agreement in principle on an electoral model based on a proportional
representation and closed party list system, in addition to an agreement on ownership,
administration and sharing of revenues from petroleum and minerals. At the meeting,
federal member states continued to express their concern at the lack of resources
allocated to them by the Federal Government. Prior to the meeting of the National
Security Council, the Presidents of the federal member states had held the second
meeting of the Council of Interstate Cooperation from 13 to 16 May in Baidoa. While
welcoming the transition plan and recognizing the progress made in discussions on
elections and resource-sharing, they urged the Federal Government to provide support
for regional forces and indicated their desire to retain the right to seek external
support.
4.
On 16 June, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed Ali, made a first
official visit to Mogadishu, which resulted in a joint commitme nt by the two countries
to strengthen cooperation, including through joint investments in four seaports in

18-13751 (E)

050918

*1813751*

S/2018/800

Somalia. The release on 28 June of the senior commander of the Ogaden National
Liberation Front, who had been arrested in Somalia and transferred to Ethiopia on
28 August 2017, was a further indication of improved bilateral relations. Prompted
by improved relations between Eritrea and Ethiopia, the President of Somalia,
Mohamed Abdullahi “Farmajo”, at the invitation of the President of Eritrea, Isaias
Afwerki, visited Asmara for the first time. On 30 July, the two leaders agreed to
establish diplomatic ties and promote bilateral relations.
5.
In Galmudug, a division in the leadership, with State President Ahmed Duale
Gelle “Haaf” and Chief State Minister Sheikh Mohamed Shakir on one side, and State
Vice-President Mohamed Hashi Abdi “Arrabey” and state assembly speaker Ali Gaal
Asir on the other side, deepened owing to a disagreement over the implementation of
the power-sharing agreement signed in Mogadishu on 6 December 2017. The key
concerns are that the new assembly violates the regional clan balance and that several
contentious articles feature in the new State Constitution. The State Vice -President
remained in Adado, maintaining a parallel governance structure, while President Haaf
and the Chief Minister ran the state government from Dhusamareb, the official
capital. On 13 July, the President of Somalia facilitated talks between the two parties
in Mogadishu, where they reached a mutual understanding on the necessity to observe
the power-sharing agreement. Further negotiations between the two sides, facilitated
by the Federal Government, were ongoing. On 22 July, my Special Representative for
Somalia and the Commissioner of the Somali Police Force visite d Gaalkacyo, where
the Somali-owned peace process, along with Gaalkacyo joint police patrols and the
work of the peace committee formed by prominent clan elders and civil society
representatives, have contributed to establishing peace and restoring securit y.
6.
Meanwhile, political tensions continued between the President of Jubaland,
Ahmed Mohamed Islam “Madobe”, and the Federal Government. On 13 July in
Lower Juba, the newly appointed commander of the Somali National Army 43rd
Division, General Ali Mohamed Mohamoud “Bogmadow”, was denied entry into
Kismaayo by the Jubaland Administration, which contested his appointment by the
Federal Government, claiming that the Jubaland Administration was not consulted.
On 14 August, the newly appointed National Intelligence and Security Agency
commander for Jubaland and his deputy were also denied entry into Kisma ayo and
deported for the same reason.
7.
Political rivalry intensified in the South-West state ahead of the 17 November
2018 state presidential election. Opposition blocs raised concerns that the President
of South-West state, Sharif Hassan, had been planning to hold the election in Barawe,
Lower Shabelle region, instead of Baidoa, Bay region, which is the current seat of the
administration. They warned that shifting the venue could split the state assembly and
lead to parallel elections. Responding to those concerns, the speaker of the state
assembly affirmed that the election would take place in Baidoa and requested the
assistance of the United Nations and AMISOM in providing training and temporary
shelter for police units tasked with securing the process. The speaker further stated
that he would appoint an electoral committee composed of state assembly members
to draft the rules of procedure and oversee the election.
8.
Little progress was made on efforts to restart talks between the Federal
Government and “Somaliland”. The distancing of the two was triggered by a full
transfer on 30 June of air space control from the International Civil Aviation
Organization office in Nairobi to Mogadishu, and the Federal Government’s objection
letter to donors regarding the “Somaliland” special arrangement — which had been
put in place in 2013 alongside the New Deal Compact to ensure a certain share of
international support was allocated to “Somaliland”. On 1 July, during the fifty-eighth
Independence Day celebrations, President Farmajo reiterated his call for talks
between Somalia and “Somaliland”.
2/18

18-13751

S/2018/800

9.
The Federal Government, Sweden and the European Union hosted the Somalia
Partnership Forum in Brussels on 16 and 17 July. The Forum brought together
representatives from 58 countries and 6 international organizations. Key outcomes
included the endorsement of the political road map for Somalia by international
partners, support for the transition plan, approval of the updated mutual
accountability framework and support for the efforts of Somalia to strengthen its
resilience against humanitarian shocks, as manifested by the recovery and resilience
framework. Participants underscored the need to finalize the electoral model and
make progress towards finalizing the constitutional review, ensure greater political
participation of women, young people and marginalized groups and build trust
through reconciliation. Side events also took place on displacement and durable
solutions; women, peace and security; and innovative financing mechanisms for
development. The Forum agreed to reconvene in early 2019.

B.

Security developments
10. The overall security situation remained volatile and unpredictable. Al-Shabaabrelated attacks continued across Somalia, and incidents carried out by alleged
pro-Islamic State of Iraq and Levant (ISIL) elements were also reported. There were
fewer security incidents during Ramadan compared with previous years. H owever,
there were incidents ranging from targeted killings and “hit and run” attacks on
Somali National Army bases by small teams in Mogadishu to larger-scale attacks
against army bases in other regions.
11. Heightened tensions between “Somaliland” and Puntland led to outbreaks of
violence on 15 and 24 May, near Tukaraq, in the disputed Sool region. The military
confrontation resulted in several casualties and the displacement of about 15,000
civilians. With large-scale deployments of security forces or militias, as well as
provocative statements by both “Somaliland” and Puntland, the situation continued
to be extremely volatile. Since 28 May, there had also been several demonstrations in
Sool and Sanaag against the “Somaliland” government.
12. On 1 July, five mortars landed near the Al-Jazeera gate of Mogadishu
International Airport. At least 5 civilians were killed and 19 injured. Al -Shabaab
claimed responsibility, stating that they had been targeting the airport. The attacks,
carried out on the national Independence Day of Somalia, during which extensive
security measures had been implemented across Mogadishu, demonstrated
Al-Shabaab’s continued operational capability. On 26 July, the Cabinet approved the
assignment of security responsibilities in Mogadish u to the 14 October Contingent, a
unit formed in the aftermath of the 14 October 2017 attack in Mogadishu, working
under the federal police command.
13. On 7 July, two cars laden with explosives drove at intervals into the collocated
premises of the Ministry of Internal Security and the Ministry of the Interior, Federal
Affairs and Reconciliation, in Mogadishu. Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for the
attack, in which 7 civilians were killed, including 3 senior staff of the Ministry of the
Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, and 27 were injured. The attack also
destroyed the premises.
14. On 14 July, Al-Shabaab attempted another complex attack close to the Hotel
SYL and Mogadishu peace gardens, where the main checkpoint controlling the entry
to Villa Somalia was located. Al-Shabaab claimed that the attack had targeted the
Villa Somalia. Two vehicles carrying improvised explosive devices and three gunmen
were involved, which left at least six people dead. The Hotel SYL, where the Ministry
of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation was temporary located, was also
badly damaged.

18-13751

3/18

S/2018/800

15. Pro-ISIL elements also claimed responsibility for three assassinations in
Mogadishu in May and six incidents in June, including an attack using a remote controlled improvised explosive device in which three soldiers were killed in
Mogadishu and five in other areas of the country. In Puntland, attacks from
Al-Shabaab or alleged pro-ISIL elements against Somali security forces continued in
the Bari region. On 29 May, pro-ISIL elements and state police clashed in the village
of Anjeel, near the town of Qandala in the Bari region. They exchanged gunfire until
pro-ISIL fighters retreated to the mountain north of Anjeel.
16. On 2 May, two international staff of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) were abducted from their office in Mogadishu by unknown armed men.
The male staff member was released shortly after, while the female staff member was
reportedly moved to an area near the coastal town of Hobyo, Mudug region. As a
result, ICRC reduced its operations in Somalia starting on 30 July. Negotiations for
the release of the female staff member are ongoing.
17. In the Lower Shabelle, Lower Juba and Gedo regions, anti-Al-Shabaab
operations continued. On 24 May, 10 Al-Shabaab militants were killed by an air strike
outside Afgoye district. On 9 June, the Somali National Army, AMISOM and
American forces, operating at an outpost near Sunguuni settlement, Lower Juba
region, were attacked by Al-Shabaab. On 23 July, Al-Shabaab staged a complex attack
against the Sanguni Base in Bar-Sunguuni, Lower Juba region, using vehicles
containing improvised explosive devices. The exact number of casualties could not
be determined, but some sources reported that four Somali soldiers and eight
Al-Shabaab militants were killed.
18. Clan violence continued across Somalia. On 9 May, in El-Afweyn district,
Sanaag region, at least 12 people were killed in clashes between the Habar-jelo
subclan of Bi-ide and the Habar Yunis subclan of Saad at Garaad Dhidhin, prompting
a public call from the “Somaliland” President to resolve the issue through dialogue.
Clashes among intra-Somali security forces also continued and were reported mainly
in Mogadishu and Hiraan region. Alleged Al-Shabaab attacks, particularly targeted
assassinations, increased in the disputed Sool region, possibly due to Al -Shabaab’s
exploitation of the Tukaraq conflict to expand its presence in “Somaliland” and
Puntland.
19. On 4 August, in Lasanod, Sool region, unknown individuals shot a staff member
of the World Health Organization outside her home. The staff member was recovering
in medical care.

C.

Economic developments
20. Following the drought impact needs assessment exercise, the Federal
Government and international partners prepared the recovery and resilience
framework, which was presented at the Somalia Partnership Forum. The Federal
Government is spearheading efforts to stimulate resilience-building, diversify the
economy, promote climate-smart investments and mitigate investment-related risks.
The Forum acknowledged the need for innovative financial models and recognized
the role that development finance institutions could have in supporting the
reconstruction and recovery of Somalia.
21. The Central Bank of Somalia completed the first phase of its road map for
comprehensive national currency reform and is seeking financial support for minting
the Somali shilling before April 2019. The Federal Government is establishing a
centralized mechanism for all government licensing and payments of fees to improve
business.

4/18

18-13751

S/2018/800

22. Somalia continued to build a track record of reforms under the Staff -Monitored
Programme of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). In the second review of the
second Programme in May 2018, the authorities gave a satisfactory performance by
demonstrating its continued commitment to implementing reform measures in a very
difficult environment. IMF confirmed that Somalia had: (a) made progress in building
institutions and improving economic performance; (b) improved fiscal management,
including domestic revenue mobilization; (c) laid the foundation for sustainable
financial sector development and strengthened compliance with anti-moneylaundering, and for combating the financing of terrorism; and (d) made progress
towards the launch of a new national currency. They agreed on a third Staff-Monitored
Programme covering the period from May 2018 to April 2019 , aimed at maintaining
the reform momentum and macroeconomic stability.

III. Support for peacebuilding and State-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal State

1.

Deepening federalism
23. Some progress was made in advancing federalism, despite lingering friction
between the Federal Government and the federal member states. On 5 June, during a
meeting of the National Security Council in Baidoa, the leaders of the Federal
Government, federal member states and Benaadir Regional Administration reached
an agreement on sharing natural resources, including details on the ownership,
administration and sharing of revenues from petroleum and minerals between the
Federal Government, federal member states, districts and producers.

2.

Constitutional review
24. From 13 to 15 May, the National Constitutional Convention was held in
Mogadishu with the participation of the Federal Government leadership and
representatives from the federal member states. The convention brought together
more than 300 participants from across the country, diaspora and civil society,
including women’s organizations, the United Nations and the international
community. It provided an unprecedented opportunity to deepen and broade n
ownership of the review process and build consensus around principles and timelines
for an inclusive, Somali-owned review process. Addressing the Convention, the Prime
Minister, Hassan Ali Khaire, described the constitutional review as a critical
opportunity to promote unity. UNSOM also facilitated the participation of the Somali
women diaspora in the Convention.
25. Building on the momentum generated by the Convention, a joint retreat was
held on 4 and 5 July, co-chaired by the Minister for Constitutional Affairs and the
Minister for the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation. It brought together key
political stakeholders, including members of the Federalization Negotiation Technical
Committee, to enhance coordination and alignment of tasks in the implementation of
the road map on inclusive politics. The retreat was opened by the Prime Minister and
included discussions on the legislative and constitutional implications of the political
agreements reached so far, and on the priorities for the coming months. A retreat was
subsequently convened by the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs in Nairobi from 13 to
20 August and discussed, among other topics, the allocation of powers an d justice in
a federal Somalia.

18-13751

5/18

S/2018/800

3.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts
26. To help defuse tensions between “Somaliland” and Puntland in Tukaraq, my
Special Representative undertook several visits to Garoowe and Hargeisa in May and
July. In Garoowe, he engaged with Puntland President Abdiweli Mohamed Ali “Gaas”
and Vice President Abdihakim Abdullahi Haji Omar. In Hargeisa, he discussed with
“Somaliland” President Muse Bihi Abdi and his Ministers in a bid to facilitate
agreement to end violent hostilities.
27. My Special Representative also coordinated messages of the internat ional
community to “Somaliland” and Puntland to develop a four-point ceasefire proposal
that included an end to hostilities, the initiation of dialogue between military
commanders on the ground, secure humanitarian access for displaced persons and the
commencement of talks about separation of forces and the exchange of detained
security personnel.
28. President Bihi of “Somaliland” accepted the proposal in writing, while Puntland
President Gaas, having verbally accepted the proposal to my Special Represent ative,
was reluctant to commit further without assurances concerning the withdrawal of
“Somaliland” forces from Tukaraq. From 28 to 30 July, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and UNSOM launched a joint initiative to take
mediation efforts forward. In a follow-up visit from 7 to 9 August, a joint IGAD and
UNSOM delegation shared with Puntland and “Somaliland” authorities a set of
principles that could be the basis for negotiations between the two sides. Though both
sides have accepted most of those principles, some issues remain that will require
more discussion and clarification.
29. Efforts continued to support the development and implementation of the Federal
Government’s national reconciliation framework. On 16 May, UNSOM and the
Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation co -hosted a special session
on reconciliation in Mogadishu, during which the “group of friends of reconciliation”
was launched. Based on the outcome of the colloquium on peace and reconciliation
that had been held in February 2018, a key recommendation, on establishing the
“communities of practice”, was discussed in June by representatives of the Ministry
of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, the international community and
civil society. The communities, expected to include practitioners of conflict
resolution, academics and experts on the relevant topics, will offer practical
recommendations to Somalis affected by protracted conflict.

4.

Support for universal elections
30. At its meeting in June, the National Security Council committed to adopting
into law by December 2018 the draft electoral law, which would serve as the legal
basis for universal multiparty elections in 2020 and 2021. Progress was made on the
drafting of the law by the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation,
with support from UNSOM. The draft law incorporated the issue of women ’s
representation.
31. During the reporting period, the United Nations continued to support the
National Independent Electoral Commission’s electoral preparations. From 14 to
16 May, the United Nations held a voter registration workshop for representatives of
the Commission and the Federal Government to support the Commission in making
an informed decision on voter registration methodology.
32. From June to August, representatives of the National Independent Electoral
Commission visited all federal member states and Benaadir to prepare for the
establishment of subnational offices, including the recruitment and deployment of
staff. In terms of mapping voter data, the Commission is also preparing the nationwide

6/18

18-13751

S/2018/800

verification of 1,763 voter catchment areas which could be used as voter registration
sites through an intensive field exercise expected to commence in the fourth quarter
of 2018.
33. In the context of the strengthened UNSOM electoral mandate, as defined in
resolution 2408 (2018), a United Nations electoral needs assessment mission was
deployed from 12 to 21 May to assess the progress made since the last mission, and
the preparations required for elections. The mission determined that some progress
had been made but more resources were needed for the United Nations to support the
National Independent Electoral Commission at the subnational level.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and women’s empowerment
34. With the adoption in May of the UNSOM and UNSOS joint gender parity
strategy and in June of the United Nations-Somalia gender equality strategy for the
period 2018–2020, UNSOM further enhanced its commitment to advancing gender
equality and women’s empowerment in Somalia.
35. In “Somaliland”, UNSOM has initiated engagement on women’s political
advancement in preparation for parliamentary and local electio ns in March 2019. That
engagement included outreach to political parties, relevant ministries and
parliamentary committees, and the promotion of civil society engagement. On 7 June,
the “Somaliland” Cabinet agreed to ensure that a minimum of 20 per cent of seats
would be allocated to women candidates.
36. On 25 and 26 July, with the support of the United Nations, the first state -level
consultations on enhancing Somali women’s role in peace, reconciliation and the
prevention of violent extremism were held in the state capitals of Puntland,
Galmudug, South-West state, Jubaland and HirShabelle, mobilizing more than 360
women leaders, peace practitioners, advocates and activists. Senior political figures
attended the consultations and emphasized the importance of women ’s participation
in all peace and political processes. My Special Representative joined the meeting in
Garoowe and reassured women leaders of the commitment and continued support of
the United Nations.

2.

Youth empowerment
37. Activities for National Youth Day, commemorated on 15 May, included a youth
march in Mogadishu led by the Prime Minister and a debate at the Somali National
University with 300 youth activists, co-organized by the United Nations Population
Fund and the United Nations Human Settlements Programme. In addition, from 22 to
24 May, AMISOM, with the Ministry of Youth and Sports and with support from
UNSOM and IGAD, organized the International Youth Conference on the Prevention
and Countering of Violent Extremism and Terrorism, held in Cairo, where 30 young
Somalis participated.
38. The United Nations supported the “Somaliland” Ministry of Youth and Sports
in hosting a workshop on the national youth policy, held on 25 June in Hargeisa.

C.

Development coordination
39. In addition to the Somalia Partnership Forum in July, the F ederal Government
held a workshop to discuss how to further strengthen the aid architecture of Somalia,
the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility, for it to assume a greater

18-13751

7/18

S/2018/800

strategic role in coordinating international development assistance and in
implementing the national development plan, and to ensure that development partners
use established multilateral systems to channel support. Consensus was reached on
the importance of using the existing aid architecture of the Facility, continuing
implementation of the mutual accountability framework agreed to in December 2017
and the “use of country systems” road map, which encourages international
development partners to channel funding through the financial systems of Somalia.

IV. Comprehensive approach to security
A.

International coordination and transition planning
40. The Federal Government and federal member states presented the transition plan
to international partners at the high-level security meeting on Somalia, held in
Brussels on 2 May, and received strong support for its strategic direction. Subsequent
attention has focused on the development of detailed planning across the entire
comprehensive approach to security strands to implement the transition in initial
priority locations, including the Mogadishu stadium and the main supply route
between Mogadishu and Baidoa. Priorities for institutional capacity-building
identified in the national security architecture are also being implemented in the
priority locations as a first step to a national roll-out. With regard to the Mogadishu
stadium, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation and the
Benaadir Regional Administration have developed a plan for the implementation of
the transition. In recognition of the key role of sports and cultural activities in
enhancing social cohesion, the European Union, through the Nordic International
Support Foundation, will install solar lights, renovate the venue and provide sports
equipment. Regarding the Mogadishu-Baidoa main supply route, the European Union
will assist with the implementation of the transition plan, through the International
Organization for Migration, through early stabilization to longer-term economic
development activities.
41. In a communiqué issued at its June meeting, the National Security Council
emphasized the comprehensive nature of the transition plan and requested that
regional security offices be strengthened, to support a decentralized planning
approach in the implementation of the transition plan. O n 3 July, the Somalia
Development and Reconstruction Facility endorsed a joint United Nations security
sector governance reform programme as a pipeline project, aimed at building the
capacity of various security institutions, including regional security of fices.
42. At the Somalia Partnership Forum in July, the Federal Government requested
international partners to align their support to the transition plan. They committed to
maintaining the momentum of progress while recognizing that some institutional
reforms would require a longer time frame to be implemented. International partners
urged the Federal Government to continue implementation and complete detailed
planning for the first phase of the transition plan by December 2018, through the
regional security councils.

B.

Comprehensive approach to security strands

1.

Strand 1: enabling AMISOM operations and enhancing AMISOM effectiveness
43. During the reporting period, the Head of UNSOS visited the capitals of the
AMISOM troop-contributing countries, except Djibouti, as part of an outreach
strategy with those countries’ foreign affairs and defence ministries regarding UNSOS
logistical support to AMISOM. Expressing strong support for the transition plan, the

8/18

18-13751

S/2018/800

countries reiterated that the transition plan should be based on capacity-building of
the Somali National Army to ensure that security gains made so far are not reversed.
44. In line with the transition plan, preparations are ongoing for the relocation of
545 AMISOM personnel from Mogadishu stadium to Al-Jazeera II and the subsequent
handover of the stadium to Somali security forces. UNSOS will reconstruct facilities
at the new location and provide the assistance necessary to shift equipment to
Al-Jazeera II.
45. On 30 May, the African Union convened a meeting in Addis Ababa with UNSOS
representatives and Kenya to discuss the latter’s offer of three military utility
helicopters. There was agreement on the need for the African Union and United
Nations to undertake a joint assessment of aviation requirements in Somalia, followed
by the development of a statement of unit requirements for aviation.
46. Major challenges persist for UNSOS owing to the limited use of the main supply
routes by AMISOM. UNSOS has largely been delivering essential life suppor t to
AMISOM forward locations using its helicopters and barge services.
47. UNSOS remains focused on the operationalization of the mission -enabling
units. Its target is to have a total of 280 armoured personnel carriers to, inter alia, help
AMISOM open main supply routes in all sectors. Over half of those carriers have
been issued by UNSOS, with the support of partners, while the rest are still under
procurement.
48. The tripartite memorandum of understanding for the reimbursement of
equipment lost in hostile action has been signed by all the troop- and policecontributing countries, except Djibouti and Sierra Leone, and remain under
development by the latter two and United Nations Headquarters. Pursuant to their
tripartite memorandum, the claims submitted by Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda for
equipment lost in hostile action are currently being processed at United Nations
Headquarters.
49. UNSOS continues to provide logistical support to the Somali National Army.
However, as at 22 August, the Army’s trust fund had a balance of $1.2 million, which
can only sustain logistical support up to September 2018. Discussions are ongoing
with Member States to fill the immediate funding gaps. Similarly, the Trust Fund in
support of AMISOM had an uncommitted balance of just $4.9 million.
50. The United Nations Mine Action Service has trained 4,585 AMISOM troops in
improvised explosive device search capacity and threat mitigation and explosive
ordnance disposal. It has supported AMISOM by providing canine teams to search
vehicles, luggage and key infrastructure to detect explosives. In total, 14 improvised
explosive devices have been safely identified along the main supply routes, of which
12 were destroyed by AMISOM teams trained by the Mine Action Service.
51. From 10 to 19 May, the African Union and United Nations conducted a joint
review of AMISOM to examine how the Mission should be reconfigured in support
of the transition plan. The Peace and Security Council of the African Union
considered the findings and recommendations of the review in its 782nd meeting, held
on 27 June. On 30 July, the Security Council adopted its resolution 2431 (2018), in
which it extended the Mission’s mandate until 31 May 2019 and requested the African
Union and United Nations to conduct a joint operational readiness assessment of
AMISOM, which commenced on 17 August 2018 and is expected to be completed by
mid-September. A review of the AMISOM concept of operations is plan ned to be
conducted soon after.

18-13751

9/18

S/2018/800

2.

Strand 2: strengthening Somali security institutions
52. Some progress was made in reforming the Somali National Army, as the Federal
Government advanced the implementation of recommendations for operational
readiness assessments. That assessment for regional forces has concluded in
Galmudug, is ongoing in Jubaland and South-West state and will start in Puntland in
mid-September. The Integrated Security Sector Reform Team of UNSOM and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) supported Parliament’s defence
committee to review a draft bill on pensions and gratuities for members of the Somali
Armed Forces and other security services, in line with the national security
architecture and the transition plan.
53. UNSOM and UNDP continued to support the conference of ministers of internal
security, the council of police commissioners and the joint technical committee to
implement the new policing model. To develop a federal police plan, a drafting team
was established, alongside the Somali Police Force and the Federal Ministry of
Internal Security. On 11 June, the joint police programme was launched to implement
the new policing model. With a budget of $42 million over four years, the programme
will bring together all major donors in the police sector and be instrumental in
strengthening the coordination of international support.
54. UNSOM and UNDP developed a joint rule-of-law programme to support the
overall framework of the “Somaliland” national development plan for the period
2017–2021. During the first phase, the programme will support community policing,
training on human rights and sexual and gender-based violence, the development of
a parole system and awareness-raising for police officers on the new “Somaliland”
Police Act.
55. The Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility approved the joint
justice and corrections services and the security sector governance programmes for
the period 2018–2020, on 23 May and 3 July, respectively. Technical elements of the
justice and corrections model, including on jurisdiction, are due to be approved at the
next meeting of the National Security Council. Nevertheless, the Federal Government
and federal member states continued consultations to support the development of
implementation plans for the justice and corrections model at the federal and state
levels.
56. On 27 May, the President dismissed the Chief Justice, while the Presidents of
the Benaadir Regional and Appeal Courts were replaced on 19 July.
57. An UNSOM-UNDP integrated security sector reform team hosted a strategic
planning workshop for staff of the Office of National Security, to frame the
institutional development and capacity-building support in the context of the United
Nations security sector governance programme.
58. The Mine Action Service further deployed community liaison officers to
67 villages in recovered districts across the southern and central regions to deliver
risk education sessions about explosive hazards. The officers delivered 368 sessions
to a total of 6,069 beneficiaries. Meanwhile, civilian clearance teams trained by the
Mine Action Service safely destroyed 141 items of unexploded ordnance and
568 free-from-explosives devices.

3.

Strand 3: community recovery and the extension of state authority and accountability
59. At a high-level security meeting on Somalia held in Brussels on 2 May, the
Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation proposed the development
of a local model for transition in priority areas of South -West state and the Benaadir
region. The Ministry underscored that realistic, analysis-driven, strategically

10/18

18-13751

S/2018/800

sequenced stabilization responses throughout military operations would be important
to enable the Federal Government to earn the support of the local population and
deliver public services. Under the leadership of the Ministry, with the support of the
United Nations, it was agreed to start preparatory activities in districts under the
control of the South-West state administration prior to military operations. Those
activities included enabling access and freedom of movement, extending effective
government presence and activities that enhance social cohesion and reconciliation,
and enhancing research, analysis and strategic communications.
60. In May, the Ministries of the Interior of HirShabelle, Galmudug, Jubaland and
South-West state finalized an outline of state stabilization plans for their respective
priority areas.
4.

Strand 4: preventing and countering violent extremism
61. Following the establishment of a national coordination office for preventing and
countering violent extremism within the Office of the Prime Minister, the national
coordinator for preventing and countering violent extremism identified the main
priorities for further progress, with the support of UNSOM and the international
community. Those priorities include an implementation plan for international legal
frameworks, including the global counter-terrorism strategy and the international
counter-terrorism instruments; the development of a methodology for consultation
with civil society, the private sector and the Somali diaspora; and the development of
a communications plan to prevent radicalization and recruitment.
62. The United Nations has developed a comprehensive support package, approved
by the Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility on 3 July, to strengthen the
capacity of Somalia to implement the national strategy for preventing and countering
violent extremism and relevant resolutions of United Nations bodies. On 28 and
29 June, UNSOM, as the first Mission with a specific mandate on preventing and
countering violent extremism, participated in the United Nations High -level
Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States, held in
New York, and emphasized the importance of a comprehensive, sustainable approach
to human security in Somalia.
63. UNSOM continues to support the Federal Government in implementing the
national programme for the treatment and handling of disengaged comba tants,
including through establishment and facilitation of coordination mechanisms in
Baidoa and Kismaayo between the Federal Government and federal member states.
During the reporting period, the three rehabilitation centres for low -risk Al-Shabaab
defectors supported 69 defectors in Mogadishu, 110 in Baidoa and 122 in Kismaayo.

V. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
64. During the reporting period, 373 civilian casualties were recorded, of whom
196, or 52 per cent, were attributed to Al-Shabaab. Three casualties were attributed
to non-AMISOM international forces, 90 to state security forces and 54 to clan
militia.
65. Three air strikes by unidentified aircraft in Jubaland resulted in the death of one
civilian and wounding of four civilians. Four executions following death sentences
were carried out in Jubaland, and 20 death sentences were handed down (10 in
Puntland, 4 in Jubaland, 4 in Benaadir and 2 in South-West state), a significant
increase compared with the previous reporting period.

18-13751

11/18

S/2018/800

66. In total, 66 individuals were arrested for issues related to the rights to freedom
of expression and of assembly, including three journalists, one civil society activist
in Puntland and one clan elder in “Somaliland”. Three television stations and
one newspaper outlet were banned, while one of the television stations remains under
suspension in “Somaliland”. On a positive note, the licenses of two media outlets that
had been previously revoked were reinstated in “Somaliland” and a female poet who
had been sentenced to three years’ imprisonment in Hargeisa was released following
a presidential pardon.

B.

Compliance with the Human Rights due diligence policy
67. UNOPS and UNSOM supported international human rights law and
international humanitarian law briefings by 20 Somali National Army instructors,
trained by UNSOM, for 2,697 Somali National Army soldiers eligible for stipend
payments in sector 3, South-West state. UNOPS updated the soldiers’ biometric
profiles as part of the human rights due diligence policy mitigatory measures.
UNSOM organized two round tables with those United Nations entities that support
non-United Nations security forces working on mainstreaming the human rights due
diligence policy within the comprehensive approach to security strands. Participants
agreed to advocate for the inclusion of the policy within the comprehensive approach
to the security agenda. The AMISOM-United Nations joint working group on the
policy convened and discussed progress on the implementation of mitigat ory
measures related to AMISOM and Somali security forces. Transition planning
meetings were organized in coordination with AMISOM discussing, inter alia, how
to mainstream measures promoting compliance with international human rights law
and international humanitarian law in joint Somali National Army-AMISOM
operations. In compliance with its own obligations under the human rights due
diligence policy, the Mine Action Service organized a briefing on the policy for its
personnel and discussed how to implement it within the framework of its support to
AMISOM and Somali security forces.

C.

Children in armed conflict
68. The country task force on monitoring and reporting verified 1,426 grave
violations affecting 1,239 children, including 168 girls. The violations included the
recruitment or use of 723 children, 207 child casualties, the abduction of 400 children
and rape or other sexual violence committed against 79 children. In addition, it
verified eight attacks against schools and one against a hospit al as well as seven
incidents of denial of humanitarian access.
69. A total of 31,532 people, including 16,610 children, of whom 8,033 were girls,
benefited from protection services supported by the United Nations Children ’s Fund,
including psychosocial support services. In total, 817 children formerly associated
with armed forces and groups, including 96 girls, were enrolled into reintegration
programmes.

D.

Prevention of sexual violence
70. Gender-based violence remains a key protection concern, as over 80 per cent of
recorded incidents have affected internally displaced persons, and 96 per cent of the
survivors of such violence are women and girls. As at 15 August, 40 cases of conflict related sexual violence had been reported during the reporting p eriod, involving
elements of the Somali National Army, regional security forces, clan militias and

12/18

18-13751

S/2018/800

Al-Shabaab. Significantly, the Federal Government Cabinet approved the sexual
offences bill on 30 May. UNSOM worked closely with government counterparts and
civil society to develop the bill.

VI. Humanitarian situation
71. Contrary to earlier forecasts of a below-average Gu rainy season, consistent and
heavy levels of rainfall that exceeded a 50-year return period for flood magnitude,
have seen Somalia start to emerge from its prolonged drought. The significant rainfall
resulted in flash and riverine flooding throughout central and southern Somalia,
affecting some 830,000 people and resulting in the temporary displacement of
300,000 people.
72. On 21 May, a further 228,000 people were affected by Cyclone Sagar in the
north, where the armed standoff between “Somaliland” and Puntland in the Sool
region had displaced thousands prior to the storm. Cyclone Sagar hit western
“Somaliland”, resulting in more than 70 deaths, the displacement of approximately
170,000 people, the loss of thousands of livestock and extensive damage to
agriculture and infrastructure. The emergency response system of “Somaliland”
provided immediate relief to those areas affected, supported by United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organization and the international community.
73. The latest projection indicates an improving food security situation in areas that
were affected by the 2016–2017 drought. The improvement is largely due to the aboveaverage Gu rainy season, from April to June, supported by large -scale humanitarian
assistance. However, humanitarian needs remain critical. Some 5.4 million people,
including 2.8 million children, require assistance. Some 2.5 million of them requir e
urgent assistance. Partners are reaching more than two million people per month with
food assistance. More than 1.2 million children under the age of five are projected to
be malnourished in 2018. Nutrition partners have managed more than 140,000 cases
of severe acute malnutrition so far in 2018, about 41 per cent of their annual target.
74. As at 15 August, more than 6,000 cases of acute watery diarrhoea and cholera,
8,260 cases of malaria and nearly 6,330 cases of measles were reported. However, the
number of cholera and measles cases is significantly lower than the previous year,
due to immunization campaigns conducted in 2017 and 2018. More than 1.8 million
consultations were conducted by health cluster partners between J anuary and July.
Routine vaccinations for tuberculosis, tetanus and measles are under way.
75. Approximately 2.6 million people are estimated to be displaced internally.
Internally displaced persons constitute nearly half of the people in need and are
largely dependent on aid. Durable solutions to displacement remain a priority. Forced
evictions of internally displaced persons have continued to surge in 2018, affecting
an estimated 205,000 individuals by mid-August, which is above the 200,000 reported
during all of 2017.
76. Access remains a challenge in several areas owing to insecurity, bureaucratic
and administrative impediments, as well as limited logistical infrastructure. In
addition, Gu rains further impeded access, particularly in riverine areas of
HirShabelle and Jubaland. A dedicated helicopter has been mobilized to reach flood affected areas.
77. Humanitarian response resources are limited. To mitigate the impact, a flood
response plan was launched in May to raise $80 million. The aim of the plan is to
capitalize on prevailing moisture conditions and address the food insecurity situation,
which has been exacerbated by protracted drought. The Central Emergency Response
Fund and the Somalia Humanitarian Fund have provided resources to kick -start the

18-13751

13/18

S/2018/800

response to the drought in the north and the flood in southern and central areas of
Somalia.

VII. United Nations presence in Somalia
78. United Nations entities continue to be present in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Boosaaso,
Dhobley, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe, Hargeisa, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. UNSOM
and UNSOS negotiated a land lease agreement with the Galmudug Administration to
establish an integrated United Nations office in Dhusamareb. Meanwhile, it was
agreed to open an interim office within the governmental compound in Dhusamareb
for the prompt deployment of UNSOM personnel. In July, UNSOM initiated the
phased relocation of its Beledweyne office to Jowhar, to reflect its mandate to be
present in all federal member state capitals. As at 29 August, 152 international and
75 national personnel had been deployed throughout Somalia.
79. The integration of the UNSOM “Somaliland” office and the regional
coordination office in Hargeisa occurred on 1 June, with the new office located in the
United Nations common compound, thereby further promoting a “One United
Nations” approach in “Somaliland”.

VIII. Observations
80. The Federal Government continues to promote a positive agenda, which merits
the investment and support of the international community. However, numerous
serious risks remain, including violent extremism, armed conflicts, political
turbulence, spillover effects from the disputes in the wider Red Sea region and the
possibility of further humanitarian crises. Improving people ’s lives must be the
guiding principle when addressing those challenges, and in that regard the unity of
Somali stakeholders is imperative to attract the continued support of the international
community. I count on United Nations entities on the ground to work with all partners
to help build trust among all stakeholders.
81. In my previous report, I expressed my concern at the implications that the crisis
surrounding the Speaker of the House of the People in the Federal Parliament would
have on the overall political progress in Somalia. I welcome the resol ution of that
crisis in May and the peaceful election and inauguration of a new Speaker. I urge the
Federal Parliament to develop expeditiously a work plan for the adoption of priority
legislation that is essential in order to make progress on deepening fe deralism,
completing the review of the constitution and preparing for elections in 2020 and
2021. I welcome the progress made towards reaching several important milestones,
including initial agreements on the electoral model and the sharing of natural
resource, made at the meeting of the National Security Council from 3 to 5 June. In
that regard, I pay tribute to the leadership of the Federal Government, federal member
states and Benaadir Regional Administration and urge them to uphold their
commitment to overcoming their differences and to define collectively the federal
system. I also commend the work of the Federalization Negotiation Technical
Committee for facilitating informed discussions in that regard.
82. I welcome the outcome of the high-level security meeting on Somalia held on
2 May and the Somalia Partnership Forum on 16 and 17 July, at which international
partners expressed their strong commitment to supporting peace and prosperity, in a
spirit of mutual accountability. That spirit should guide us until the next Forum in
December 2018, around a set of clear and concrete deliverables, particularly those in
the IMF Staff Monitored Programme, the implementation of the Federal
Government’s political road map, the national security architecture and th e transition
14/18

18-13751

S/2018/800

plan. The finalization and adoption of the draft electoral law is key to set the path
toward multiparty elections in 2020. Making tangible progress against those
deliverables will also require: (a) formalizing the status of federal member stat es;
(b) defining the allocation of powers, intergovernmental relations, resource -sharing
and fiscal federalism through the constitutional review process; (c) accelerating the
implementation of the national security architecture; and (d) finalizing the just ice and
corrections federal model. A priority is for Parliament to resume and organize the
legislative agenda around a clear set of priorities.
83. I remain concerned at the destabilizing effects of tensions affecting the wider
Red Sea region on Somalia. I call upon all stakeholders, including the international
partners of Somalia, to work in a constructive spirit to support the development of a
federal system and institutions within the mutual commitments agreed at the Somalia
Partnership Forum.
84. At the same time, the positive regional dynamics emerging in the Horn of Africa
in recent months and the expected positive peace and security implications are
encouraging. The commitment made by the President of Somalia and the Prime
Minister of Ethiopia to improving bilateral relations is a significant development. I
also welcome President Farmajo’s visit to Eritrea. The announcement by the two
countries to establish diplomatic relations and promote bilateral trade and investment
will hopefully nurture partnerships in a region long devastated by mistrust and war. I
call on Somalia and its neighbouring countries to further improve relationships,
including through the platform of IGAD, in the areas of economy, development,
investment and security for mutual benefit.
85. I am deeply concerned at the military standoff between Puntland and
“Somaliland” forces and militias near Tukaraq that has escalated into armed conflict.
Heavy armed clashes play into the hands of violent extremists, deplete scarce
resources needed to meet the basic needs of the people and induce mass displacement
of civilians who are already severely affected by a dire humanitarian situation.
Political leaders should set an example by resolving their differences through
dialogue. I fully support my Special Representative’s efforts and the joint IGADUNSOM mediation initiative, and encourage all actors to provide space for the
mediation efforts towards a negotiated resolution and to continue to refrain from
fighting. I also strongly encourage Somalia and “Somaliland” to resume talks on
outstanding issues, such as airspace control, development assistance, boundaries and
long-term reconciliation.
86. I urge the leaders of Somalia to implement swiftly the national security
architecture, in particular the integration of regional forces into the police and the
Somali National Army, the delineation of roles and responsibilities between the
various federal and regional security services, and the establishment in further detail
of the principles on the command and control, size, distribution and financing of the
security sector. The creation of a financial tracking system for the Somalia security
sector, as decided at the Somalia Partnership Forum, is a welcome development. It
constitutes the essential basis for Somalis to take over successfully security
responsibilities and to strengthen protection for the population.
87. I urge also the Federal Government and federal member states to accelerate
implementation of the transition plan in an inclusive manner, inv olving all its
partners. I call upon Member States to align their support to implement the plan, and
call upon all parties to respect the protection of civilians and uphold international
human rights and humanitarian law. The coming few months will be esse ntial for the
implementation of the first phase of the plan, which requires concerted efforts from
all involved.

18-13751

15/18

S/2018/800

88. I welcome the adoption of Security Council resolution 2431 (2018), which
extends the mandate of AMISOM until 31 May 2019 and in which the Council
decided to authorize AMISOM to reconfigure the Mission, to effectively support
implementation of the transition plan and to support the emerging capacity of Somali
security institutions and forces. Their efforts, along with strengthened accountability,
must be accompanied by more predictable funding by the international community
and the provision of force enablers and multipliers.
89. I remain concerned at the level of corruption and the role of untraceable money
in Somali economic and political affairs. Progress on public financial management
and financial governance is encouraging, as is the intent of the Prime Minister to
advance the entire corruption agenda. I urge the Federal Government to br oaden those
gains by identifying objectives, practical steps and measurable benchmarks to
improve transparency and accountability in key sectors, for example relating to
property rights and procurement, including in the security sector, as well as the
conduct of political business and expectations of Members of Parliament.
90. I am deeply concerned at the recent attacks by Al-Shabaab and ISIL. The attacks
on key ministries in Mogadishu represent clear attempts to undermine the path
towards peace and stability for Somalia. Somalis and government authorities remain
undeterred by those acts, and the United Nations will remain by their side, continuing
support to immediately restore the functionality of the ministries and to enhance
security. To reduce the threat and capability of Al-Shabaab, it will be vital to
implement the national security architecture in Mogadishu and throughout the
country, with clear command and control mechanisms and payment of security forces.
It is equally important to forge general trust and accountability between government
authorities, security forces and the civilian population.
91. I welcome the visit to Mogadishu on 8 May by the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea,
during which it, inter alia, considered the issue of weapons and ammunition
management. I encourage the Federal Government to endorse the draft w eapons and
ammunition legislation under review.
92. The high number of children being forcibly recruited by Al -Shabaab remains
alarming. There is an urgent need to strengthen the legal framework on counter terrorism and preventing and countering violent extremism and to support the
reintegration of young disengaged combatants and young people at risk at the
community level, to prevent them from joining the group. Women can also play a
vital role in motivating voluntary disengagement of Al-Shabaab members.
93. An independent, comprehensive review of UNSOS is currently under way to
examine the conditions for success and inform strategic dialogue with Member States
on UNSOS effectiveness. The review will focus on mission management and support
issues while reconciling competing demands from different clients, reviewing lines
of accountability, determining a viable exit strategy a nd identifying better
performance models. It will examine the support UNSOS will provide in realizing my
Special Representative’s strategic, integrated vision in Somalia. Meanwhile, I am
concerned at the low levels of funding of the trust funds of AMISOM a nd the Somali
National Army, and I appeal to Member States to consider making contributions to
them.
94. The over-reliance on air deliveries continues to deplete UNSOS resources, and
is unsustainable. I therefore encourage contingents to prioritize opening and using
main supply routes, particularly those essential to improving the humanitarian
situation, that may include commercial goods essential to meeting the basic needs of
civilians and those critical for logistical support to AMISOM.

16/18

18-13751

S/2018/800

95. I am concerned that the conflict continues to exact a heavy toll on civilians. I
also remain extremely concerned at the scale of sexual abuse and assaults on girls and
women and the ongoing practice of female genital mutilation. I welcome the
endorsement of the sexual offenses bill by the cabinet of the Federal Government —
a milestone for the protection of women in the country — and encourage Parliament
to bring the bill swiftly into law. In addition, I remain concerned at the conflict -related
sexual violence that continues to affect women and girls, in particular those living in
settlements for internally displaced persons, and call on the Federal Government and
its partners to augment and expedite preventative measures to ensure Somali women
and girls can live their lives in safety and dignity. I also urge the Somali national
security forces to unite their efforts and play a leading role in protecting civilians
from suffering.
96. Somalia continues to bear the brunt of climatic shocks. The unprecedented
drought spanning more than four consecutive poor rainy seasons has displaced nearly
1.6 million people since the start of 2017, mainly from rural areas to urban centres.
From 2005 to date, internal displacement has more than tripled. There are currently
2.6 million internally displaced persons in Somalia, pointing to a very low rate or
return to areas of origin. Record levels of rainfall in 2018 have seen Somalia emerge
from drought, only to have flooding expose other vulnerabilities. The acute crisis of
2017 and sudden onset emergencies of 2018 call for long-term interventions to
address the drivers of chronic vulnerability in Somalia. The new recovery and
resilience framework for Somalia aims to build support for resilience -building and
durable solutions to climate-induced shocks. It estimates that over three to five years,
$810 million will be needed to deliver on the highest priority interventions and set
Somalia on the path to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Meanwhile, the
Somalia humanitarian response plan remains significantly underfunded at only
36.5 per cent. Resources for the remainder of the year are urgently required.
97. I thank the African Union, AMISOM, IGAD, the European Union, Member
States, non-governmental organizations and other development partners for their
support for the peacebuilding and State-building agenda in Somalia. We must
continue to strengthen our partnership. I pay tribute to AMISOM and the Somali
security forces for their bravery and for the sacrifices they continue to make in
Somalia.
98. I pay tribute to my Special Representative, Michael Keating, my two Deputy
Special Representatives and the staff of UNSOM, the head and staff of UNSOS and
the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in Somalia for their continued
hard work in very challenging conditions.

18-13751

17/18

S/2018/800

Annex

18/18

18-13751
