6

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

practice of apartheid and all forms of racial discrimination constitute a crime against humanity;
S. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the colonial peoples to exercise their right
to self-determination and independence, notes with satisfaction the progress made in the colonial Territories
by the national liberation movements, both through
their struggle and through reconstruction programmes,
and urges all States to provide moral and material
assistance to them;
6. Requests all States, as well as the specialized
agencies and international institutions, to withhold
assistance of any kind from the Governments of Portugal and South Africa and from the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia until they renounce their policy of colonial domination and racial
discrimination;
1. Reiterates its declaration that the practice of
using mercenaries against movements for national liberation and independence is punishable as a criminal act
and that the mercenaries themselves are outlaws, and
calls upan the Governments of all countries to enact
legislation declaring the recruitment, financing and
training of mercenaries in their territory to be a punishable offence and prohibiting their nationals from serving
as mercenaries;
8. Requests the colonial Powers to dismantle without further delay their military bases and installations
in colonial Territories and to refrain from establishing
new ones;
9. Condemns the policies, pursued by certain colonial Powers in the Territories under their domination,
of imposing non-representative regimes and constitutions, strengthening the µosition of foreign economic
and other interests, misleading world public opinion
and encouraging the systematic influx of foreign immigrants white evicting, disµlacing and transferring the
indigenous inhabitants to other areas;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of the Declaration in all Territories which
have not yet attained independence, and in particular
to formulate specific proposals for the elimination of
the remaining manifestations of colonialism;
11. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions which could assist the Security Council
in considering appropriate measures under the Charter
of the United Nations with regard to developments in
colonial Territories which are likely to threaten international peace and security, and recommends the
Council to take such suggestions fully into consideration;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the compliance of Member States with the
Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on the
question of decolonization, particularly those relating
to the Territories under Portuguese domination,
Southern Rhodesia and Namibia, and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
13. Invites the Special Committee to continue to
pay particular attention to the small Territories and to
recommend to the General Assembly the most appropriate methods and also the steps to be taken to enable
the populations of those Territories to exercise fully
their right to self-determination and independence;
14. Urges the administering Powers to co-operate
fully with the Special Committee by permitting the
access of visiting groups to the colonial Territories in

order to secure first-hand information concerning the
Territories and to ascertain the wishes and aspirations
of the inhabitants of those Territories under their administration;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue to take concrete measures through all the media
at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to give widespread and continuous publicity to
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, to the situation in the colonial Territories
and to the continuing struggle for liberation being
waged by the colonial peoples;
16. Requests Member States, in particular the administering Powers, to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in promoting the large-scale dissemination of
information on the work of the United Nations in the
implementation of the Declaration;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
the facilities necessary for the implementation of the
present resolution.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2575 (XXIV). Fourth International Conference
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 2406 (XXIII) of 16
December 1968 concerning the holding of the Fourth
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of
Atomic Energy,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 18
1. Endorses the proposals contained in the report of
the Secretary-General;
2. Approves the expenditures proposed for 1970
by the Secretary-General in his report;
. 3. Notes the Secretary-General's estimated expenditures for 1971 and 1972 and requests him to advise
the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session of any
changes in those estimates;
4. Awaits with interest the draft agenda of the
United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, with the continuing assistance of the United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee, in close co-operation with the International Atomic Energy Agency and in consultation
with appropriate specialized agencies, to continue preparations for the Fourth International Conference on
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, to be held at
Geneva for eight or nine working days on convenient
dates in 1971;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To transmit the draft agenda proposed by the
United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session, including
whatever suggestions and comments he may deem
appropriate;
( b) To report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session on the preparations for the Conference.
1833rd plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
18 lbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 22,
document A/7823/Rev.2.
