UNITED NATIONS

I NATIONS UNIES

COUNCIl.
SECUBITT COUNCII.
orrlCIAI. RECORDS
OrrlCIAI.

782

TWELFTH YEAR
th ...Y EETlNG: 28 MAY 1967

erne SÉANCE:
SEANCE: 28 MAl 1967
eme
ANNEE
DOUZlSME ANNÉE

SEC:UBITE
CONSEII. DE SECUalTE
DOCUMENTS orrlCIEI..
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

(S¡Agenda¡782) ...•..............•.................•..
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/782)

1

Adoption of the agenda •..•....•........................................

1

The Palestine question:
Letter dated 13 May 1957 from the representative of Syria to the President
Seeurity Council
Couneil concerning
eoneerning the construction
eonstruetion of a bridge in the
of the Security
demilitarized zone established by the General Armistice
Armistiee Agreement between
Israel and Syria (S/3827)
(S¡3827) (concluded) •. . • . . • • • • • • • . • • . • . •• . • . • • • • . . . • . .

1

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/782)
(S¡Agenda¡782)

1

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

1

La question de Palestine :
Lettre, en date du 13 mai 1957, adressee
adressée au President
Président du Conseil de securite
séeurité
représentant de la Syrie, concernant
eoneernant la construction
eonstruetion d'un pont dans la
par le representant
zone demilitarisee
démilitarisée prevue
prévue par la Convention d'armistice
d'armistiee general
général syroisraelienne
israélienne (S/3827)
(S¡3827) [fin] ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

1

.L48 p

)

S¡PV.782
S/PV.782

___'-~~-==-_"~~ .. ,-c... =.:::~
~

¡

I
!'

l·

¡~

r

Relevant
Relevant documents
documents not
not reproduced
reproduced in
in full
full in
in the
the records
records of
of the
the meetings
meetings
of
the Security
Security Council
Council are
are published
published in
in quarterly
quarterly supplements
supplements to
to the
the Official
Official
of the
Records.
Records.

Symbols
letters combined
Sgmbols of
01 United
United Nations
Nations documents
documents are
are composed
composed of
01 capital
capitalletters
combined
with
with figures.
figures. Mention
Mention of
of such
such aa symbol
sgmbol indicates
indicates aa reference
reference to
to aa United
United Nations
Nations
documento
document.

• **
Les
Les documents
documents pertinents
pertinents qui
qui ne
ne sont
sont pas
pas reproduits
reproduits in extenso dans
dans les
les
séances du Conseil de securite
sécurité sont publies
publiés dans des supcomptes rendus des seances
pléments trimestriels aux Documents officiels.
plements

Les cotes des documents de ['Organisation
l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent
de leUres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention
mentíon d'une cote dans un texte signifie qu'il s'agit d'un document de l'Organisation.

Preside
Prese
countri
Iraq, P
Republi
Norther

1. Ado

2. The
Lett
of S
cone
dem
mist
(S/3:

The a;

The PaI
trom
of the
of a 1
by tIJ

Israel

At the
represent
represent
1. Mr.
the con
1951 at
Syria to
under t
Israel an
of perm
magnitu
t,

before t
goal can
through

1

Oflicia

Supplemen

SEVEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SECOND MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuesday, 28 May 1957, at 3 p.m.

SEPT CENT QUATRE-VINGT-DEUXIEME SEANCE
Tenue a New-York, le mardi 28 mai 1957, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. H. C. LODGE (United States of America).

President : M. H. C. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, China, Colombia, Cuba, France,
Iraq, Philippines, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Presents : Les representants des pays suivants :
Australie, Chine, Colombie, Cuba, France, Irak, Philippines, Suede, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

~rovisional agenda (S/Agenda/782)

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/782)

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

1. Adoption of the agenda.

2. La question de Palestine :
2. The Palestine question:
Lettre, en date du 13 mai 1957, adressee au PresiLetter dated 13 May 1957 from the representative
dent du Conseil de securite par le representant de
of Syria to the President of the Security Council
la Syrie, concernant la construction d'un pont dans
concerning the construction of a bridge in the
la zone demilitarisee prevue par la Convention
demilitarized zone established by the Genera Ar-.
d'armistice general syro-israelienne (Sj3827).
mistice Agreement between Israel and Syria
(Sj3827).
Adoption de I'orilre du jour

Adoption of the agenda

L'ordre du jour est adoptee

The agenda was adopted.

The Palestine question: Letter dated 13 May 1957
from the representative of Syria to the President
of the Security Council concerning the construction
of a bridge in the demilitarized zone established
by the General Armistice Agreement between
Israel and Syria (S/3827) (concluded)

La question de Palestine: lettre, en date du 13 mai 1957,
adressee au President du Conseil de securite par
le representant de la Syrie, concernant la construction d'un pont dans la zone demilitarisee p~evue
par la Convention d 'armistice general syro-israeIienne
(S/3827) (fin)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rafik Asha,
representative of Syria, and Mr. Mordacai R. Kidron,
representative of Israel, took places at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Rafik Asha, representant de la Sgrie, et M. Mordecai R. Kidron, representant d'Israel, prennent place i1 la table du Conseil.

1. Mr. ROMULO (Philippines): My delegation shares
the concern expressed by the Security Council since
1951 at the failure of the Governments of Israel and
Syria to achieve progress pursuant to the commitments
under the General Armistice Agreement between
Israel and Syria of 20 July 1949 1 to promote the return
of permanent peace in Palestine. We appreciate the
magnitude and complexity of the issues to be resolved
before that salutary aim becomes a reality; but that
goal cannot be achieved without the initiative, followed
through persistently with dedicated effort by the parties

1. M. ROMULO (Philippines) [traduit de l'anglais]
Ma delegation partage !'inquietude que le Conseil de
securite manifeste, depnis 1951, devant le fait que le
Gouvernement d'Israel et le Gouvernepent de la Syrie
ne sont pas parvenus a accomplir des progres dans
l'execution des engagements qui, en vertu de la Convention d'armistice general syro-israelienne du 20 juillet 1949 1, ont ete pris en vue de favoriser le retour a
une paix permanente en Palestine. Nous comprenons
l'ampleur et la complexite des problemes qui devront
etre resolus avant que cet objectif desirable ne devienne

1 Ofl/tial Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement No. 2.

1 Proces-verbaux du Conseil de securite, quatrieme annee, Supplliment special no 2.

1

themselves. It is the duty of the United Nations to
lend all possible assistance to create favourable conditions conducive to the negotiation of permanent
settlement; but the Security Council can intervene
only when called upon to exercise its primary responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security. The Security Council has
in fact intervened in specific cases involving an alleged
breach of the Armistice Agreement on the broad ground
that the Agreement had been concluded in pursuance
of Security Council action toward the aim of achieving
peac(~ in Palestine.

une realite. Mais cet objectif ne pourra pas etre atteint
si les parties elles-memes ne prennent pas l'initiative
d'y parvenir et ne s'y consacrent pas ensuite avee
tenacite. Il est du devoir des Nations Unies d'apporter
toute l'assistance possible a la creation de conditions
favorables a la negociation d'un reglement permanent i
mais le Conseil de securite ne peut intervenir que lorsqu'll est appele a exercer sa tache essentielle qui, aux
termes de la Charte, est de maintenir la paix et la seeurite internationales. En fait, dans des cas precis qui
comportaient une pretendue infraction a la Convention
d'armistice, le Conseil de securite est intervenu pour le
motif d'ordre general que la Convention a ete conclue
en application des decision~ du Conseil de securite visant
a ramener la paix en Palestine.

2. The Security Council, in its resolution of 18 May
1951 declared, [Sj2157], "that in order to promote the
return of permanent peace in Palestine, it was essential
that the Governments of Israel and Syria observed
faithfully the General Armistice Agreement...".

2. Dans sa resolution du 18 mai 1951, [Sj2157jRev.l],
le Conseil de securite a declare ( qu'afin de promouvoir
le retour d'une paix permanente en Palestine, il est
essentiel que les Gouvernements d'Israel et de Syrie
observent fidelement la Convention d'armistice
general... »

3. The least that the Council can do is to prevent the
deterioration of conditions along the armistice demarcation line or within that demilitarized zone which
might upset the delicate balance established by the
Armistice Agreement. It is recalled that the Armistice
Agreementprovi<ies its own machinery for the enforcement of its provisions.

3. Le moins qua le Conseil de securite puisse faire est
d'empecher que la situation le long de la ligne de demarcation d'armistice ou a l'interieur de la zone demilitarisee ne s'aggrave, ce qui pourrait detruire l'equilibre
fragile qui a ete etabli par la Convention d'armistice.
Nous devons nous rappeler que la Convention d'armistice fixe les modalites voulues pour la mise en amvre
de ses disposit.ions.

4. The Security Council in its resolutions of 11 August
1949 [Sj1376] and 17 November 1950 [Sj1907] noted
that the several armistice agreements concerning
Palestine provide for the supervision by the parties
themselves and relied upon the parties to ensure their
continued application and observance.

4. Dans des resolutions du 11 aout 1949 [Sj1376] et
du 17 novembre 1950 [Sj1907], le Conseil de securite
notait que les differentes conventions d'armistice
concernant la Palestine prevoient que le controle sera
exerce par les parties elles-memes, et laissait a celles-ci
le soin d'assurer l'application et le respect constants
des conventions.

5. In its resolution of 18 May 1951 the Council called
on the Governments of Israel and Syria to bring their
complaints before the Mixed Armistice Commission
or its Chairman, whichever has the pertinent responsibil~
ity under the Agreement and to abide by the decisions
resulting therefrom. It follows that it is incumbent
upon the parties in their own interests to avail themselves of the procedures established by the Armistice
Agreement, looking towards the implementation of
its provisions.

5. Le Conseil de securite, dans sa resolution du 18 mai
1951, recommandait que les Gouvernements d'Israel
et de Syrie sournettent leurs plaintes a la Commission
mixte d'arrnistice ou a son President, selon leur competence respective aux termes de la Convention d'armistice, et qu'ils respectent les decisions qui seront prises
par eux. II s'ensuit que c'est aux parties, dans leur
propre interet, qu'il appartient de se prevaloir des procedures fixees par la Convention d'arrnistice, aux fins
de la mise en reuvre de ses dispositions.

6. The letter dated 13 May 1957 from the representative of Syria to the President of the Security Council
[Sj3827] alleges that the construction by Israel of a
bridge at the southern end of Lake Huleh in the demilitarized zone violates the Armistice Agreement because
it is a military activity, gives Israel a military advantage and constitutes a threat to peace. The complaint
cites article V, paragraph 5 (a), of the General Armistice
Agreement which establishes a "demilitarized zone
from which the armed forces of both parties shall be
totally excluded, and in which no activities by military
or para-military forces shall be permitted ".

6. La lettre en date du 13 mai 1957 adressee au President du Conseil de securite par le representant de la
Syrie [Sj3827] allegue que la construction par Israel
d'un pont a l'extremite meridionale du lac Houle, dans
la zone demilitarisee, viole la Convention d'armistice,
parce que c'est une activite de caractere militaire, parce
qu'elle donne a Israel un avantage militaire et qu'elle
constitue une menace contre la paix. Dans sa plainte,
la Syrie cite l'alinea a du paragraphe 5 de l'article V
de la Convention d'armistice general, qui cree ( une
zone demilitarisee d'ou les forces armees des deux parties
sont entierement exclues, et ou aucune activite de forces
militaires ou paramilitaires n'est permise ll.

7. When pressed by the Syrian Chief of Staff for a
ruling the Acting Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization stated that although

7. Lorsque le Chef d'etat-major syrien a insiste aupres
du Chef d'etat-major par interim de l'Organisme des
Nations Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve

the bridge could be used for military purposes, he was
satisfied, after his personal investigation on the spot
and the conversations he had had with the Israel
authorities, that the bridge had been erected in connexion with the Huleh reclamation project with a
view to facilitating its completion. The report went
on: "Accordingly, [the Acting Chief of Staff] does not
think, despite the possible military value of the bridge,
that he would be justified in asking for its removal.
Such a request would have to be based on the assumption
that a party would use the bridge for military purposes
in violation of the provisions of the General Armistice
Agreement, an assumption which the Acting Chief of
Staff is not entitled to consider. " [8/3815, para. 13].

pour qu'il prenne une decision, ce dernier a declare que,
bien que le pont puisse etre utilise a des fins militaires,
il etait convaincu - apres avoir effectue sur les lieux
une enquete personnelle et avoir eu des entretiens avec
les autorites israeliennes - que le pont avait ete
construit pour faciliter les travaux d'amenagement
du lac HouIe. Le rapport poursuit en ces termes :
« Par consequent, malgre l'interet que le pont pourrait
eventuellement presenter du point de vue militaire,
le Chef d'etat-major par interim ne pense pas etre fonde
a demander qu'on le demonte. Il faudrait, pour cela,
partir de l'hypothese que l'une des parties interessees
se servirait du pont a des fins militaires, au mepris des
dispositions de la Convention d'armistice general; or,
c'est la une hypothese que le Chef d'etat-major n'a
pas a envisager.» [8/3815, par. 13.]

8. The issue that confronts the Council in the view 8. La question qui se pose au Conseil, de l'avis de ma
of my delegation is whether the determination of what delegation, est celle de savoir si le soin de determiner
constitutes a violation of a.rticle V of the Armistice ce qui constitue une violation de l'article V de la ConvenAgreement is a function of the Chief of Staff of the tion d'armistice incombe au Chef d'etat-major de
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve, en sa
his capacity as Ch"irman of the Mixed Armistice Com- qualite de President de la Commission mixte d'armistice,
mission or a function. of the Commission as a whole. ou s'H incombe a la C()mmission dans son ensemble.
It is noted that artici 'a VII, paragraph I, of the Armistice Il est a noter que le paragraphe premier de l'article VII
Agreement entrusts the Mixed Armistice Commission de la Convention d'armistice confie a la Commission
with the supervision of the execution of all its pro- mixte d'armistice la surveillance de l'application de
visions, while paragraph 8 of the same article provides: toutes ses dispositions, tandis que le paragraphe 8 du
"Where interpretation of the meaning of a particular meme article prevoit que « lorsque le sens d'une dispoprovision of this Agreement, other than the preamble sition particuliere de cette Convention, a l'exception du
and articles I and II, is at issue, the Commission's preambule et des articles I et 11, donne lieu a interpretainterpretation shall prevail." However, article V, tion, l'interpretation de la Commission prevaut ».
paragraph 5 (c) of the Armistice Agreementinvests Cependant, l'alinea c du paragraphe 5 de l'article V de
the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission· la Convention d'armistice charge le President de la
and the United Nations observers attached to the Commission mixte d'armistice et les observateurs des
Commission with the responsibility for ensuring the Nations Unies attaches a la Commission, d'assurer la
full implementation of article V.
pleine application de l'article V.
9. If we proceed on the theory that it is within the
competence of the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice
Commission to resolve the question, then we have to
accept the ruling of Colonel Byron C. Leary, Acting
Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization, as final and conclusive. On the other
hand, if we proceed on the theory that it is within the
competence of the Commission as a body to decide
the question, then it would be necessary for the Chairman to convoke a meeting of the Mixed Armistice
Commission for the purpose of considering the Syrian
complaint. This seems to be the logical procedure since
the Chairman of the Commission would be entitled to
implement article V of the Agreement in any given
situation after there has been an authoritative interpretation by the Commission on the applicability of
that article to that particular situation.

9. Si nous faisions notre la theorie selon laquelle il
est de la competence du President de Ja Commission
mixte d'armistice de resoudre la question, nous devrions
accepter la decision du colonel Byron C. Leary, chef
d'etat-major par interim de l'Organisme charge de la
surveillance de la treve, comme concluante et definitive. Si, par contre, nous adoptions le principe d'apres
lequel il est de la competence de la Commission, prise
en tant qu'organe, de trancher la question, il serait
necessaire que le President convoque une reunion de
la Commission mixte d'armistice afin d'examiner la
plainte syrienne. Cela parait etre la procedure logique,
puisque le President de la Commission serait en droit
d'appliquer l'article V de la Convention d'armistice
general dans une situation determinee, lorsque la
Commission a donne une interpretation autorisee sur
l'application de cet article a cette situation particuliere.

10. In the case before us, however, the convocation
of the Commission would appear to be a mere formality
because under article VII, paragraph 4, of the General
Armistice Agreement, "in the absence of unanimity,
decisions shall be taken by majority vote of the members of the Commission present and voting. " In view
of the position taken by the Government of Israel,
it is unlikely that the Israel members of the Commission
will disagree with the ruling of the Chairman that the
bridge in question was not constructed for a military

10. Dans le cas qui nous occupe, toutefois, la convocation de la Commission mixte semblerait n'etre qu'une
simple formalite parce que, aux termes du paragraphe
4 de l'article VII de la Convention d'armistice general,
(e a defaut d'unanimite, les decisions de la Commission
seront prises a la majorite des voix des membres presents et votants». Etant donne la position prise par
le Gouvernement d'Israel, il est peu vraisemblable
que lef" membres israeliens de la Commission desapprouvent l'avis du President de la Commission selon
3

purpose and hence does not violate the Armistice
Agreement.

lequel le pont en question n'a pas ete construit a des.
fins militaires et ne constitue donc pas une violation
de la Convention d'armistice general.

11. It is further recalled that this is not the first time
that the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization has been called upon to
make a ruling of a similar nature. On 21 February 1951
the parties agreed to seek the opinion of General
William E. Riley, then Chief of Staff, on the question
of whether the Huleh reclamation project would give
Israel any military advantages. General Riley found
that "in draining Lake Huleh, the Israelis will not
enjoy any military advantages not equally applicable
to the Syrians ". [8/2049, sect. IV, para. 3.]

11. On se rappellera en outre que ce n'est pas la
premiere fois que le Chef d'etat-major de l'Organisme
charge de la surveillance de la treve a et6 appeIe a
prendre une decision d'un caractere semblable. Le
21 fevrier 1951, les parties sont convenues de solliciter
l'avis du general William E. Riley, qui etait alors
Chef d'etat-major, sur la question de savoir si le projet
de mise en valeur du lac Houle donnerait a Israel un
quelconque avantage militaire. Le general Riley a
declare que « les Israeliens ne retireront de l'assechement du lac HouIe aucun avantage militaire qui
ne profiterait pas egalement aux Syriens ll. [8/2049,
clzapitre IV, par. 3.]
Ainsi a ete regIee la question de l'avantage militaire
soulevee a propos de ce projet particulier.

Thus the question of military advantages in connexion
with t]lat particular scheme was definitely settled.
12. IJil a decision promulgated on 23 September 1953,
General Vagn Bennike, who succeeded General Riley
as Chief of Staff, ruled on the military advantage that
would accrue to Israel from the construction of a canal
to divert the waters of the Jordan River, 2S follows:

12. Dans une decision qui a ete promulguee le 23 septembre 1953, le general Vagn Bennike, qui a succede
au general Riley au poste de chef d'etat-major, a
exprime l'avis suivant, au sujet de !'avantage militaire dont Israel beneficierait par suite de la construction d'un canal destine a detourner les eaux du
Jourdain :
« En ce qui concerne l'aspect militaire de la question, le Jourdain, avec sa vallee profonde, constitue
un serieux obstacle pour toutes les troupes, en particulier pour les troupes motorisees, qui chercheraient
a le traverseI'. La partie a la Convention d'armistice
general qui, par un canal, pourrait controler le
cours du Jourdain dans la zone demilitarisee et
pourrait modifier ce cours ou meme assecher le
fleuve a sa guise pourrait moditler a sa guise la
valeur que la zone demilitarisee presente pour l'autre
partie; cette zone a ete « definie en vue de separer
les forces armees des deux parties, de maniere a
reduire au minimum les possibilites d'incidents et
de froissements... » [8/3122, annexe I, par. 7, e.]

" As regards the military aspect of the question,
the Jordan, in its deep valley, is a serious obstacle
for any troops, particularly motorized troops, which
would attempt to cross it. A party to the General
Armistice Agreement which, by means of a canal,
could control the flow of the Jordan in the demilitarized zone, changing it or possibly even drying it up
at will, could alter at will the value to the other
party of the demilitarized zone, which has been
, defined with a view toward separating the armed
forces of the two parties in such manner as to minimize the possibility of friction and incident.. .'''.
[8/3122, annex I, para. 7 (e).]
13. In arriving at the foregoing conclusion, General
Bennil{e held that the absence of an agreed procedure
between the parties for settling that particular question
did not, in his view, relieve the Chairman of the IVHxed
Armistice Commission of the responsibility of considering the military consequences of such a project in the
light of the provisions of the General Armistice Agreement. It was partly because of this finding that General
Bennike decided "that the Israel authority which
started work in the demilitarized zone on 2 September
be instructed ' to cease working in the zone so long as
an agreement is not arranged' ". [8/3122, annex Ill,
para. 9.]

13. En arrivant a la conclusion que je viens de citer,
le general Bennike avait considere que l'absence
d'une procedure adoptee en commun par les parties
pour regler cette question particuliere ne dispensait
pas, a son sens, le President de la Commission mixte
d'armistice de la tache qui lui etait confiee et qui
consistait a peser les consequences militaires d'un tel
projet a la lumiere des dispositions de la Convention
d'armistice general. C'est en partie en raison de cette
conclusion que le general Bennike a decide « qu'il
devait etre ordonne a l'autorite israelienne qui, le
2 septembre, avait fait entreprendre les travaux dans
la zone demilitarisee d'arreter les travaux dans cette
zone tant qu'un accord ne serait pas pres d'etre conclu»).
[8/3122, annexe Ill, par. 9].

14. Because Israel contested that decision, Syria
filed a complaint with the Security Council, which on
27 October 1953 deemed it desirable "that the
works started in the demilitarized zone on 2 September
1953 should be suspended during the urgent examina.tion
of the question by the Security Council ".2

14. Etant donne qu'Israel a conteste cette decision,
la Syrie a depose une plainte aupres du Conseil d.e
securite, lequel a declare, le 27 octobre 1953, qu'll
jugeait « souhaitable que les travaux entrepris ~ans
la zone demilitarisee le 2 septembre 1953, sOlent
suspendus pendant le prompt examen de la question
par le Conseil de securite 2».

2

Same text as document S/3128.

2

4

Meme texte que celui du document S/3128.

I

i

~

15. Unfortunately, the Council was unable to adopt
;a draft resolution which, inter alia endorsed the decision of the Chief of Staff and which would have been
adopted had it not been for the negative vote of a
permanent member of the Council. Even those who
voted against the draft resolution, however, had
supported the decision of the Chief of Staff, and the
Israel scheme remains uncompleted to this day.

15. Malheureusement, le Conseil n'a pu adopter un
projet de resolution qui, notamment, tendait a confirmer la decision du Chef d'etat-major et qui, n'eutete le vote negatif d'un membre permanent du Conseil
de securite, aurait ete adopte. Meme ceux qui ont vote
contre le projet de resolution avaient appuye la decision du Chef d'etat-major. Le projet israelien est donc
reste inacheve jusqu'a ce jour.

16. It will be seen that, even in a case where the parties
have not previously agreed in advance to accept. the
ruling of the Chief of Staff on a particular matter
within the latter's competence, his ruling has nevertheless been followed.

16. On constatera que meme dans une affaire oil.
les parties ne s'etaient pas mises prealablement d'accord pour accepter la decision du Chef d'etat-major
sur une question particuliere relevant de sa competence, la decision de celui-ci a neanmoins ete respectee.

17. For the foregoing reasons, my delegation does
not see its way clear towards disturbing the ruling of
'Colonel Leary in the specific case before us. This is
not to say that we are satisfied with the circumstances
which attended the construction of the bridge. We are
here concerned merely with the treatment which in
our view should be accorded Colonel Leary's appraisal
of the military consequences of the construction. The
fact that he is only the Acting Chief of Staff does not,
in our view, diminish his authority or detract from his
responsibility. We respect his technical qualifications
to judge the military aspect of the situation in the
light of the Armistice Agreement which, in its own
words, had been "dictated exclusively by military,
and not by political, considerations. "

17. Pour les raisons que je viens d'indiquer, ma delegation ne croit pas pouvoir mettre en cause la decision
du colonel Leary dans le cas precis qui nous occupe.
Je ne veux pas dire que nous nous felicitons des circonstances dans lesquelles s'est effectuee la construction du pont; mais ici, nous devons surtout preter
attention a la maniere dont le colonel Leary evalue
les consequences que, sur le plan militaire, peut avoir
la construction du pont. Le fait qu'il n'est Chef d'etatmajor que par interim ne diminue nullement, selon
nous, son autorite et n'enleve rien a ses responsabilites.
Nous tenons compte de la competence technique qui
lui permet de porter un jugement sur l'aspect militaire
de la situation, a la lumiere d'une Convention d'armistice dont les dispositions - j'en reprends les termes ont ete « dictees exclusivement par <:les considerations
d'ordre militaire, et non politique».

18. There are, however, certain underlying assumptions in Colonel Leary's decision on which, I believe,
the complaining party is entitled to some assurances.
Colonel Leary noted "from the technical point of
view that, by placing base-plates or other appropriate
supports under the bridge on parts of a, former dam
and without adding more prefabricated sections, the
safe-load capacity of the bridge could be raised at
present to approximately 45 tons. " He was made to
understand, however, "that the remaining parts of
the dam will be removed in the near future to accelerate
the flow of the water from Lake Huleh and complete
the projected drainage". [S/3815, para. 11.]

18. Cependant, la decision du colonel Leary se fonde
sur certaines hypotheses au sujet desquelles, je crois,
la partie plaignante est en droit d'attendre quelques
assurances. Du point de vue technique, le colonel
Leary a note « qu'en faisant reposer le pont sur les
restes d'un ancien barrage, sans ajouter de nouveaux
elements prefabriques, on pourrait des maintenant
lui donner une force portante de 45 tonnes environ».
On lui a, cependant, indique « que les restes du barrage seront enleves prochainement afin d'accelerer
l'ecoulement des eaux du lac Houle, et de terminer
les travaux d'assechement». [S/3815, par. 11.]

19. It goes without saying that, if this undertaking
to remove the dam is carried out as soon as possible,
it can contribute to the assurance that the bridge will
not be used for aggressive military purposes.

19. Il va sans dire que si cet engagement d'enlever
les restes du barrage est execute le plus tot possible,
cela pourra contribuer a donner l'assurance que le
pont ne sera pas utilise a des fins militaires et agressives.

20. As the construction of the bridge was justified
on the ground that it would facilitate the completion
of the Huleh reclamation project, it follows that the
bridge will no longer have any reason for being, once
the project is completed. In his statement of 23 May
1957, the representative of Israel affirmed that there is
no other use for the bridge. Indeed, background note
No. 27, dated 17 May 1957, issued by the Israel
Embassy, describes the bridge as "temporary". It
will certainly contribute to the tranquillity of the demilitarized zone if the bridge is removed as soon as it has
fulfilled its specific announced purpose.

20. Etant donne que la construction du pont etait
justifiee par le fait qu'elle faciliterait l'achevement
des travaux d'amenagement du lac Houle, il s'ensuit
que le pont n'aura plus de raison d'etre lorsque les
travaux en question seront termines. Dans sa declaration du 23 mai 1957, le representant d'Israel a affirme
que le pont n'avait pas d'autre usage. En fait, dans
la note documentaire nO 27, en date du 17 mai 1957,
publiee par les services de l'ambassade d'Israel, le
pont est qualifie de « provisoire». Ce sera assurement
contribuer a la tranquillite de la zone d6militarisee
que de demonter le pont des qu'il aura permis d'atteindre le but bien d6fini qui a 6te annonce.

21. Colonel Leary also found that an area on the
western approaches of the bridge was marked as being
mined. That certainly gave the Israel side a military
advantage over the Syrian side, besides being a flagrant
violation of annex 11, paragraph 3, of the Armistice
Agreement. It will certainly reassure not only the
complaining party but also the Council, I am sure, if
Colonel Leary were to confirm that the mines have in
fact been removed in accordance with the announcement
made by representative of Israel at our last meeting.
The removal of mines, however, should be considered
in mitigation but not in exoneration of the initial fact
of violation of the Armistice Agreement.

21. Le colonel Leary a egalement constate que, dans
une zone situee aux abords ouest du pont, des signes
indiquaient la presence de mines. Ce fait, assurement,
donne aux Israeliens un avantage militaire sur les
Syriells, sans compter qu'il s'agit d'une violation
flagrante des dispositions du paragraphe 3 de l'annexe
11 de la Convention d'armistice. Si le colonel Leary
devait confirmer que les mines ont ete effectivement
enlevees, conformement a la declaration faite par le
representant d'lsrael a notre derniere seance, cela
serait rassurant, j'en suis sur, non seulement pour la
partie plaiguante, mais aussi pour le Conseil. L'enlevement des mines, toutefois, devrait etre considere
comme attenuant, mais non pas comme effatiant la
violation initiale de la Convention d'armistice.

22. There is another point on which my delegation
concurs in the report of the Acting Chief of Staff. In
view of the difficulties which have occurred in this
case and which have considerably delayed the inspection of the site by the United Nations military observers,
he suggests the advisability of reaffirming the special
powers of the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission and the United Nations military observers
in the demilitarized zone. In asking for the recognition
witheut a.ny reservation of the right of the Chairman
and the military observers to freedom of movement and
access to all sectors ofthe demilitarized zone Colonel Leary
is only reiterating what is their due under the Armistice
Agreement, article V, paragraph 5 (c) and article VII,
paragraph 10.

22. Il est un autre point sur lequel nous sommes
d'accord avec le Chef d'etat-major par interim. Dans
son rapport, il estime qu'etant d.onne les difficultes
rencontrees, qui ont considerablement retarde rinspection du chantier par les observateurs militaires
des Nations Unies et la presentation du present rapport, le Chef d'etat-major par interim croit qu'il serait
utile de confirmer les pouvoirs speciaux conferes au
President de la Commission mixte d'armistice et aux
observateurs militaires des Nations Unies dans la zone
demilitarisee. Il devrait etre reconnu sans aucune
reserve que la Convention d'armistice general garantit
leur liberte de mouvement et d'acces dans tous les
secteurs de la zone demilitarisee, y compris le secteur
central ou. le pont a ete construit. Le colonel Leary
ne fait la que repeter ce qui est deja expressement
prevu a l'alinea c du paragraphe 5 de l'article V et au
paragraphe 10 de l'article VII de la Convention d'armistice.

23. This is not the first time that this question has
been raised. The Security Council, in its resolution of
18 May 1951 [S{2157], noted with concern the refusal
on a number of occasions to permit observers a.nd officials
of the Truce Supervision Organization to enter localities
and areas which were subjects of complaints in order
to perform their legitimate functions, and considered
that the parties should permit such entry at all times
whenever this is required to enable the Truce Supervision Organization to fulfil its functions and to render
every facility which may be requested by the Chairman
of the Mixed Armistice Commission for this purpose.
This directive of the Security Council still stands and
should be scrupulously observed by the parties irrespective of the origin of the complaints which are under
investigation by the Mixed Armistice Commission.

23. Ce n'est pas la premiere fois que la question est
soulevee. Le Conseil de securite, dans sa resolution du
18 mai 1951 [S{2157{Rev.1], avait deja pris acte avec
souci du refus en de nombreuses occasions de permettre a des observateurs ou a des membres de l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve l'acces,
pour l'exercice de leurs fonctions legitimes, de localites
ou de zones visees dans des plaintes et il avait estime
que les parties doivent donner cet acces toutes les
fois qu'il est requis pour permettre a l'Organisme
charge de la surveillance de la treve d'exel.'cer ses
fonctions, et fournir toutes facilites qui seraient demandees dans ce but par le President de la Commission
d'armistice. Ces directives du Conseil de securite
demeurent en vigueur et elles devraient etre observees
scrupuleusement par les parties, sans consideration
de l'origine des plaintes qui font l'objet d'enquetes
de la Commission mixte d'armistice.

24. In his statement of 23 May [780th meeting], the
representative of Syria invites attention to the reports
of the Chief of Staff which show that those portions of
the Security Council resolution of 18 May 1951 which
call for the return of Arab civilians removed by the
Government from the demilitarized zone, have not
been fully implemented and that, as of May 1956, the
Chief of Staff had reported once more that the restitution of normal civilian life in villages in the demilitarized zone inhabited by Arabs, had not taken place. In
addition, the representative of Syria alleged that in

24. Dans sa declaration du 23 mai [780 e seance], le
representant de la Syrie a signaIe les rapports du Chef
d'etat-major qui indiquent que les dispositions de la
resolution adoptee le 18 mai 1951 par le Conseil de
securite demandant le retour des civils arabes evacues
de la zone demilitarisee n'ont Das ete entierement
appliquees et qu'au mois de mai'1956, le Chef d'etatmajor avait declare a nouveau que le retablissement
d'une vie civile normale dans les villages de la zone
demilitarisee habitee par des Arabes n'avait pas eu
lieu. En outre, le representant de la Syrie allegue qu'en

_~:::::~:~::,:e Arab

I
I

I.

inhabitants living inB.qq:§oetGbre 1956, tons les babitants arabes vivant dan' ;~

r

Village in the central demilitarized zone were expelled
for the second time by the Israel authorities.

le village de Bakkara, au centre de la zone demllitarisee, ont ete expulses une deuxieme fois par les
autorites israeliennes.

25. This is a serious charge which, if true, constitutes
a violation of the General Armistice Agreement and
the Council's resolution of 18 May 1951. In the view
of my delegation, this is a matter within the competence
of the Mixed Armistice Commission under article VII,
paragraph 7, in relation to article V, paragraph 5 (e),
and article VI, paragraph 5, of the Armistice Agreement.

25. C'est la une grave accusation. Si le fait est wai,
il constitue une violation de la Convention d'armistice
general et de la resolution du Conseil de securite en
date du 18 mai 1951. De l'avis de ma delegation, cette
question releve de la competence de la Commission
mixte d'armistice, en vertu du paragraphe 7 de l'article VII de la Convention d'armistice, a rapprocher
de l'alinea e de l'article V et du paragraphe 5 de l'article VI du mi:!me texte.

26. To the Mixed Armistice Commission also should
be referred the charge made by the representative of
Syria on 23 May that Israel state policemen are being
stationed in the demilitarized zone in violation of the
decision of the Commission of 12 December 1954, and
that the construction of the bridge had been
accompanied by military activity in the demilitarized
zone in violation of article V, paragraph 5 (a) of the
Armistice Agreement. Attention is invited to the
special duty vested in the Chairman of the Commission
and the United Nations military observers by article V,
paragraph 5 (b) of the Armistice Agreement, which
provides that any advance by the armed forces, military
or para-military, of either party into any part of the
demilitarized zone "when confirmed by the United
Nations representatives" shall constitute a.~flagrant
:violation of the Agreement.

26. C'est egalement a la Commission mixte d'armistice
qu'il faudrait renvoyer l'accusation formulee le 23 mai
par le representant de la Syrie : d'apres celui-ci, des
membres de la police d'Etat d'Israel ont ete places
dans la zone demilitarisee, en violation de la decision
de la Commission d'armistice en date du 12 decembre
1954, et la construction du pont a ete accompagnee
d'activites militaires dans la zone demilitarisee en
violation de l'alinea a du paragraphe 5 de l'article V
de la Convention d'armistice. 11 fant souligner l'attri·
bution speciale qu'est celle du President de la Com·
mission et des observateurs militaires des Nations
Unies en vertu de l'alinea b du paragraphe 5 de l'article V de la Convention d'armistice, qui prevoit que
toute avance des forces armees, militaires ou paramilitaires, de l'une ou l'autre partie a la Convention,
dans une partie quelconque de la zope demilitarisee.
constitue une violation flagrante de cette Convention
. « quand !adite avance est confirmee par les reprp.sentants des Nations Unies ».

27. It would certainly help if in the meantime the
Council were to receive further reports from the Chief
of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization to keep it up-to-date on the general
situation in the demilitarized zone.

27. 11 serait certainement utile que le Conseil rec;oive,
entre temps, de nouveaux rapports du Chef d'etatmajor de l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la
treve afin qu'il puisse etre tenu au courant de la situation generale dans la zone demilitarisee.

.28. My delega.tion wishes to reiterate the following
provisions of the resolution of 18 May 1951 [S/2157J,
which clearly apply to the problems before us:

28. Ma delegation desire reaffirmer les dispositions
suivantes de la resolution du 18 mai 1951 [S{21571
Rev.l] qui, de toute evidence, s'appliquent auprobleme :
« Le Conseil de securite,

"The Security Council,

"

« •••

" Calls upon the Governments of Israel and-Syria
to bring before the Mixed Armistice Commission or
its Chairman, whichever has the pertinent responsibility under the Armistice Agreement, their complaints
and to abide by the decisions resulting therefrom;
" Considers that it is inconsistent with the objectives and intents of the Armistice Agreement to
refuse to participate in meeting of the Mixed Armistice
Commission or to fail to respect requests of the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission as they
relate to his obligations under article V, and calls'
upon the p:;>td-i~S to be represented at all meetings
Called by t1"; .hairman of the Commission and to
respect such .·equests. "

7

« Fait appel aux Gouvernements d'Israel et de
Syrie pour qu'ils soumettent leurs plaintes a la
Commission mixte d'armistice ou a son President,
selon leur competence respective aux termes de la
Convention d'armistice et qu'ils respectent les
decisions _qui seront prises par eux;
« Estime que sont incompatibles avec les objectifs
et l'esprit de la Convention d'armistice le refus de
participer aux reunions de la Commission mixte
d'armistice et le defaut de satisfaire aux demandes
formulees par le President de la Commission d'armistice, en relation avec les obligations qui lui
incombent au titre de l'article V, et fait appel aux
parties pour qu'elles se fassent representer a toutes
les reunions convoquees par le President de la Commission et pour qu'elles temoignent le respect necessaire aux demandes de celui-ci. I

29. Mr. CARBONNIER (Sweden): The Security
Council is seized of a complaint by the Government of
Syria that the Israel authorities, by building a bridge
at the southern end of Lake Huleh in the demilitarized zone as defined in the General Armistice Agreement
between Israel and Syria, are violating that Agreement,
and that this constitutes a threat to the peace.

29. M. CARBONNIER (Suede) [traduit de l'anglais] :
Le Conseil de securite est saisi d'une plainte du Gouvernement de la Syrie selon laquelle les autorites
israeliennes, par la construction d'un pont a l'extremite
meridionale du lac Houle, dans la zone demilitarisee
prevue par la Convention d'armistice generale israelo_
syrienne, ont viole cette convention et menace ainsi
la paix.

30. This matter was brought to the attention of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization at the
end of :March 1957 and hns been investigated by the
Acting Chief of Staff of that Organization. The Council
has before it a report by the Acting Chief of Staff from
which it appears that, although the bridge could be
used for military purposes, he is satisfied that it has
been erected in connexion with the Huleh reclamation
project, with a view to facilitating the completion of
that project. Despite the possible military value of the
bridge, he does not feel that he would be justified in
asking for its removal, as requested by the Government
of Syria.

30. Cette question a eM portee a l'attention de 1'01'...
ganisme des Nations Unies charge de la surveillance
de la treve, a la fin du mois de mars 1957, et eUe a
fait l'objet d'une enquete du Chef d'etat-major par
interim. Il ressort du rapport que nous avons reQu,
que, bien que le pont puisse etre utilise a des fins
militaires, le Chef d'etat-major par interim est convaincu
que ce pont a ete construit a l'occasion des travaux
d'amenagement du lac HouIe et en vue de faciliter
l'achevement de ces travaux. Malgre l'interet que le
pont pourrait presenter du point de vue militaire, le
Chef d'etat-major ne pense pas etre fonde a demander
qu'il soit demonte, comme le sollicite le Gouvernement
de la Syrie.

31. My Government notes the speqial responsibility
give.n to the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission, under article V, paragraph 5 (c), of the Armistice
Agreement, for the general supervision of the demilitarized zone. The Acting Chief of Staff, in his capacity
as Chairman of that Commission, has investigated the
present complaint and has come to the conclusion that
the circumstances do not warrant a demand for the
removal of the bridge. :My Government has full confidence in the Acting Chief of Staff and feels that his
decision should be upheld.

31. Mon Gouvernement prend note de la responsabilite speciale qui a ete donnee au President de la
Commission mixte d'armistice en vertu de l'alimia c
du paragraphe 5 de l'article V de la Convention d'armistice, a l'effet d'exercer un controle general de la
zone demilitarisee. Le Chef d'etat-major par interim,
en sa qualite de President de la Commission d'armistice, a etudie la presente plainte, et est parvenu a la
conclusion que les circonstances n'exigent pas que le
pont soit demonte. Mon gouvernement donne toute
sa confiance au Chef d'etat-major par interim, et estime
que sa decision doit etre appuyee.

32. Since the report of the Acting Chief of Staff is
dated 20 April 1957 and leaves open certain matters
regarding the activities in the area, we feel-bearing
in mind the special responsibilities entrusted to the
Chief of Staff-that it would be useful for the Security
Council to receive a supplementary report on the
conditions in the zone.

32. Etant donne que le rapport du Chef d'etat-major '
par interim est date du 20 avril 1957 et qu'illaisse en
suspens certaines questions relatives aux activites )
dans la region, nous pensons, tenant compte des taches
particulil~res qui ont ete confiees au Chef d'etat-major
qu'il serait utile que le Conseil de securite re~oive un
rapport compIementaire sur la situation existant dans
la zone.

33. In this connexion, I wish to say that it has been
a matter of concern to my Government to learn of the
difficulties again experienced by the Acting Chief of
Staff and the United Nations military observers in
performing their duties. In our view, this is in contravention both of the Armistice Agreement and of the
Security Council resolution of 18 May 1951 [8/2157].
In order to fulfil their functions, officials and observers
of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
must have freedom to enter areas where they have
special supervisory responsibilities or areas which are
subjects of complaints. The parties must be required
to render all facilities for this purpose.

33. A ce propos, je dois dire que mon gouvernement I
a appris, non sans inquietude, que les difficultes deja
eprouvees par le Chef d'etat-major par interim et par
les observateurs militaires des Nations Unies dans
l'accomplissement de leurs taches se sont de nouveau
presentees. A notre avis, cela constitue une infraction
a la fois a la Convention d'armistice et a la resolution
du CO::J.seil de securite du 18 mai 1951 [8/2157]. Pour I
pouvoir s'acquitter de lenr tache, les fonctionnaires
et les observateurs de l'Organisme des Nations Unies
charge de la surveillance de la treve, doivent avoir
libre acces aux regions OU ils sont specialement charges
d'exercer leur surveillance ou a celles qui sont l'objet
de plaintes. Les parties doivent etre invitees a leur \
donner toutes facilites a cet egard.

34. Mr. TSIANG (China): During the last several
years the Security Councl1 has had to consider a number
of disputes originating in the demilitarized zones or
along the so-called demarcation lines of Palestine.
I recall no case in which this Council as a whole

34. M. TSIANG (Chine) [Iradoll de I'anglats] : I)epui.
plusieurs annees, il a ete donne au Conseil de securite
d'examiner un certain nombre de differends ayant

I

II

1.

pour origine de
les Palestine.
zones demilitarisees
ou les lignes
de . .• . • •
demarcation
Je ne me souviens
d'aucun
8

challenged the facts as reported to us by the Truce
Supervision Organization or repudiated a decision
made by the Chief of Staff. It certainly has been the
practice of my delegation to uphold the authority of the
Truce Supervision Organization and the Chief of Staff.
The representatives of the Arab States may have
noticed the several occasions when, in upholding the
authority of the Truce Supervision Organization, I
have had to speak and vote against Israel in this
Council.

cas Oll le Conseil, dans son ensemble, ait conteste les
faits tels qu'ils nous etaient presentes par 1'0rganisme
charge de la surveillance de la treve ou qu'il ait desavoue
une decision prise par le Chef d'etat-major. L'usage
de ma delegation a ete d'appuyer l'autorite de 1'0rganisme charge de la surveillance de la treve et celle du
Chef d'etat-major. Les representants des Etats Arabes
auront peut-etre remarque qu'en plusieurs occasions,
en appuyant l'autorite de 1'0rganisme charge de la
surveillance de la treve, j'ai ete amene a me prononcer
et a voter contre Israel au sein de ce Conseil.

35. The main point of the Syrian complaint in the
present debate is the bridge on Lake Huleh. On this
point the report of the Acting Chief of Staff is very
clear. My delegation 'had not been able to find sufficient
reason to wish to challenge or revise the decision, for
the time being at least, not to remove the bridge. In
building the bridge the purpose of Israel is unmistakably clear. I now wish to quote paragraph 10 of the
report of the Acting Chief of Staff:

35. La plainte qui fait l'objet du present debat est
essentiellement relative au pant etabli sur le lac Houle.
A cet egard, le rapport du Chef d'etat-major par interim
est tres net. Ma delegation n'a pu trouver de raisons
suffisantes de modifier ou de reviser, du moins pour le
moment, la decision qui a ete prise de ne pas demonter
le pont. L'intention d'lsrael, quand il a decide de
construire le pont, etait absolument claire. A cet egard,
je desirerais citeI' le paragraphe 10 du rapport du Chef
d'etat-major par interim:
« Plus precisement, le pont devait permettre
d'amener du materiel d'excavation sur la rive Est
du lac. Ce materiel devait servir a approfondir la
partie Sud du canal principal et du canal secondaire pres de l'extremite Sud du lac. Le pont devait
egalement permettre d'entretenir plus facilement
ce material.» [8/3815.]

"Specifically, the purpose of the bridge was to
convey earth-moving equipment to the eastern
shore of Lake Huleh. Such equipment would serve
to deepen the southern parts of the main and secondary canals near the southern tip of the Lake. The
bridge would also facilitate the servicing of the
equipment... [8/3815.]
36. Since that is the purpose of the bridge, the question naturally arises: What should be done with the
bridge once the purpose has been achieved? Could
the bridge not. then be removed? I think the Council
and the Truce Supervision Organization should consider
the question of the future of the bridge. In the meantime,
since we have had this debate, and since Syria is so
concerned with the matter, I would welcome - and
I would urge the Chief of Staff when he finds the
occasion suitable, to submit to us - additional reports
which might give him the occasion to answer certain
points raised in the debate, and which would supply
us with additional information.

36. Puisque tel est l'objet de la construction du pont,
la question se pose evidemment de· savoir ce qu'il
conviendra de faire de ce pont une fois que cette fin
aura ete atteinte. Ne pourrait-il etre demonte a ce
moment-la? Je crois que le Conseil et 1'0rganisme
charge de la surveillance de la treve devraient examiner
cette question de l'avenir du pont. Pour le moment,
puisque nous nous sommes engages dans ce debat et
que la Syrie se preoccupe tant de la question, je souhaiterais vivement que le Chef d'etat-major par interim
nous presente des rapports complementaires lorsqu'il
le jugera bono Ces rapports lui permettraient peut-etre
de donner une reponse it. certaines questions qui ont
ete soulevees au cours du debat, en meme temps qu'ils
nom; fourniraient de nouveaux renseignements.

37. I am also greatly impressed with paragraph 14
of the report. I am greatly distressed that in connexion
~ith the bridge Israel has seen fit to place difficulties
In the way of investigation and inspection of the bridge
by the Truce Supervision Organization.

37. Le paragraphe 14 du rapport m'a egalement
frappe, et je suis tres occupe de savoir qu'lsrael a
juge bon de creel' des diflicultes qui ont gene l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve dans l'enquete
concernant le pont et l'inspection du pont lui-meme.

38. The Chief of Staff suggests certain steps to be
taken in the future. My delegation fully supports the
~uggestions contained in paragraph 14. Since Syria
IS concerned, I would add one word. I think it is up to
the Truce Supervision Organization to pay added
attention to this region of the bridge during the next
few months.

38. Le Chef d'etat-major suggere que certaines mesures
soient prises a l'avenir. Ma delegation appuie entierement ces suggestions, qui figurent au paragraphe 14.
Puisque la situation actuelle preoccupe la Syrie, j'aimerais ajouter qu'il appartient, je pense, it. 1'0rganisme
charge de la surveillance de la treve d'accorder au
cours des mois it. venir toute son attention a la region
dans laquelle le pont a ete construit.

.39. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (translated from
French): The French delegation listened attentively
to the statements made by the representatives of Syria
and Israel at the Council's meeting on 23 May
,{780th meeting]. Having heard this morning the arguments and the conclusions of the United Kingdom

39. M. GEORGES-PICOT (France) : La delegation
franvaise a ecoute avec attention les declarations
faites par le representant de la Syrie et le representant
d'lsrael au cours de la reunion du Conseil du 23 mai
[780 e seance]. D'autre part, ayant entendu ce matin
l'argumentation et les conclusions du representant du

representative and the five representatives who spoke Royaume-Uni et des cinq representants qui ont pris
after him [781 st meeting] on the construction of a la parole apres lui touchant la construction d'un pont
bridge in the demilitarized zone between Israel and dans la zone demilitarisee entre Israel et la Syrie, la
Syria the French delegation finds that it has nothing delegation franc;aise constate qu'elle nta den a ajouter
to add to what has been said. For the reasons which a ce qui a deja ete dit. Pour les memes raisons qui
have already been given and which it is therefore ont deja ete donnees et qu'il serait done superflu de
unnecessary to repeat, it approves of the report of I rappeler, elle approuve le rapport qui a ete presente
the Acting Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce par le Chef d'etat-major par interim de l'Organisme
Supervision Organization in Palestine submitted to des Nations-Unies pour la surveillance de la treve
en Palestine, rapport qui a ete presente au Secretaire
the Secretary-General on 20 April 1957 [8/3815].
general l'e 20 avril 1957 [8/3815].
40. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): At the request of the
Government of Syria the Security Council is again
discussing the question of violations by Israel of the
Armistice Agreement concluded between these States
on 20 July 1949.

40. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques sociaHstes sovietiques) [traduit du russe] : A la demande
du Gouvernement de la Syrie, le Conseil de securite
discute de nouveau la question des violations par Israel
de la Convention d'armistice general conclue le 20 juillet
1949 entre ces deux Etats.

41. The representative of Syria in his letter of 13 May
1957 [8/3827] and in his statement to the Council on
23 May, mentioned a number of facts bearing witness
to the abnormal situation in the demilitarized zone
on the Syrian-Israel demarcation line. Members of the
Security Council also heard the representative of Israel
on 23 May, setting forth the viewpoint of his Government. The Council also has before it the report of the
Acting Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization of 20 April which gives the
results of the consideration of Syria's complaint by
the Israel-Syria Mixed Armistice Commission.

41. Dans sa lettre en date du 13 mai 1957 [8/3827],
comme dans le texte de son intervention au Conseil
de securite le 23 mai, le representant de la Syrie cite
une serie de faits qui temoignent de la situation anormale qui regne dans la zone demilitarisee sur la ligne
de demarcation syro-israeIienne. Le 23 mai, les membres
du Conseil ont entendu egalement le representant
d'IsraeI, qui a expose le point de vue de son Gouvernement. Le Conseil dispose en outre du rapport du
20 avril du Chef d'etat-major par interim de l'Organisme des Nations Unies charge de la surveillance de
la treve, dans lequel sont exposes les resultats de
l'examen de la plainte syrienne par la Commission
mixte d'armistice syro-israelienne.

42. As is well known, the Armistice Agreement 42. Comme on le sait, la Convention d'armistice
provided for the creation of special demilitarized zones general stipulait la creation de zones demilitarisees
from which all military and para-military forces were speciales d'ou devaient etre retirees toutes les forces
to be withdrawn and in which all structures having a militaires et paramilitaires et dans lesquelles devaient
military character were to be destroyed. The Agreement etre detruites les installations a caractere militaire.
also prohibited the mining of the area. These provisions Aux termes des dispositions de la Convention, il est
regarding the demilitarized zones were included in the egalement interdit de miner ces zones. Les dispositions
Armistice Agreement not only in order to separate the relatives aux zones demilitarisees incluses dans la
armed forces of the two sides but also to prevent the Convention d'armistice general avaient pour but non
possibility of friction or border incidents between the ' seulement d'isoler rune de l'autre les forces armees
two neighbouring States in the future.
des deux parties, mais egalement d'eIiminer a l'avenir
toute possibilite de friction et d'incidents de frontiere
entre les deux pays voisins.
43. The Israel authorities, however, in defiance of
the clear and specific provisions of the Agreement have
in various ways acted unilaterally in the demilitarized
zone, in particular by building a bridge at the southern
end of Lake Huleh, which is essentially strategic in
character and gives Israel a military advantage. The
military significance of this bridge is recognized even
in the report of the Acting Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization in which he
states that the bridge could be used for military purposes. Furthermore, the Israel authorities are taking
other measures which are substantially altering the
character of the demilitarized zone, converting it from
a demilitarized into a militarized area. As the representative of Syria has said, both in his letter and in his
statement, and as is confirmed in the report of the
Acting Chief of Staff, the Israel authorities have mined
the western approaches to the bridge. Nor does the
representative of Israel deny the lact that this area
.IQ

43. Cependant, au mepris des dispositions precises
et claires de la Convention, les autorites israeliennes
ont entrepris une serie de mesures unilaterales dans
la zone demilitarisee et, en particulier, la construction
d'un pont a l'extremite meridionale du lac HouIe.
Ce pont revet en fait un caractere strategique qui
confere a Israel un avantage militaire. Le rapport du
Chef d'etat-major par interim de l'organisme des
Nations Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve
reconnait l'interet militaire de ce pont et indique que
cc le pont pourrait etre utilise a des fins militaires)l.
En outre, les autorites israeliennes prennent d'autres
mesures qui modifient essentiellement le caractere de
la zone en la convertissant de zone demilitarisee en
zone militaire. Ainsi que le representant de la Syrie
l'a indique, tant dans sa lettre qu'au cours de son
intervention, les autorites israeliennes ont mine les
abords ouest du pont, fait qui a ete egalement confirme
par le rapport du Chef d'etat-major par interim. Il

was mined, for at our last meeting he stated that the
mines have now been removed from this area.

n'a pas ete dementi non plus par le representant d'IsraeI,
qui a declare au cours de la precedente seance du Conseil
que la region est actuellement deminee.

44. In order to appreciate the general situation it is
important to bear in mind the position of the Israel
Government with regard to various points in the
Armistice Agreement which to some degree and at
some time or other have not suited Israel. By way of
illustration we may look at Colonel Leary's report
in which he states:
"The Chairman contacted the Israel delegation
with a view to an investigation. In conformity with
the position adopted by the Israel Government
concerning Syrian complaints relating to the demilitarized zone, the Senior Israel representative refused
to consider the Syrian complaint. He added that
United Nations military observers should not enter
the demilitarized zone from Syrian territory and
that no investigation would be allowed from the
Israel side. [8/3815, para. 3.]

44. Afin d'evaluer la situation d'ensemble, il est
important de connaitre la position du Gouvernement
d'Israel a l'egard de nombreux points de la Convention
d'armistice general qui, a des degres divers et a diverses
epoques, ne lui conviennent pas. Voici ce que dit a
ce sujet le rapport du colonel Leary :

To what extent is the position of the Israel authorities
compatible with Armistice Agreement in this matter?
It is clear that this position of Israel's is contrary to
the Agreement. If the Israel authorities had nothing
to hide from the United Nations observers, why should
they refuse to admit them at once to investigate the
situation on the spot? The fact that the Israel authorities
were compelled later to allow the United Nations
observers into the area where the bridge was being
built does not alter the fact that Israel hindered the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in
discharging its functions under the Armistice Agreement.

Dans quelle mesure la position des autorites israeliennes
est-elle compatible avec les dispositions de la Convention d'armistice general relatives a ce secteur?
Il est evident que la position d'Israel est contraire a
la Convention. Si les autorites israeliennes u'avaient rien
a dissimuler aux observateurs des Nations Unies,
pourquoi auraient-elles refuse de les laisser penetrer
immediatement dans la zone pour y. proceder a une
enquete? Que les autorites israeliennes aient ete
obIigees, par la suite, d'admettre les observateurs des
Nations Unies dans le secteur du pont construit ne
modifie nullement les faits, a savoir qu'Israel empeche
I'Organisme des Nations Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve d'exercer les fonctions que lui confie
la Convention d'armistice general.

t)

« Le President est entre en rapports avec la delegation israelienne afin de proceder a une enquete.
Conformement a la position adoptee par Israel a
regard des plaintes syriennes concernant la zone
demilitarisee, le Chef de la delegation israelienne
refuse d'examiner la plainte de la Syrie. Il a ajoute
que les observateurs militaires des Nations Unies
ne devaient pas penetrer dans la zone demilitarisee
par le territoire syrien et qu'Israel ne les autoriserait
pas a proceder a une enquete en empruntant le
territoire israelien.» [8/3815, par. 3.]

a

45. What did the United Nations observers discover 45. Qu'a revele l'enquete faite sur place par les obserin their investigation of the situation on the spot? vateurs des Nations Unies? Les paragraphes 11 et
Colonel Leary refers to this in paragraphs 11 and 12 of 12 du rapport du colonel Leary y sont consacres. Je
cite le paragraphe 11 :
his report [8/3815]. In paragraph 11 he states:
« Lorsque le Chef d'etat-major par interim a
"The bridge, when seen by the Acting Chief of
inspecte le pont, le 7 avril, il s'agissait d'un pont
Staff on 7 April, was of the Bailey standard type,
du type Bailey de quelque 30 metres de long et de
100 feet in length, 12 1/2 feet wide and with a safe3 m. 50 de large, capable de supporter de 8 it 10 tonnes.
load capacity of 8 to 10 tons. In the immediate
Aux alentours se trouvaient vingt elements de pont,
vicinity of the bridge, twenty bridge sections were
qui ont servi, par la suite, a le renforcer et a le pro-.
seen. Subsequently, they were used to reinforce and
longer. Lorsque des observateurs militaires des
lengthen the bridge. When the site was visited by the
Nations Unies ont visite le chantier, le 20 avril,
United Nations military observers on 20 April, the
on avait allonge le pont de 6 metres en depla~ant
length of the bridge had been increased to 120 feet
les appuis sur la rive orientale, et on l'avait renforce
by moving the base-plates on the eastern side, a.nd
de maniere it ce qu'il put supporter de 12 it 14 tonnes.
the bri1ge had been strengthened to a safe-load of
Du point de vue technique, on a remarque qu'en
of 12 to 14 tons. It was noted from the technical
faisant reposer le pont sur les restes d'un ancien
point of view that, by placing base-plates or other
barrage sans ajouter de nouveaux elements preappropriate supports under the bridge on parts
fabriques, on pourrait des maintenant lui donner
of the former dam and without adding more prefaune force portante de 45 tonnes environ. Il semble,
bricated sections, the safe-load capacity of the bridge
cependant, que les restes du barrage seront enleves
could be raised at present to approximately 45 tons.
prochainement afin d'acceIerer l'ecoulement des
It is understood, however, that the remaining parts
eaux du lac Houle et de terminer les travaux d'asof the dam will be removed in the near future to
sechement. »
accelerate the flow of the water from Lake Huleh
and complete the projected drainage."
The report further states, in paragraph 12: "No for- Le rapport dit plus loin, au paragraphe 12 : « Aucune
tifications of a type prohibited under annex 11, para- fortification appartenant a l'un des types interdits
'·,.. ··Co:·.. ,·.·•...;"- "

............

~~.

T " '.' .. '

graph 3, of the General Armistice AgTeement were
seen when carrying out the inspection of the site of
the bridge."
This is all very well, but then he says: " An area on
the western approaches of the bridge was, however,
marked as being mined...
The report observes that minefields and mines in the
demilitarized zone are prohibited under annex I1,
paragraph 3, of the General Armistice Agreement and
says: "The Acting Chief of Staff is taking steps to have
any existing mines removed from the area in question ".

par le paragraphe 3 de l'Annexe II de l'Accord d'al'mistice gemiral n'a ete observee lors de l'inspection
du chantier... ))
Tout cela est parfait. Cependant, voici ce qui suit :
«•••mais des signes indiquaient que les abords ouest
du pont etaient mines I).
Le rapport mentionne que l'installation de champs
de mines et de mines est interdite dans la zone demilitarisee conformement au paragraphe 3 de l'annexe II
de la Convention d'armistice general, puis dit ceci :
« Le Chef d'etat-major par interim prend actuellement
des dispositions pour que l'endroit soit deminell.

46. It would of course be useful for us to have a report
from the Acting Chief of Staff stating that the mines
have been removed from the area. Unfortunately we
have not yet received such a report from him.

46. Certes, il serait bon que nous recevions du Chef
d'etat-major par interim un rapport indiquant que
cet endroit a ete demine. Malheureusement nous ne
posseclons pas encore un tel rapport.

47. The information given in the report permits us
to conclude that the bridge under construction is of
such a kind that it could without any doubt be used
for military purposes and, secondly, that the approaaches to this bridge are mined. It is legitimate then to
sk: if the bridge has ouly a pacific purpose, as the
representative of Israel claims here, then why was it
nece~sary to mine the approaches to it?

47. Les faits cites dans le rapport que nous avons
re~m permettent de conclure, d'abord, que ce type
de pont peut sans aucun doute servir it des fins militaires et, deuxiemement, que ses abords sont mines.
On peut donc Iegitimement poser la question : si le
pont n'est destine qu'a des fins pacifiques, comme
l'affirme le representant d'Israel, pourquoi fallait-il
en miner les abords ?

48. In this connexion we cannot agree with the view
expressed by a number of members of the Council,
namely, that the decisive factor in this case is the intention - I repeat the word " intention .. - of the Israel
authorities to use the bridge for peaceful purposes
only. The crucial point, in our view, is not a matter
of intention but of whether or not this or that construction in the demilitarized zone has a military value
and whether or not from this point of view it violates
the Armistice Agreement. In the case before us there
can be no doubt in anyone's mind that the bridge
could be used for military purposes, and this was confirmed by the Acting Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization. At the same time, the
discussion in the Council shows that there are questions
demanding further clarification from the Israel authorities and from the Acting Chief of Staff.

48. A cet egard, je ne saurais accepter l'opinion
emise par certains membres du Conseil de secnrite
suivant laquelle l'element determinant dans le cas
present est l'element d'intention - je souligne le
mot - savoir l'intention des autorites israeliennes
d'utiliser ce pont uniquement a des fins pacifiqnes.
A notre avis, il ne s'agit pas de presumer des intentions
mais de savoir si telle ou telle installation dans la
zone demilitarisee presente ou non une valeur miIitaire et si, de ce point de vue, elle est conforme ou
contraire a la Convention d'armistice general. Dans
le cas donne, personne ne doute que le pont puisse
etre utilise a des fins militaires. Le fait °a ete confirme
par le Chef d'etat-major par interim de l'Organisme
des Nations Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve.
D'autre part, la discussion au Conseil de securite montre
que certaines questions necessitent des eclaircissements
ulterieurs de la part des autorites israeliennes et du
Chef d'etat-major par interim.

49. The representative of Iraq in his statement
[781st meeting] recommended that the Security Council
should invite Colonel Leary to the Council table so
that members could try to elicit from him certain explanations in connexion with his report. It seems to us
that this proposal of the representative of Iraq's merits
attention and the Soviet delegation supports it.

49. Dans son intervention [781e seance], le representant de I'Irak a suggere que le Consei! de securite
invite le colonel Leary a prendre part a la discussion,
afin d'essayer obtenir de lui certaines precisions au
sujet de son rapport. II nous semble que cette proposition du representant de I'Irak merite notre attention,
et la delegation sovietique I'appuie.

50. Another idea has been put forward, that of
seeking a further written report from Colonel Leary
concerning the situation in this part of the demilitarized zone at the present time - one month, approximately, after our receipt of his earlier report. This
idea, too, it seems to me, merits the attention of the
Security Council and could furnish additional material
to help us form a judgement as to what is going on in
the demilitarized zone.

50. Une autre idee a ete formulee, a savoir, demander
au colonel Leary de fournir au Conseil un rapport
ecrit complementaire au sujet de la situation actuelle
dans la zone demilitarisee de cette region, dans un
delai d'un mois apres la reception du precedent rapport. Comme cela permettrait d'obtenir des renseignements supplementaires pour juger de la situation
dans la zone demilitarisee, cette idee me parait egalement meriter l'attcntion du Conseil de securite.

51. The unilateral actions of the Israel authorities
in the demilitarized zone constitute a serious violation
of the Armistice A~eement and are in effect a military

51. Les actions unilaterales entreprises dans la zone
demilitarisee par les autorites israeliennes constituent
des violations graves de la Convention d'armistice
12

0

r

j

,

threa.t to Israel's neighbour, Syria; they are therefore general et sont, en fait, une menace militaire pour le
a fresh source of alarm and disorder in this area. Such pays voisin, la Syrie. Elles representent done une
actions on the part of Israel cannot fail, as we observe, nouvelle source d'inquietude et de trouble dans cette
to acrgravate relations between Israel and Syria. region. De tels actes ne peuvent qu'aggraver les relaThe :ituation in the area of the Syria-Israel demar- tions entre Israel et la Syrie, fait que, d'ailleurs, nous
cation line is worsened by the general attitude of the constatons. La situation dans la region de la ligne de
Israel Government to the system for ensuring com- demarcation syro-israelienne a ete aggravee par l'atpliance with the conditions laid down in the Armistice titude generale qu'a adoptee le Gouvernement d'Israel
Agreement. As you know, the Israel representative a l'egard du systeme de surveillance destine a assurer
refused to participate in the work of the Israel-Syria l'application des dispositions de la Convention d'armisMixed Armistice Commission which is responsible in tice general. On sait que les representants israeliens
particular for hearing the complaints and claims of refusent de participer aux travaux de la Commission
mixte d'armistice syro-israelienne, chargee en partithe parties.
culier de l'examen des plaintes et reclamations des
parties.
52. If we add to this that there have very often been
occasions when the Israel authorities have refused
the United Nations observers permission to carry out
investigations on the spot, then we are compelled to
ask: do not all these facts add up to an attempt on the
part of Israel's ruling circles to prevent any investigation as to how Israel is observing the Armistice
Agreement?

52. Si a ce qui precede on ajoute que les autorites
israeliennes ont refuse a plusieurs reprises aux observateurs des Nations Unies l'autorisation de faire des
enquetes sur place, on en arrive toutnaturellement
a se demander si ces faits ne refletent pas la tendance
des milieux dirigeants israeliens a paralyser l'inspection
lorsqu'eUe porte sur la maniere dont ces autorites
appliquent les dispositions de la Convention d'armistice
general.

53. Such a policy on the part of the Israel Govern- 53. Cette attitude du Gouvernement d'Israel provoque
ment naturally arouses grave concern among the naturellement une grande inquietude dans les pays
neighbouring Arab countries, which, with good reason, arabes voisins qui, non sans raison, voient dans cette
view this policy as a threat to their security. Syria politique une menace a leur securite. Etant donne que
has every justification for showing alarm at Israel's dans le passe la Syrie a ete souvent victime d'actes
new violations of the provisions of the Armistice .d'agression commis par Israel, elle a to.ut lieu de craindre
Agreement, since it has in the past on more than one les nouve11es violations de la Convention d'armistice
occasion been the victim of aggressive activities on general de la part de ce pays.
the part of Israel.
54. The Security Council has more than once had
to consider Israel's violations of the Armistice Agreement, including the provisions regarding the demilitarized zone. Suffice it to recall that in January 1956
the Security Council warned the Government of Israel
of the need for a strict fulfilment of its obligations under
the Armistice Agreement and the United Nations
Charter; otherwise, the Council would be obliged to
consider what further measures under the Charter
were necessary for the maintenance or restoration of
peace.

54. Le Conseil de securite a etudie plus d'une fois
les violations israeliennes de la Convention d'armistice
general et des dispositions relatives a la zone demilitarisee. Il suffit de rappeler qu'au mois de janvier 1956,
le Conseil de securite a averti le Gouvernement d'Israel
qu'il devait se conformer strictement aux obligations
imposees par la Convention d'armistice general et par
la Charte des Nations Unies faute de quoi le Conseil
envisagera les mesures ulterieures, dans le cadre de
la Charte, propres a maintenir ou a retablir la paix.

55. Did Israel's policy regarding compliance with the
Armistice Agreement alter after this decision of the
SecUrity Council? The events of the past months and
in particular the unprovoked aggression against Egypt
show that Israel's leaders will go to any lengths in
their endeavours to carry out their extremist plans
directed against their Arab neighbours.

55. La politique d'Israel concernant l'observatiou de
la Convention d'armistice general a-t-e11e change apres
cette decision du Conseil de securite ? Les evenements
des derniers mois et en particulier l'agression non
provoquee contre I'Egypte temoignent que les milieux
dirigeants d'Israel ne s'arretent devant aucune aventure
qui leur permettrait de mener a bien leurs plans extremistes a l'egard des pays arabes voisins.

56. The unilateral actions of the Israel auth;ties
in the demilitarized zone in violation of the Armistice
Agreement, which have created a tense situation along
the Syria-Israel demarcation line, call for the Security
Council's close attention. The Council ought, in our
view, to put a stop to Israel's attempt to sabotage
the present armistice and to provoke fresh conflict
aud friction with neighbouring States.

56. Les actions unilaterales entreprises par les autorites israeliennes dans la zone demilitarisee en violation
de la Convention d'armistice general ont cree une
situation tendue le long de la ligne de demarcation
syro-israelienne, et cette situation exige la vigilante
attention du Conseil de securite. A notre avis, le Conseil
de securite doit mettre un terme aux tentatives d'Israel
de saper la base de la Convention d'armistice general
actuellement en vigueur et de provoquer de nouveaux
incidents et conflits avec les pays vcisins.

57. The representative of Syria has set forth his
Government's request to the Security Council to take
certain steps to ensure the strict observance of the
Armistice Agreement which is in force is fully in accord
with the spirit and the letter of the United Nations
Charter. In the Soviet delegation's view it is impossible not to support the Syrian representative's appeal
to the Council to condemn Israel's violation of the
provisions of the Armistice Agreement and of the
Security Council's resolution.

57. La requete que le representant de la Syrie a
presentee au nom de son Gouvernement pour demander
au Conseil de securite de prendre une serie de mesures
destinees a faire respecter rigoureusement la Convention
d'armistice general en vigueur est entierement conforme
a l'esprit et a la lettre de la Charte des Nations Unies.
La delegation sovietique estime qu'il est impossible
de ne pas approuver le representant de la Syrie lorsqu'il invite le Conseil de securite a condamner les
'violations de la Convention d'armistice general et
des resolutions du Conseil de securite commises par
Israel.

58. No one can have any doubt that the Syrian
Government's request that the powers of the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission should be
confirmed is justifiable; United Nations military observers should be allowed freely to enter the demilitarized zone and to penetrate to any part of it. These
requests are fully in accordance with the provisions
of the Armistice Agreement.

58. Nul doute que la requete de la Syrie tendant a
voir confirmer les pouvoirs du President de la Commission mixte d'armistice et des observateurs militaires des Nations Unies, ne soit legitime : ils doivent
pouvoir acceder librement a la zone demilitarisee et
a n'importe quel secteur. Ces demandes sont parfaitement conformes aux dispositions de la Convention
d'armistice general.

59. In view of Israel's violations of the provisions of
the Armistice Agreement regarding the demilitarized
zone the Soviet delegation also supports Syria's request
and .considers that it would be expedient for the Security Council, in a decision, to confirm the provisions
of the Armistice Agreement defining the status of
the demilitarized zone, and to request Israel unconditionally to fulfil those conditions.

59. La delegation sovietique, tenant compte des violations par Israel des dispositions de la Convention
d'armistice general qui ont trait a la zone demilitarisee
appuie la demande syrienne et estime que le Conseil
de securite devrait confirmer ses decisions relatives
au statut de la zone demilitarisee telles qu'elles sont
enoncees dans la Convention d'armistice general, et
exiger d'Israel leur application inconditionnelle.

60. To this end, the Israel authorities ought to stop
all unilateral actions in the zone and to dismantle the
bridge at once, withdraw their police forces and take
steps to ensure that the Arab population removed from
the area of the zone shall be able to return to their
land and homes. The Soviet delegation is convinced
that the just and well-founded request of the Syrian
Government that measures should be taken to restore
a normal situation in the demilitarized zone will meet
with the support of members of the Security Council
and that an important step will thereby have been
taken towards the restoration of peace and security
in this area.

60. A cette fin, les autorites israeliennes doivent
mettre un terme aux mesures unilaterales dans la
zone demilitarisee, proceder au demontage immediat
du pont, evacuer leurs forces de police et prendre des
dispositions pour permettre a la population arahe
expulsee de regagner ses terres et ses foyers. La dele.gation de I'Union sovietique est convaincue que les
exigences legitimes et fondees du. Gouvernement
syrien concernant l'adoption de mesures propres a
retablir une situation normale dans la zone demili..
tarisee recevront l'appui des membres du Conseil et
que, de cette maniere, un pas important sera fait vers
le retablissement de la paix et de la tranquillite dans
cette region.

61. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: The representative of the Soviet Union referred to the minefields
and asked whether it has been confirmed that the
mines have been removed. In that connexion, I should
like to inform the Council that the Acting Chief of
Staff has confirmed the statement of the representative
of Israel to that effect.

61. Le SECRETAIRE GENERAL (traduit de l'ar:glais) : Le representant de I'Union sovietique a parM
des champs de mines. Il a demande s'il a ete confirme
que les mines en question ont ete enlevees. Je tiens
a informer le Conseil de securite que le Chef d'etatmajor par interim a confirme la declaration en ce sens
faite par le representant d'IsraeI.

62. Mr. MORALES (Colombia) (translated from Spanish): In our opinion, the Acting Chief of Staff of the
Truce Supervision Organization is the competent
authority to judge the nature of any public works
constructed in the demilitarized zone. In his report
to us [S/3815] he states that he does not think he
would be justified in asking for the removal of the
bridge. He likewise informs us that, generally speaking,
the Israel authorities did not give the necessary cooperation to facilitate investigation by the United
Nations.

62. M. MORALES (Colombie) [traduit de l'espagnol] :
La delegation de la Colombie estime que le Chef d'etatmajor par interim de l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve est I'autorite qui a competence pour
se prononcer sur la nature de tout ouvrage qui se
construit dans la zone demilitarisee. Dans le rapport
qu'il nous a. soumis [S/3815], il estime qu'il n'y a pas
Heu de demander que le pont soit demonte. Il indique
aussi qu'en general les autorites israeliennes n'ont pa8
apporte toute la collaboration necessaire pour faciliter
les operations d'enquete des Nations Unies.

I

63. My delegation welcomes the report of the Truce
Supervision Organization and considers that (1) There
is no justification for ordering the removal or destruction of the bridge, since that is the view of the Acting
Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision Organization;
(2) it is essential to confirm and to reaffirm the authority of the Chief of Staff and the Chairman of the
Mixed Armistice Commission; (3) the parties concerned
should give the Mixed Armistice Commission all the
necessary co-operation in its work and, in particular,
provide all the necessary means of access so that it
may enjoy full freedom of movement in the demilitarized zone.

63. Ma delegation se felicite du rapport de l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve, et a son
avis: 1) il n'y a pas lieu d'ordonner le demontage ou
la destruction du pont, tel etant l'avis du Chef d'etatmajor par interim de I'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve ; 2) il est indispensable de confirmer
et de reaffirmer l'autorite du Chef d'etat-major par
interim et celle du President ce la Commission mixte
d'armistice ; 3) les parties interessees doivent apporter
tout le concours voulu en vue des travaux de I'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve et, en particulier, accorder toutes les facilites necessaires aux
observateurs de maniere a leur permettre d'acceder
a la zone demilitarisee et d'y operer en toute liberte.

64. Furthermore, it would be useful, as some, representatives have suggested, to obtain a supplementary
report from the Chief of Staff on present conditions in
the zone, on the freedom of access enjoyed by the
United Nations authorities and, in general, on whatever he thinks he should bring to the attention of
the Council.

64. Par ailleurs, il serait utile, comme l'ont deja
declare plusieurs representants, de demander au Chef
d'etat-major par interim un rapport complementaire
sur la situation actuelle a l'interieur de la zone, sur
la liberte d'acces a cette zone pour les autorites des
Nations Unies et, d'une fa~on generale, sur tous les
points que le Chef d'etat-major juge opportun de porter
a la connaissance du Conseil.

65. We hope that the parties concerned will
take due note of the views that have been expressed
here.

65. Nons esperons que les parties interessees prendront dtiment en consideration les opinions qui ont
ete exprimees au Conseil.

66. The PRESIDENT: All members of the Council
except the President having spoken, I now propose
to speak in my capacity as representative of the UNITED STATES.

66. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'angIais) : Tous
les membres du Conseil, a I'exception du President,
ont pris la parole, et je me propose de parler a mon
tour en qualite de representant des ETATS-UNIS.

67. The United States has examined carefully the
complaint of the Government of Syria that the recent
construction of a bridge in the central sector of the
Israeli-Syrian demilitarized zone constitutes an undertaking of military activity in violation of article V,
paragraph 5 (a), of the Armistice Agreement, and a
threat to the peace.

67. Les Etats-Unis ont examine attentivement la
plainte du Gouvernement de la Syrie selon laquelle
la. construction recente d'un pont dans le secteur
central de la zone demilitarisee syro-israelienne constitue une activite militaire contrevenant a l'alinea a
du paragraphe 5 de I'article V de la Convention d'armistice, et une menace contre la paix.

68. The Acting Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine inspected
the bridge at the request of the Government of Syria,
the was also requested by the Syrian Government to
stop the construction, which that Government stated
was illegal. In his report of 20 April 1957 [8/3815],
the Acting Chief of Staff stated that, although the
bridge could be used for military purposes, he was
satisfied, after his personal investigation on the spot,
that the bridge was built in connexion with the Huleh
reclamation project. He therefore did not feel that
he would be justifed in asking for the removal of the
bridge. He pointed out that such a request would
have to be based on the assumption that the bridge
would be used for military purposes in violation of the
General Armistice Agreement, an assumption which
he did not feel he was entitled to make. The Acting
Chief of Staff has also reported that the bridge does
not affect the interests of any Arab civilians in the
zone.

68. Le Chef d'etat-major par interim de I'Organisme
charge de la surveillance de la treve en Palestine a
inspecte le pont a la requete du Gouvernement syrien.
Ce gouvernement a egalement demande que I'on fasse
arreter la construction de ce pont qui, seIon lui, est
ilIegale. Dans sen rapport du 20 avril 1957 [8/3815],
le Chef d'etat-major par interim declare qu'il est
convaincu, a la suite de l'enquete personnelle qu'il a
effectuee sur place, que ce pont - bien qu'il puisse
etre utilise a des fins militaires - a ete construit pour
faciliter les travaux d'amenagement du lac Houle.
Par consequent, le Chef d'etat-major par interim ne
pense pas etre fonde a demander que le pont soit
demonte. Il souligne qu'une telle demande devrait
reposer sur l'hypothese que l'une des parties se servirait du pont a des fins militaires, en violation de
la Convention d'armistice general, et qu'il s'agit la
d'une hypothese qu'il n'a pas a envisager. Le Chef
d'etat-major par interim signale egalement que la
construction du pont ne porte atteinte aux interets
d'aucun civil arabe de la zone.

69. Under Article V of the Armistice Agreement, the
Chief of Staff, as Chairman of the Mixed Armistice
~ommission, is responsible for ensuring that the armistice provisions for the demilitarized zone are fully
carried out. This authority has been recognized by

69. En vertu de l'article V de la Convention d'armistice, le Chef d'etat-major, en tant que President de
la Commission mixte d'armistice, est charge d'assurer
la mise en application complete des dispositions de
l'armistice dans la zone demilitarisee. Ces attributions

the Security Council in its resolution of 18 May 1951

ont ete reconnues par le Conseil de securite dans la
resolution qu'il a adoptee le 18 mai 1951 [8/2157/
Rev.l]. Si rune ou I'autre des parties estime que le
Chef d'etat-major a agi de fa~on irreguliere dans
quelque cas que ce soit, elIe peut saisir la Commission
mixte d'armistice de la question. Les parties ont en
effet donne a cette Commission, aux termes de I'article VII de la Convention d'armistice, le pouvoir de
regler les differends concernant I'application de cette
Convention, et d'interpreter celle-ci.

[8/2157]. If either of the parties think that the Chief

of Staff has acted incorrectly in any matter, that party
can bring the matter before the Mixed Armistice Commission, which has been given the power, under Article
VII of the Armistice Agreement, to decide disputes
concerning the application of that Agreement and to
interpret it.

70. We are fully cognizant of the fact that the Mixed
Armistice Commission has not met since 1951. But this
fact does not relieve either party of the responsibility of
making every effort to resort to the procedures of the
Commission before coming to the Security Council.
We continue to hold that the Mixed Armistice Commission should function, but if no recourse is had to
the Commission under the provisions of Article VII,
the decisions of the Chief of Staff must hold.

70. Nous savons parfaitement que la Commission
mixte d'armistice ne s'est pas reunie depuis 1951, mais
ce fait ne dispense aucune des parties de I'obligation
de faire tous ses efforts pOUf recourir a la procedure
de la Commission mixte avant de se presenter devant
le Conseil de securite. Nous continuons a penser que
la Commission mixte d'armistice devrait fonctionner;
mas si I'on n'a pas recours a elIe conformement aux
dispositions de I'article VII, les decisions prises par
le Chef d'etat-major doivent rester valables.

71. Having considered all the available facts in the
present case, the Unites States believes that the report
of the Acting Chief of Staff is fully responsive to the
Syrian request.

71. Ayant pris en consideration tous les aspects
connus de la question, la delegation des Etats-Unis
estime que le rapport du Chef d'etat-major par interim
repond pleinement a la demande de la Syrie.

72. The representative of Israel stated ['i80th meeting]
that, since the truce had been replaced by the Armistice
Agreement, neither party may invoke purely military
considerations in the demilitarized zone. The demilitarized zones, he stated, are areas from which military
forces are excluded - and nothing more. The United
States does not share that view. Article V of the Armistice Agreement, as I have already said, gives the Chief
of Staff responsibility for the full implementation of
the armistice provisions relating to the demilitarized
zone. Paragraph 2 of Article V states that the demilitarized zone has "been defined with a view toward
separating the armed forces of the two Parties in such
a manner as to minimize the possibility of friction and
incident, while providing for the gradual restoration
of normal civilian life in the area of the demilitarized
zone, without prejudice to the ultimate settlement ".

72. Le representant d'lsrael a declare ['i80 e seance]
que, puisque la treve avait e16 remplacee par la Convention d'armistice, aucune des parties ne pouvait invoquer des considerations d'ordre militaire en ce qui
concerne la zone demilitarisee. Les zones demilitarisees,
a-t-il dit, sont celles d'oil les forces militaires sont
exclues, et tien de plus. Les Etats-Unis ne partagent
pas cette opinion. L'article V de la Convention d'armistice, comme je I'ai deja dit, charge le Chef d'etatmajor d'assurer la pleine application des dispositions
d'armistice relatives a la zone demilitarisee. Conformement au paragraphe 2 de cet article, la. zone demilitarisee a e16 definie « en vue de separer les forces armees
des deux parties, de maniere a reduire au minimum
les possibilites d'incidents et de froissement, tout en
permettant, sans prejuger en rien le reglement final,
le retablissement graduel de la vie civile normale dans
la zone demilitarisee».

73. In 1953, the Chief of Staff requested the cessation
of the work in the demilitarized zone which, in his
opinion, affected the protection of normal civilian
life within the area and the military value of the zone.
Military considerations were thus clearly asserted by
the Chief of Staff as among the matters for which he is
responsible under the Armistice Agreement. The
United States supported him in this, as did the majority
of the members of the Security Council. The United
States position on the authority of the Chief of Staff
in the demilitarized ;zone was also fully explained
at that time, as follows.

73. En 1953, le Chef d'etat-major avait demande que
1'0n mit fin, dans la zone demilitarisee, a des travaux
qui, a son avis, avaient une incidence sur la protection
de la vie civile normale dans la region, et la valeur
militaire de la zone. Des considerations d'ordre miIitaire avaient ainsi ete clairement enoncees par le Chef
d'etat-major comme faisant partie des questions relevant de sa. competence en vertu de la Convention
d'armistice. Les Etats-Unis I'avaient appuye a cet
egard, tout comme la majorite des membres du Conse~
de securite. La position adoptee par les Etats-Ums
en ce qui concerne l'autorite du Chef d'etat-maj~r
dans la zone demilitarisee avait ete egalement plelnement expliquee a l'epoque, et ce en ces termes :
« En premier lieu, il est d'une importance vitale
pour le maintien de la paix dans cette region que
la Convention d'armistice coneIue entre Israel et
la Syrie soit strictement observee - et la question
qui nous occupe est etroitement liee au maintien
de la paix. En deuxieme lieu, la principale tache

"First, strict compliance with the Armistice
Agreement entered into between Israel and Syria
is of vital importance to the peace of the areaand this question is intimately involved in the present case. c.cJondly, the primary responsibility of
the Security C.:>unciI in this matter is to uphold that

If?

Armistice Agreement, which it endorsed in its resolution of 11 August 1949 as superseding the truce
and facilitating the transition to permanent peace.
The agent of the Security Council for these purposes
is the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization. Thirdly, development projects which are consistent with the undertakings of
the parties under the Armistice Agreement and
which are in the general interest and do not infringe
established rights and obligations should be
encouraged.
" ... The Chief of Staff as the authority responsible
for the general supervision of the demilitarized zone
is the proper authority to determine whether the
project in question meets these conditions. Any
unilateral action, from whatever side, which is not
consistent with the authority of the Chief of Staff
threatens the effective operation and enforcement
of the Armistice Agreement. Similarly, no Government should, in our opinion, exercise a veto power
over legitimate projects in the demilitarized zone."
[648th meeting, paras. 3 and 4.]
That is the United States position on the authority
of the Chief of Staff, as stated in 1953.

du Conseil de securite dans cette affaire est de faire
observer la Convention d'armistice qui, aux termes
de sa resolution du 11 ao-ut 1949, se substituait a
la treve et devait faciliter la transition vers l'etablissement d'une paix permanente. C'est a cette
fin que le Chef d'etat-major de rOrganisme des
Nations Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve
a ete designe par le Conseil. En troisieme lieu, les
projets de mise en valeur qui sont compatibles a.vec
les engagements contractes par les parties en vertu
de la Convention d'armistice, qui sont conformes
a l'interet general et qui n'empietent pas sur les
droits et obligations etablis sont a encourager.
(c ...Le Chef d'etat-major, en tant qu'autorite
responsable de la surveillance generale de la zone
demilitarisee est l'autorite habilitee a decider si
le projet dont il est question actuellement repond
a ces conditions. Toute action unilaterale, de quelque
ctlte qu'elle soit prise, qui ne respecte pas cette
autorite du Chef d'etat-major, menace la mise en
reuvre et le respect effectif de la Convention d'armistice. De meme, nous estimons qu'aucun gouvernement ne devrait s'opposer a des projets Iegitimes
dans la zone demilitarisee en exer~ant un droit de
veto. II [648e seance, pars. 3 et 4.]
Telle est, dans les termes employes en 1953, la position
des Etats-Unis en ce qui concerne l'autorite du Chef
d'etat-major.

74. While the report of the Acting Chief of Staff in 74. Le Chef d'etat-major par interim repond, dans
the present case answers the question raised by the son rapport, a la question posee par le Gouvernement
Government of Syria about the bridge, it does raise a' de la Syrie au sujet du pont. Mais' ce rapport souleve,
number of other questions which are of interest to sans leur donner de reponse, un certain nombre d'autres
the Security Council and which the report does not questions qui interessent le Conseil de securite. Ainsi,
answer. For example, the report indicates that the le rapport indique que le President de la Commission
Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission and the mixte d'armistice et les observateurs militaires des
United Nations military observers encountered initial Nations Unies se sont heurtes, au debut, a une ceropposition from the Government of Israel. The Acting taine opposition de la part du Gouvernement d'!srael.
Chief of Staff suggests, in the light of this experience, Le Chef d'etat-major par interim suggere, a la lumiere
the advisability of reaffirming the powers of the Chair- de cette experience, qu'il serait utile de confirmer les
man of the Mixed Armistice Commission and of the pouvoirs conferes dans la zone demilitarisee an President
United Nations military observers in the demilitarized de la Commission mixte d'armistice et aux obserzone.
vateurs militaires des Nations Unies.
75. It is obvious from the report of 20 April 1957
that the authority of the Acting Chief of Staff has not
been fully respected and that he consequently has not
been able fully to discharge his responsibilities in the
demilitarized zone. This prompts me to make the following observation: that efforts to limit the freedom of
movement and access of the Chairman of the Mixed
Armistice Commission and the United Nations military
observers in any sector of the demilitarized zone are
of serious concern to the United States, as they should
be to all members of the Security Council and to the
parties to the General Armistice Agreement.

75. On constate, a la lecture du rapport du 20 avril
1957, que l'autorite du Chef d'etat-major par interim
n'a pas ete pleinement respectee et que, en consequence,
il n'a pas eM en mesure de s'acquitter pleinement des
taches qui lui incombent dans la zone demilitarisee.
Cela m'amene a faire la remarque suivante : les efforts
faits pour restreindre la liberte de deplacement et
d'acces du President de la Commission mixte d'armistice et des observateurs des Nations Unies dans un
secteur quelconque de la zone demilitarisee ne manquent
pas de preoccuper vivement les Etats-Unis et devraient
preoccuper egalement tous les membres du Conseil
de securite de meme que les parties a la Convention
d'armistice general.

76. The suggestion from the Acting Chief of Staff
that his authority should be reaffirmed is clearly in
order. His authority must be respected by the parties,
~ho should extend to him full co-operation and help
III any practical arrangements he many consider necessary for the exercise of his authority.

76. Le Chef d'etat-major par interim est parfaitement
fonde a demander que son autorite soit confirmee.
L'autorite du Chef d'etat-major doit etre respectee
par les parties, qui devraient lui offrir une cooperation
sans reserve et l'aider dans toutes les mesures pratiques
qu'il jugerait necessaire de prendre en vue de l'exercice de ses fonctions.
17

77. The report also shows that the Acting Chief of
Staff found that an area on the western approaches to
the bridge had been mined, in contravention of the
Armistice Agreement. The reported that he was taking
steps to have the mines removed, and the representative of Israel has informed the Coun.cil that the
mines have been taken away.

77. Le r-apport indique egalement que le Chef d'etat.
major par interim a constate qu'une zone situee a
rouest du pont avait ete minee, en violation de la
Convention d'armistice. Le Chef d'etat-major par
interim a declare qu'il a pris des mesures afin de faire
deminer cette zone et le representant d'Israel a informe
le Conseil que les mines avaient ete enlevees.

78. To give a third illustration, the report further
indicates that the Acting Chief of Staff inspected only
certain portions of the demilitarized zone. Whether
this was through his own choice or because he was
prevented from inspecting other portions has not
been made clear.

78. Le rapport indique en outre - si l'on veut un
troisieme exemple - que le Chef d'etat-major par
interim n'a inspecte que certaines parties de la zone
demilitarisee. Il n'apparait pas clairement, si c'etait
du fait de sa propre decision ou s'il a ete empeche de
visiter le reste de la zone.

79. Inasmuch as these questions remain outstanding,
the United States believes that it would be of value
to the Council to have from the Acting Chief of Staff
an up-to-date report on current conditions throughout
the zone, including the policing of the zone, the freedom
of access of the Acting Chief of Staff and any practical
arrangements he may consider necessary to carry out
his responsibilities. We believe that he should undertake such a complete survey so that we may be assured
that conditions in the zone are those called for by
the Armistice Agreement. We hope that both parties
to the Armistice Agreement will give him their full
co-operation.

79. Etant donne que ces questions ne sont pas tran.
chees. la delegation des Etats-Unis considere qu'il
serait utile que le Conseil re~oive du Chef d'etat-major
par interim un rapport a jour sur la situation actuelle
dans la zone ; ce rapport porterait notamment sur les
mesures prises pour la surveillance de la zone, la liberte
d'acces du Chef d'etat-major par interim et sur toutes
les dispositions pratiques qu'il estimerait necessaire de
prendre pour s'acquitter des taches qui lui sont confiees.
Ma delegation estime que le Chef d'etat-major devrait
entreprendre cette etude complete, qui nous permettrait de nous assurer que la situation dans la zone est
hien conforme aux dispositions de la Convention d'armistice. Nous esperons que les deux parties a la Convention
d'armistice coopereront avec lui sans reserve.

80. The aim of the Security Council must be to assure
a peaceful situation. The Armistice Agreement and
the United Nations personnel in the area are crucial
- in fact, indispensable - ele::aents in achieving this
objective. All parties should co-operate fully in making
it possible for the United Nations representatives to
fulfil their tasks. This is indispensable to achieving
peace and order, which are vital to Israel and vital
to Israel's neighbours.

80. Le but du Conseil de securite doit etre de garantir
un etat de paix. La Convention d'armistice et le personnel des Nations Unies dans cette region sont d'une
importance capitale a cet egard; ce sont en fait les
elements indispensables qui permettront d'atteindre
cet objectif. Toutes les parties devraient cooperer
activement pour que des representants des Nations
Unies soient a meme de s'acquitter de leur tache.
C'est indispensable si l'on veut retablir la paix et l'ordre,
qui sont vitaux pour Israel et pour les voisins d'Israel.

81. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I wish to say that
the representative of Syria has informed me that he
would like to be recognized to make another statement
today, and the representative of Israel also has indicated that he would like the floor again. It is the
general practice of the Chair, subject to the wishes
of the Council, always to accede to the desires of the
parties to a question before the Security CouncIl and
if one of the parties or both want to be heard on a
certain day, to arrange matters so that they can be
heard. Therefore, the Chair plans to recognize the
representative of Syria; when he has concluded, he
will recognize the representative of Israel.

81. Parlant en tant que PRESIDENT, je desire
informer le Conseil que le representant de la Syrie
m'a avise qu'il voudrait avoir la parole pour faire une
nouvelle declaration aujourd'hui. Le representant
d'Israel a, lui aussi, demande a nouveau la parole. Le
President - sous reserve des vreux du Conseil - a
l'habitude d'acceder aux desirs exprimes par les parties
qui sont interessees a une question soumise au Conseil
de securite, et si rune des parties ou les deux parties
desirent etre entendues un jour determine, le President
fait en sorte qu'elles puissent prendre la parole. Le
President se propose donc de donner la parole au representant de la Syrie et, a la suite de son intervention,
il donnera la parole au representant d'Israel.

82. Mr. ASHA (Syria): I wish to thank the President
for giving me the floor to make an additional statement.

82. M. ASHA (Syrie) [traduit de l'anglais) : Je remercie
le President de me donner la parole pour une declaration
complementaire.

83. In my statement before the Security Council on
23 May 1957 [780th meeting), I demonstrated clearly,
- with sufficient proof, complete and accurate references, undistorted quotations, and recent exampleshow the Israel authorities, by constructing a bridge
with military value in the central demilitarized zone,

83. Dans mon intervention au Conseil de securite du
23 mai 1957 [780 e seance), j'ai clairement demontre avec des preuves suffisantes, des references completes
et precises, des citations non deformees et des exemples
recents - les conditions dans lesquelles les autorites
israeliennes, en construisant un pont presentant un

I

18
. ,.',':,> "r ",", '~-..

S-:~~"""':~~::;C':~<
~.;~

I

by refusing to examine the Syrian complaint concerning the bridge, by refusing to attend the meeting of
the Mixed Armistice Commission, by maintaining
their regular police forces in the demilitarized zone,
by expelling Arab civilians from this zone, by mining
the western approaches of the bridge, and by exercising military activity in the zone, have violated provisions of the General Armistice Agreement, and especially article V of this Agreement, as well as the Security
Council resolution of 18 May 1951 [8/2157].

interet militaire dans le centre de la zone demih"tarisee,
en refusant d'examiner la plainte deposee par la Syrie
au sujet de ce pont, en refusant d'assister a la reunion
de la Commission mixte d'armistice, en maintenant des
forces de police reguliere dans la zone demilitarisee, en
expulsant des civils arabes de la zone, en minant les
abords ouest du pont et en exerctant des activites militaires dans la zone, ont enfreint les dispositions de la
Convention d'armistice general, et en particulier l'article V de cette Convention, de meme que la resolution
du Conseil de r,ecurite en date du 18 mai 1951 [8/2157/
Rev.1.]

84. I also proved beyond any doubt that the Israel
authorities, by continuing the drainage work in the
central demilitarized zone, without having fulfilled
the conditions required by the Council's resolution of
18 May 1951, were violating that resolution.

84. J'ai egalement prouve, en ne laissant place a
aucun doute, que les autorites israeliennes, en poursuivant des travaux d'assechement dans le centre de
la zone demilitarisee sans avoir rempli les conditions
prevues par la resolution du Conseil de securite du
18 mai 1951, contreviennent a cette resolution.

85. I stated that the Syrian Government was ready
to subscribe to most of the dechrations of the Acting
Chief of Staff, particularly those concerning the jurisdiction of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission, the attributions of the Chairman of the Mixed
Armistice Commission, and freedom of movement of
United Nations observers.

85. J'ai dit que le Gouvernement syrien est pret a
faire siennes la plupart des declarations du Chef d'etatmajor par interim, en particulier les declarations
relatives a la competence de la Commission mixte d'armistice israelo-syriennes, aux attributions du President
de la Commission mixte d'armistice et a la liberte de
deplacement des observateurs des Nations Unies.

86. We have, however, pointed out, and justified our

86. Nous avons cependant fait remarquer, avec
preuves a l'appui, que les conclusions que le Chef
d'etat-major par interim a exposees dans son rapport
ne sont pas tout a fait conformes aux faits et ne constituent pas une stricte application des dispositions de
la Convention d'armistice general entre la Syrie et
Israel.

contention, that the conclusions drawn by the Acting
Chief of Staff in his report do not completely harmonize
with the facts, nor do they constitute a strict application of the provisions of the General Armistice Agreement between Israel and Syria.
87. At the :end ~of ~my-previous statement 2 proposed

for consideration by the Council a plan of action
covering nine legitimate, reasonable and amply justified demands.
88. On the other hand, in our preliminary and closing
remarks, 2 drew the attention of the members of the
Security Council to the inaccuracies and distortions
contained in a background note issued by the Embassy
of Israel in order to misinform and mislead the public
and to confuse the real issue which is at stake before
~C~~

a~

89. We do not wish to go back today to the argu-

87. A la fin de ma derniere intervention, j'ai soumis a
l'examen du Conseil un plan d'action portant sur neuf
demandes legitimes, raisonnables et amplement fondees.

Dans mes remarques preliminaires et dans mes
conclusions, j'ai, d'autre part, attire l'attention des
membres du Conseil de securite sur les inexactitudes et
les deformations contenues dans une note documentaire
publiee par les services de I'Ambassade d'Israel afin
d'induire en erreur le public et d'embrouiller la question
reelle dont le Conseil est saisi.
88.

ments developed in our previous statement. We should
like to limit ourselves at present to an examination
of the Israel statement made before the Council on
23 May 1957 [7801h meeting], and to other statements
made this afternoon.

Nous ne voulons pas revenir aujourd'hui sur les
arguments que nOllS avons exposes dans notre declaration precedente. Nous voulons nous limiter actuellement a l'examen de la declaration d'Israel devant le
Conseil de securite le 23 mai 195," ~780e seance], ainsi
qu'a certaines declarations faites cet apres-midi.

90. We 'observe, first of all, that, in spite of all the
efforts by the Israel delegation to plug all possible
leaks in their statement, the statement remains a
sieve with very big holes. It will be quite easy for us
to refute the shaky assertions contained in it. We
shall not, however, follow in the footsteps of the Israel
del~gation, for we want to preserve the dignity and
serIOusness of the debate, in deference to the prestige
of the Security Council.

90. Tout d'abord, nous constatons que, malgre les
efforts de la delegation israelienne en vue de combler
toutes les lacunes de leur declaration, celle-ci n'en reste
pas moins pareille a un crible dont les trous sont fort
grands. Il nous serait tres facile d'en refuter les assertions
fragiles. Mais nous ne suivrons pas la delegation israelienne sur ce terrain, car nous voulons maintenir la
dignite et le serieux du debat, par respect pour le prestige
du Conseil de securite.

91. At the beginning of his statement the Israel
representative said that the Syrian complaint was
not a complaint against Israel at all, but substan-

91. Au debut de sa declaration, le representant d'Israel a dit que la plainte de la Syrie n'etait nullement
une plainte contre Israel, mais qu'il s'agissait essentiel-

89.

19

tially a quarrel with the Chief of Staff of the Truce
Supervision Organization, who is the competent United
Nations authority in the area. We are surprised to
hear the representative of the authority which excluded
the Chief of Staff for more than two weeks from the
site of the bridge now champion publicly the competence
of the Chief of Staff. We would point out that the
Syrian complaint is partly motivated by thb lack of
respect which the Israel authorities have shown so
far for the competence of the Chief of Staff. Moreover,
the Syrian complaint is motivated by the Israel violations of the General Armistice Agreement, and it is
lodged against Israel. It cannot, therefore, be interpreted as a quarrel between Syria and the Chief of
Staff, the latter not being a party to the General
Armistice Agreement. \Ve may, of course, differ from
the Acting Chief of Staff in the assessment of certain
facts and the establishment of some conclusions. In
referring to these differences, we have not, however,
had recourse to malicious and dishonest methods of
distortion, misstatement and misrepresentation.

lement d'un differend avec le Chef d'etat-major de,
l'Organisme des Nations Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve, qui est l'autorite des Nations Unies
competente dans la region. Nous avons tite surpris
d'entendre le representant des autorites qui, pendant
plus de deux semaines, ont tenu le Chef d'etat-major
it. l'ecart du chantier de construction du pont, se faire
maintenant publiquement le champion de sa competence. Nous ferons remarquer que la plainte syrienne
est motivee en pal'tie par le manque de consideration
dont les autorites israeliennes ont fait preuve jusqu'iei
it. }'egard de la competence du Chef d'etat-major. En
outre, la plainte de la Syrie est motivee par les violations
de la Convention d'armistice general commises par
Israel; elle est portee contre Israel. Elle ne peut done
etre consideree comme un differend entre la Syrie et
le Chef d'etat-major, ce dernier n'etant pas - partie
it. la Convention d'armistice general. Nous pouvons,
bien entendu, ne pas etre d'accord avec le Chef d'etatmajor par interim lorsqu'il s'agit d'apprecier certains
faits et tirer certaines conclusions. Cependant, en parlant de ces divergences, nous n'avons pas eu recours
aux methodes malveillantes et deloyales qui consistent
it. deformer les faits, it. faire des declarations erronees
ou it. exposer la situation de fac;on inexacte.

92. The Israel representative goes on to say that
there is nothing new in the complaint. This is partly
true, since the Syrian complaint deals partly with the
same type of Israel violations as have occurred in the
past. It is not entirely true, for the present Syrian
complaint deals solely with the demilitarized zone and
with violations of the Council's resolution of 18 May
1951, a resolution which did not exist at the time the
first Syrian complaint concerning the drainage of
Lake Huleh was presented.

92. Le representant d'Israel a poursuivi en disant que
la piainte n'apportait rien de nouveau. Cela est vrai
dans une certaine mesure, etant donne que la plainte
syrienne porte, pour une part, sur des violations analogues it. celles dont Israel s'est rendu coupable dans
le passe. Mais ce n'est pas entierement vrai, car la plainte
presentee actuellement par la Syrie ne concerne que
la zone demilitarisee et les violations de la resolution
du Conseil en date du 18 mai 1951, laquelle n'existait
pas au moment oil a ete deposee la premiere plainte
syrienne relative it. l'assechement du lac HouIe.

93. As to the arguments put forward in our previous
statement, we are aware that some of them have been
repeated for the third time in a span of six years.
What we have already said about the complaint, we
can repeat with regard to the arguments. We did, in
fact, repeat these arguments; let them reverberate
once more in the Israel representatives' ears, in the
hope that one day these arguments will find a way
into their minds. It is relevant to quote from a recent
issue of an American newspaper: " A diplomat living
in Israel said that there' are two viewpoints in Israel,
the Israel point of view and the wrong one." With
such a state of mind prevailing in Israel, we shal
surely have to repeat our arguments time and time
again, trusting to convince some day those who now
are aware only of "the Israel point of view".

93. Quant aux arguments que nous aV(Jus presentes
dans notre declaration precedente, nous savons que
certains d'entre eux ont ete'repetes pour la troisieme
fois en l'espace de six ans. Ce que nous avons deja dit
au sujet de la plainte, nous pouvons le refaire au sujet
des arguments. Nous avons, en fait, repete ces arguments et nous voulons qui'ls resonnent une fois de plus
aux oreilles des representants d'Israel, car nous voulons
esperer qu'un jour ces arguments penetreront dans
leur esprit. A ce propos, il est opportun de citer un
numero recent d'un journal americain : c( Un diplomate
vivant en Israel a dit qu'il existe deux points de vue
dans ce pays : le point de vue israelien et le point de
vue faux.» Si un tel etat d'esprit regne en Israel, nous
aurons surement it. n3peter nos arguments maintes et
maintes fois, dans l'espoir de convaincre un jour ceux
qui, actuellement, ne veulent connaitre que cc le point
de vue israelien ».

94. We must also stress, in answer to the Israel
statement that the Council is dealing for the third
time with the problem of Syrian interference in the
demilitarized zone, that the question with which
the Council has been deaJing and which is now before
it is, in fact, Israel's unilateral and illegal intervention
in the demilitarized zone. Had the Israel authorities
strictly observed the status of that zone, no need would
have arisen to burden the Council with our repeated
complaints.

94. Nous devons egalement souligner, en reponse a
la declaration d'Israel selon laquelle le Conseil s'oocupe pour la troisieme fois du probleme de !'ingerence
syrienne dans la zone demilitarisee, que la question
dont le Conseil s'est occupe precedemment et dont
il est saisi actuellement est, en fait, celle de l'intervention
unHaterale et Hlegale d'Israel dans la zone demilita:
risee. Si les autorites israeliennes avaient respecte
strictement le statut de cette zone, nous n'aurions pas
eu it. importuner le Conseil de nos plaintes reiterees.

95.

95. The Israel statement goes on to say that cc the
essential feature of this latest essay in Syrian obstructionism is that it forms part of a res judicata of re':,G~­
table antiquity in the history of the Security Council,
a case which was determined six years ago, a case
which Syria lost. " [780th meeting, para. 114.] There is,
in fact, a res fudicata in this matter, but it is certainly
not in favour of Israel.

Israel, dans sa declaration, poursuit en disant que

« le trait essentiel de cette derniere tentative d'obstruc-

tion par la Syrie est qu'elle fait partie d'une res judicata
d'une antiquite respectable dans l'histoire du Conseil
de securite, d'une affaire qui a ete reglee il y a six ans
environ, d'une cause que la Syrie a perduell [780 e ..
seance, par. 114]. Il existe bien une res judicata en la
matiere, mais elle n'est certainement pas en faveur
d'Israel.

96. Syria might be considered as having lost the case,
if one considers that the C<Juncil resolution of 18 May
1951 did not expressly forbid the drainage work outside
the demilitarized zone. Syria cannot be considered as
having lost the case when it is realized that the past
Syrian complaint concerning drainage of the Huleh
marshes dealt partly with work in the demilitarized
zone and that the Security Council demanded, in this
connexion, that Israel's work in the demilitarized zone
be stopped, with the proviso that it must meet various
conditions to conform with the Armistice Agreement
before it should be continued.

96.

On pourrait penser que la Syrie a perdu sa cause,

a considerer que la resolution du Conseil de securite en
date du 18 mai 1951 n'a pas interdit formellement
les travaux d'assechement en dehors de la zone demilitarisee. Mais la Syrie ne peut etre consideree comme
perdante si 1'0n admet que, d'une part, la plainte
deposee anterieurement par la Syrie au sujet de l'assechement des marais du lac Houle se rapportait en
partie aux travaux effectues dans le zone demilitarisee
et que, d'autre part, le Conseil de securite a exige, a
ce sujet, que les travaux effectues par Israel dans la
zone Mmilitarisee soient interrompus, avec cette clause
que diverses conditions conformes aux dispositions de
la Convention d'armistice devaient etre remplies
avant que ces travaux puissent etre repris.

97. These facts were evident from the grievances
uttered by the Israel representative Mr. Eban 18 May
1951, during the 547th meeting of the Security Council,
at which the following paragraphs were embodied
in the resolution adopted by the Council:
"Noting that the Chief of Staff of the Truce
Supervision Organization in a memorandum of'
7 March 1951 [S/2049, Sect. IV, para. 3], and the
Chairman of the Syrian-Israel Mixed Armistice
Commission on a number of occasions have requested
the Israel delegation to the Mixed Armistice Commission to insure that the Palestine Land Development Company, Limited, is instructed to cease all
operations in the demilitarized zone until such time
as an agreement is arranged through the Chairman
of the Mixed Armistice Commission for continuing
this project.
" Endorses the requests of the Chief of Staff and
the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission
on this matter and calls upon the Government of
Israel to comply with them ". [S/2157].

97. Ces faits ressortent clairement des griefs exprimes
par le representant d'Israel, M. Eban, a la 547 e seance
du Conseil de securite, tenue le 18 mai 1951, au (:our8
de laquelle le paragraphe suivant a ete insere dans la
resolution adoptee par le Conseil :
« Prenant acte de ce que le Chef d'etat-major de
1'0rganisme charge de la surveillance de la treve,
dans un memorandum en date du 7 mars 1951
[S/2049, chap. IV, par. 3], et le President de la Commission mixte d'armistice, en de nombreuses occasions ont demande a la delegation israelienne a la
Commission mixte d'armistice d'assurer que la
Palestine Land Development Company Limited soit
invitee a cesser toutes operations dans la zone demilitarisee jusqu':\ ce qu'un accord ait pu etre conclu
par l'intermediaire du President de la Commission
mixte d'armistice pour la continuation des travaux... II
« Fait siennes les demandes du Chef d'etat-major
de I'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve
et du President de la Commission mixte d'armistice
en cette matiere et fait appel au Gouvernement
d'Israel afin qu'il y defere» [S'/2157/Rev.1.]

98. Commenting on the resolution, Mr. Eban said:
" ... this morning members of the Arab League expressed
'thorough satisfaction' with this draft resolution.
Presumably they have assessed it accurately as a
complete and uncritical acceptance of the Syrian viewpoint." [5471h meeting, para. 49.]

98.

99. This was not solely the Syrian viewpoint. It was
the only conclusion that could be drawn from the evidence of the case. He added: "But the central point,
of course, is the proposed recommendation to the
~overnment of Israel to cease the drainage operations
l~ the demilitarized zone which have been in progress
smce October 1950. " [ibid., para. 51.]

99. Cela n'etait pas seulement le point de vue de la
Syrie. C'etait la seule conclusion que 1'0n pouvait
tirer des preuves presentees. M. Eban a ajoute : « Cependant, le point essentiel est la recommandation au Gouvernement d'Israel de cesser les operations d'assechement dans la zone demilitarisee, operations qui s'etaient
poursuivies depuis le mois d'octobre 1950.» [Ibid.,
par. 51.]

~OO. He went on to say - and we find here an
mteresting analysis of the resolution:

100. M. Eban a poursuivi interessante de la resolution :

Commentant cette resolution, M. Eban a dit :

« ... ce matin, les membres de la Ligue arabe ont exprime
« la profonde satisfaction » que leu1' procure le projet

de resolution. Il est a supposeI' qu'ils ont vu dans ce
texte l'acceptation complete et sans reserve du point
de vue syrien - ce en quoi ils ont raison. II [547e seance,
par. 49.]

21

et c'est la une analyse

cc But the text before us has clearly a contrary
effect. It takes a wholly negative attitude to the
project. It prevents its operation anywhere or at
any time. In terms of time. it involves an indefinite.
and perhaps even an eternal postponement. In
terms of space. it does not confine its negative provisions even to the seven acres which are the only
source of United Nations interest. It attempts to
hold up the work now and in the future on both
the eastern and the western bank of the river. and
the consequent obstruction would affect a much
wider area than these seven acres. to which also
8,ny enlightened government with authority would
apply. not a suspension of the work. but a compulsory
procedure of compensation or exchange for the
public good and in fidelity to contracts and duly
acquired private rights." [Ibid•• para. 68.]

It Or, le texte dont nous sommes saisis a un effet
nettement contruire. Il reflete une attitude comple..
tement negative a regard des travaux. 11 empeche
leur continuation en tout lieu et a tout moment.
Dans le temps, il comporte un ajournement indeiini
et peut etre perpetuel. Dans l'espace, il ne limite
pas ses dispositions negatives aux trois hectares
qui seuls interessent rOrganisation des Nations
Unies. Il essaie d'arreter les travaux maintenant
et a l'avenir, a la fois sur la rive orientale et la rive
occidentale du fleuve. et robstruction qui en resulte
frappera une zone beaucoup plus etendue que les
trois hectares auxquels, d'ailleurs, un gouvernement
eclaire et doue d'autorite appliquerait, non pas une
suspension des travaux, mais une procedure obligatoire de dedommagement ou d'echange dans
rinteret public, dans le respect des contrats passes
et des droits individuels Iegitimement acquis.»
[Ibid., par. 68.]

101. It appears clear from this that the present
Syrian case, insofar as it relates to a bridge which
forms a part of a drainage scheme being illegally carried
out in the demilitarized zone. cannot be lightly dismissed as lost case.

101. Il ressort nettement de cela que la cause presentee
actuellement par la Syrie, dans la mesure oil elle se
rapporte a un pont qui fait partie d'un plan d'assechement applique dans la zone demilitarisee. ne peut etre
consideree a la Iegere comme une cause perdue.

102. The Israel statement of 23 May goes on to say:
cc They " - that is, the demilitarized zones .. derive
from the Syrian aggression against Israel in 1948"
[780th meeting. para. 115].

102. Le deIegue d'Israel a dit encore, le 23 mai :
Cl La creation de ces zones» il s'agit des zones demilitarisees - Cl resulte de I'agression de la Syrie contre
Israel en 1948» [780 8 seance. par. 115J.

103. We do not wish at this stage to reopen the files
of the Palestine question. It is not the proper time to
do so. We would like, however, to remark that whenever
these files are opened, the facts they contain will
certainly not speak in favour of Israel. It is needless
to go back so far in order to prove the recent Israel
violations. The General Armistice Agreement and
resolution of the Security Council of 18 May 1951
constitute sufficient basis and starting points to realize
such a precise objective.

103. Nous ne voulons pas. actuellement, rouvrir le
dossier de la question de Palestine. Ce n'est pas le
moment de le faire. Nous desirons toutefois faire
remarquer que lorsque ce dossier sera rouvert, les
faits qui y sont exposes ne temoigneront certainement
pas en faveur d'Israel. Il est inutile de remonter aussi
loin pour faire la preuve des violations recentes commises par Israel. La Convention d'armistice general
et la resolution du Conseil de securite du 18 mai 1951
constituent des bases et des points de depart suffisants
pour parvenir a cet objectif precis.

104. We are, however, compelled to state once more
that the demilitarized zone, which is not classified by
the General Armistice Agreement as northern, central
and southern demilitarized zones, forms a unique and
single territory, defined and regulated by the General
Armistice Agreement, the provisions of which are
equally binding upon the two parties to the Agreement.

104. Nous sommes cependant contraints d'affirmer
une fois de plus que la zone demilitarisee - que la
Convention d'armistice general n'a jamais divisee en
zones demilitarisees du nord, du centre et du sud constitue un territoire unique, defini dans la Convention
d'armistice general et regi par cet instrument dont les
dispositions sont egalement obligatoires pour les deux
parties.

105. Speaking of the Syrian withdrawal from the
territory defined in the General Armistice Agreement
as the demilitarized zone, the Israel statement says
that this withdrawal was " unconditional " and " unqualified ". When one has in mind that the provisions
of article V of the General Armistice Agreement,
together with the other provisions of this Agreement,
were precisely the conditions upon which the two
parties agreed at that time, the Israel assertion becomes
a one-sided and baseless interpretation.

105. Parlant du retrait syrien du territoire defini
comme zone demilitarisee dans la Convention d'armistice general le deIegue israelien declare que ce retrait
avait ete fait «sans condition». Si I'on considere que
les dispositions de I'article V de la Convention d'armistice general, ainsi que les autres dispositions de cette
Convention, fixaient precisement les conditions sur
lesquelles les deux parties s'etaient mises d'accord a
l'epoque, on constate que les affirmations d'Israel en
sont une interpretation partiale et sans fondement.

106. We understand that the Israel authorities now
regret having placed the demilitarized zone at that
time under such terms. We understand that the provisions of article V are becoming too uncomfortable
and too confining for the growing ambitions of Israel,

106. Nous comprenons parfaitement que les autorites
israeliennes regrettent aujourd'hui d'avoir accepte a
l'epoque de semblables conditions en ce qui concerne
la zone delilitarisee. Nous comprenons tres bien que
les dispositions de l'article V soient devenues genantes
22

but we do not consider that these reactions should be
taken into account in any sound and legal interpretation
of the General Armistice Agreement.

et trop restrictives pour un pays qui, comme Israel,
nourrit des ambitions croissantes. Mais nous ne pensons
pas que ces reactions doivent etre prises en consideration lorsque 1'0n veut donner une interpretation
juridique correcte de la Convention d'armistice general.

107. The Israel representative continues further in
his surprising and inaccurate interpretation of article V
of the General Armistice Agreement with a contention
that the demilitarized zones are "areas from which
military forces are excluded and nothing more".
We agree that the exclusion of military forces from
the demilitarized zone is one of the provisions which
regulate that zone. We cannot accept the implication
that there is nothing more said about this zone in
article V of the General Armistice Agreement. We
should like to refresh the memory of the Israel representative, who shows, whenever the demilitarized zone
is involved, a very curious tendency to forget. I should
like to quote the relevant paragraphs of article V of
the Armistice Agreement:
"1. It is emphasized that the following arrangements for the armistice demarcation line between
the Israel and Syrian armed forces and for the
demilitarized zone are not to be interpreted as
having any relation whatsoever to ultimate territorial arrangements affecting the two parties to this
Agreement.
"2. In pursuance of the spirit of the Security
Council resolution of 16 November 1948, the armistice demarcation line and the demilitarized zone
have been defined with a view toward sepai"ating
the armed forces of the two parties in such manner
as to minimize the possibility of friction and incident,
while providing for the gradual restoration of normal
civilian life in the area of the demilitarized zone,
without prejudice to the ultimate settlement.

107. Le representant d'lsrael poursuit encore son
interpretation surprenante et inexacte de l'article V
de la Convention d'armistice general en soutenant
que les zones demilitarisees sont « des regions d'ou
sont exclues les forces militaires; elles ne sont rien
de plus». Nous convenons que l'exclusion des forces
militaires de la zone demilitarisee est run des principes
appliques pour reglementer cette zone, mais nous ne
pouvons accepter la these que l'article V de la Convention d'armistice general n'exige rien de plus en ce qui
concerne cette zone. Nous voudrions rafralchir la
memoire du representant d'Israel qui, chaque fois
qu'il est question de la zone demilitarisee, manifeste
une tendance tres curieuse a l'oubli. Je citerai le texte
des paragraphes 1, 2, 5 a et 5, e de l'article V :
« 1. Il est expressement declare que les arrangements ci-apres relatifs a la ligne de demarcation
d'armistice entre les forces armees syriennes et israeliennes et a la zone demilitarisee ne doivent pas
etre interpretes comme ayant un rapport quelconque
avec les arrangements finaux de caractere territorial
interessant les deux parties a la presente Convention.
« 2. Conformement a l'esprit de la resolution du
Conseil de securite du 16 novembre 1948, la ligne de
demarcation d'armistice et la zone demilitarisee
sont definies en vue de separer les forces armees
des deux parties, de maniere a reduire au minimum
les possibilites d'incidents et de froissements, tout
en permettant, sans prejuger en rien le reglement
final, le retablissement graduel de la vie civile normale dans la zone demilitarisee.

"
" 5 (a) Where the armistice demarcation line
does not correspond to the international boundary
between Syria and Palestine, the area between the
armistice demarcation line and the boundary, pending final territorial settlement between the parties,
shall be established as a demilitarized zone from
which the armed forces of both parties shall be
totally excluded, and in which no activities by military forces shall be permitted. This provision applies
to the Ein Gev and Dardara sectors which shall
form part of the demilitarized zone.

"

« •••
cc 5. a)

La ou la ligne de demarcation d'armistice
ne correspond pas a la limite internationale entre
la Syrie et la Palestine, la zone entre la ligne de
demarcation d'armistice et cette limite constitue,
en attendant un reglement territorial final entre
les parties, une zone demilitarisee ou les forces
armees des deux parties sont entierement exclues
et oil aucune activite de forces militaires ou paramilitaires n'est permise. Cette disposition s'applique
aux secteurs d'Ein Guev et de Dardara, lesquels
font partie de la zone demilitarisee.
cc •••

"(e) The Chairman of the Mixed Armistice
Commission shall be empowered to authorize the
return of civilians to villages and settlements in
the demilitarized zone and the employment of
limited numbers of locally recruited civilian police
in the zone for internal security purposes, and shall
be guided in this regard by the schedule of withdrawal referred to in sub-paragraph (d) of this
article."

cc e) Le President de la Commission mixte d'armistice est habilite a autoriser le retour des civils aux
villages et settlements de la zone demilitarisee, ainsi
que l'emploi dans cette zone d'une police civile
aux effectifs limites et recrutee localement pour la
securite interieure. Le plan de retrait vise a l'alinea d
du present article servira a cet egard de guide au
President de la Commission.»

108. From Mr. Bunche's statement which is included
in the record of the 542nd meeting of the Security
Council, I quote the following:
': It was recognized also that the gradual restoratIOn of normal civilian life in the demilitarized

108. Je citerai maintenant les passages suivants de
la declaration de M. Bunche, qui est incorporee dans
le compte rendu de la 542e seance du Conseil de securite :
cc Il etait reconnu aussi que le retour graduel a
la vie civile normale dans la zone demilitarisee ne

zone could neither be automatic nor left to the '
discretion of the conflicting parties...
" In the nature of the case, therefore, under the
provisions of the Armistice Agreement, neither
party could validly claim to have a free hand in
the demilitarized zone over civilian activity, while
military activity was totally excluded (article V,
sub-paragraphs 5 (a) and 5 (b).
" In all of the discussions and negotiations on this
Agreement, in all communications concerning it,
including my letters as Acting Mediator of 24 May
to the Foreign Ministers of Israel and Syria, and the
notes and letters delivered to the two governments
in my name on 26 June in response to questions
raised on 21 June, it was always kept uppermost in
mind that it was an armistice agreement and not
a peace treaty or other final settlement that was
being negotiated. The question of territorial sovereignty, therefore, was scrupulously avoided.

" In paragraph 2 of my cable from New York
of 25 June 1949 to Mr. Vigier in Damascus, which
was transmitted by him. to the Foreign Offices in
Damascus and Tel Aviv on 26 June, I stated:
" 'The provision for the demilitarized zone in the
light of all circumstances is the most that can be
reasonably expected in an armistice agreement by
either party. Questions of permanent boundaries,
territorial sovereignty, customs, trade relations and
the like must be dealt with in the ultimate peace
settlement and not' - I repeat not - 'in the armistice agreement' "
" The provision of the Armistice Agreement and
my communications to the governments in connexion therewith, do not establish, affirm, confirm
or deny the right, claims or position of either party
with regard to t>~ question of territorial sovereignty
either in the demilitarized zone or elsewhere. The
Armistice Agreement was entered into without
prejudice to any and all such rights, claims or positions (article 11, paragraph 2 ; article V, paragraph 1)
in the ultimate settlement." [542nd meeting, para. 97.]

pouvait ni se faire automatiquement ni etre laisse

a la discretion des deux parties au differend...

« Par consequent, de par le caractere meme de
cette affaire et conformem,ent aux dispositions de
la Convention d'armistice, ni l'une ni l'autre des
parties ne pouvait pretendre etre libre d'agir dans
la zone demilitarisee en ce qui concerne la vie civile;
d'autre part, tonte activite militaire etait absolument
interdite dans cette zone (art. V, alineas 5, a
et 5, b).
« Dans toutes les discussions et dans toutes les
negociations dont cette convention a fait l'objet,
dans toutes les communications faites a ce sujet
et notamment dans les lettres qu'en ma qualite de
Mediateur par interim, j'ai adressees le 24 mai aux
Ministres des affaires etrangeres d'lsrael et de la
Syrie, et dans les notes et lettres remises a ces deux
gouvernements en mon nom le 26 juin pour repondre
aux questions posees le 21 juin, on a toujours accorde
la plus grande importance an fait qu'il s'agissait
de negocier une convention d'armistice et non pas
un traite de paix ou un autre instrument de reglement
definitif. Par consequent, la question de la souverainete territoriale a ete soigneusement eludee.
« Dans le paragraphe 2 du teIegramme que j'ai
adresse de New-York le 25 juin 1949 a M. Vigier,
a Damas, teIegramme que celui-ci a transmis aux
Ministeres des affaires etrangeres de Damas et de
Tel-Aviv le 26 juin, je declarais :
« Compte tenu de toutes les circonstances, la
creation d'une zone demilitarisee est le maximum
que l'on puisse s'attendre a voir accepter par l'une
ou l'autre partie dans une convention d'armistice.
Les questions des frontieres permanentes, de souverainete territoriale, de douanes, de relations commerciales, etc., doivent etre traitees lors du reglement
pacifique definitif et non - je repete : non - dans
la convention d'armistice.»
« Les dispositions de la Convention d'armistice et
les communications que j'ai adressees aux gouvernements a leur sujet n'etablissent, n'affirment, ne
confirment on ne denient aucun des droits, pretentions ou positions de l'une ou de l'autre partie en ce
qui concerne la question de la souverainete nationale
soit dans la zone demilitarisee, soit dans toute autre
region. La Convention d'armistice a ete coneIue
sans prejuger aucun des droits, pretentions et positions de cette nature lors du reglement final (art.
11, par, 2, art. V. par. 1).» [542e seance, par. 97].

109. It must also be pointed out that the other provisions of the General Armistice Agreement, and especially those which contain the fundamental principles,
apply equally to the demilitarized zone. If the Israel
representative continues, after being reminded of these
additional provisions, to hold the view that there is
nothing more in the demilitarized zone, then we will
certain ly consider him an unfortunately hopeless case
and give up any attempt to convince him.

109. Il faut noter aussi que les autres dispositions
de la Convention d'armistice general, et plus particulierement celles qui posent les principes fondamentaux, s'appliquent egalement a la zone demilitarisee. Si, apres s'etre entendu rappeler ces dispositions suppIementaires, le representant d'lsrael continue d'affirmer qu'il n'y a rien de plus dans la zone
demilitarisee, il nous faudra alors malheureusement
considerer son cas comme desespere et nous devons
abandonner l'espoir de le conv:;lincre.

110. The Israel representative further says that

110. Le representant d'lsrael a encore dit qu' « en
acceptant la demilitarisation, Israel n'a concede a la
Syrie aucun droit sur ces zones... » [780 e seance, par.
117]. Il serait facile de retourner cette phrase et de

.c, by agreeing to demilitarization Israel did not concede

to Syria any rights whatsoever..." [7801h meeting,
para. 117]. This assertion could easily be reversed.

We could say: cc by agreeing to demilitarization Syria
did not concede to Israel any rights whatsoever.))

dire qu'en acceptant la demilitarisation, la Syrie n'a
concede aucun droit a Israel.

111. The Israel representative continued with the
statement: "Whatever the reasons for demilitarization, the Armistice Agreement and the jurisprudence
of the Security Council uphold the Israel position in
every particular)' [ibid]. We should have liked to
have, instead of this vague and general declaration,
detailed evidence with complete source references to
support his statement concerning the Israel· position
in the demilitarized zone. We cannot, if we base ourselves on the General Armistice Agreement and on the
jurisprudence of the Security Council, but consider
that such a statement constitutes no more than wishful
thinldng, based solely upon Israel jurisprudence.

111. Le representant d'IsraeI a fait, en outre, la declaration suivante : « Quelles que soient les raisons qui
ont motive la demilitarisation de ces zones, la Convention d'armistice general et la jurisprudence du Conseil
de securite ont consacre le bien-fonde de la position
d'IsraeI dans tous ses details II [ibid]. Au lieu de cette
declaration de caractere vague et general du representant d'Israel, nous aurions aime qu'il nous donmlt
des preuves detaillees, assorties de references completes,
pour etayer la these concernant la position d'Israel
dans la zone demilitarisee. A examiner la Convention
d'armistice general et la jurisprudence du Conseil de
securite, la seule conclusion possible est que, en faisant
sa declaration - fondee uniquement sur la jurisprudence
israelienne - le representant d'lsrael a pris ses desirs
pour des realites.

112. The representative of Israel further stated:
" In 1951 the Syrian representative at the Security
Council had the temerity to declare that it was the
purpose of his Government to annex these three Israel
areas" [ibid., para. 118]. We note that, at the 545 th
meeting of the Council on 8 May 1951, the Syrian
representative at that time, Mr. Faris EI-Khouri, declared: "Under the present circumstances, I solemnly
declare that my Government does not entertain any
intention of occupying the demilitarized zone in all
or in part." [545th meeting, para. 83.]

112. Le representant d'lsrael a declare encore: « En
1951, le representant de la Syrie au Conseil de securite
eut l'audace de declarer que le but de son Gouvernement etait d'annexer ces trois regions israeliennes ))
[ibid., par. 118]. Nous relevons que le representant
de la Syrie, qui etait a l'epoque M. Faris EI-Khoury,
a declare au Conseil, le 8 mai 1951 : « Dans les circonstances presentes, je tiens a declarer solennellement
que mon Gouvernement n'a nullement !'intention
d'occuper la zone demilitarisee en totalite ou en partie 11
[545e seance, par. 83].

113. The characterization given by the Israel repre- . 113. La definition que le representant d'Israel a
sentative to the demilitarized zone when he spoke of donnee de la zone demilitarisee, lorsqu'il a parle de
three Israel areas, taken with the events of past and trois regions israeliennes, et les evenements qui sont
recent years, clearly demonstrates which of the two survenus au cours des recentes annees, permettent
parties to the General Armistice Agreement is enter- de designer nettement celle des deux parties a la
taining the idea of such an annexation.
Convention d'armistice general qui nourrit de telles
idees d'annexion.
114. The Israel representative links his absurd assertion to the incident known as the incident of Tel El Mutilla, which occurred on 2 and 3 May 1951. This incident, as is readily apparent from the records of the
545th meeting of the Security Council of 8 May 1951
[para. 87] and the report of the United Nations observers, was provoked by the confiscation by an Israel
army patrol, at 0630 hours on 2 May, of large flocks
of cattle, sheep and goats belonging to the Arab civilians living in the demilitarized zone. This incident,
referred to by Israel during previous meetings of the
Security Council, is scarcely relevant to the intentions
attributed to Syria.

114. Le representant d'Israel rattache cette absurde
affirmation a l'incident, connu sous le nom d'incident
de Tel EI-Mutilla, qui se produisit les 2 et 3 mai 1951.
Il ressort du compte rendu de la 545e seance du Conseil
de securite, tenue le 8 mai 1951 [par. 87], ainsi que
du rapport des observateurs des Nations Unies, que
cet incident fut provoque par le fait qu'une patrouille
de l'armee israelienne confisqua, le 2 mai, a 6 h. 30 du
matin, un grand nombre de tetes de betail - moutons
et chevres -, qui appartenaient a des civils arabes
vivant dans la zone demilitarisee. Cet incident, auquel
Israel a fait allusion a des seances precedentes du Conseil
de securite, n'a rien a voir avec les intentions que l'on
prete a la Syrie.

115. The Israel representative went on :
"If the Armistice Agreement had in any way
forbidden legitimate civilian activity in the demilitarized zones, or had conferred on Syria the slightest
authority to interfere with such activity, Israel
would never have signed it." [780thmeeting, para. 119.]

115. Le representant d'lsrael a poursuivi en ces termes:
« Si la Convention d'armistice avait d'une maniere
quelconque interdit toute activite civile legitime
dans les zones demilitarisees, ou si eUe avait confere
a la Syrie la moindre autorite pour s'ingerer dans
cette activite, Israel n'aurait jamais signe cet instrument.)) [780 e seance, par. 119.]

116. It must be remarked that Syria has never contended that the Armistice Agreement forbade legitimate civilian activity in the demilitarized zone. We
maintain, however, that the restoration of civilian
activity in the demilitarized zone is subject to certain

116. Relevons que la Syrie n'a jamais pretendu que
la Convention d'armistice interdisait une activite
civile legitime dans la zone demilitarisee. Nous affirmons, par contre, que le retablissement de l'activite
civile dans la zone demilitarisee doit dependre de

conditions, set forth in the General Armistice Agreement
and in Mr. Bunche's authoritative comment on article V,
conditions that we specifically noted in our previous
statement.

certaines conditions qui sont precisees dans la Convention d'armistice general et dans le commentaire autorise
fait par M. Bunche au sujet de l'article V ; nous avons
precise ces conditions dans notre precedente~declaration.

117. We consider that Syria, being the other party
to the General Armistice Agreement and the other
member of the Mixed Armistice Commission, has the
right to have its say in all matters covered by the
General Armistice Agreement, implementation of which
is under the supervision and control of the two parties
directly interested, that is, Syria and Israel.

117. Nous estimons que la Syrie, en sa qualite de
signataire de la Convention d'armistice general et de
membre de la Commission mixte d'armistice, a le droit
de dire son mot dans toutes les questions visees par la
Convention d'armistice general, dont la mise en application est soumise au contr61e et a la surveillance des
deux parties directement interessees, a savoir la Syrie
et Israel.

118. We must add that we do not consider the Israel
statement that, given certain conditions, Israel would
never have signed the General Armistice Agreement as
a constructive contribution to this debate, for what
we are considering in actual fact is a document which
has been duly signed by the two parties and the provisions of which are equally binding upon the signatories.

118. 11 nous faut ajouter que nous ne considerons pas
comme une contribution constructive au present
debat la declaration selon laquelle Israel n'aurait
jamais signe la Convention d'armistice general dans
certaines conditions. En effet, notre discussion se fonde
essentiellement sur un document qui a ete dument
signe par les deux parties et dont les dispositions engagent par consequent les signataires de maniere identique.

119. The Israel statement goes on:
" The policy of the Syrian Government was clearly
stated by its Foreign Ministry spokesman only two
weeks ago: 'Syria will never allow any change in
the situation that might result in any benefit for Israel
in the demilitarized zones.' " [Ibid., para. 120.]

119. Voici ce qu'a dit encore le representant d'Israel:
(C 11 Y a seulement deux semaines, le porte-parple
du Ministere des affaires etrangeres du Gouvernement
syrien a clairement defini la politique de son gouvernement en declarant que la Syrie n'acceptera jamais
qu'un changement quelconque susceptible de beneficier a Israel dans les zones demilitarisees soit apporte
a cette situation.» [Ibid., par. 120.]

120. We are obliged to draw the Council's attention
to the fact that the statement of the Syrian Foreign
Ministry spokesman, made in Arabic, has been intentionally mistranslated, for obvious reasons. The Syrian
statement did not use the word "benefit" but" advantage " and was made in accordance with the principle
laid down in article lI, paragraph I, of the General
Armistice Agreement, which stipulates that: "The
principle that no military or political advantage should
be gained under the truce ordered by the Security
Council is recognized."

120. Nous sommes obliges d'attirer l'attention du
Conseil sur le fait que la declaration du porte-parole
du Ministere syrien des affaires etrangeres, faite en
arabe, a ete intentionnellement traduite d'une maniere
erronee, et ce pour des raisons evidentes. Ce n'est pas
le mot «beneficier», mais les mots «procurer un avantage)) qui sont utilises dans la declaration' syrienne,
laquelle est conforme au principe pose au paragraphe
premier de l'article 2, de la Convention d'armistice
general, ainsi conl;u : «Le principe qu'aucun avantage
militaire ou politique ne devrait etre acquis durant la
treve ordonnee par le Conseil de securite est reconnu».

121. As to the Israel assertion that "the fact that
the people of Syria would also have derived benefits from
these schemes is evidently of no concern to the Government of that country" [ibid.], it is sufficient for us
to declare that the Syrian people will assuredly not
benefit from economic schemes the price of which will
be their subjugation to Israel rule and domination.
We observe here that the paternalistic interest shown
by the Israel authorities for the welfare of the Syrian
people is highly suspect and grotesque.

121. Quant a l'affirmation d'Israel selon laquelle
les « avantages que le projet aurait pu apporter egalement au peuple syrien, le Gouvernement syrien ne s'en
soucie evidemment pas » [i bid.], nous nous contenterons de declarer que le peuple syrien ne tirera assurement aucun avantage de programmes economiques
dont le prix serait la subordination au gouvernement
et a la domination d'Israel. A ce propos, nous estimons
que l'interet paternaliste que les autorites israeliennes
temoignent au bien-etre de la population syrienne est
extremement suspect et parfaitement grotesque.

122. The Israel statement goes on to say that every
one of the Syrian arguments was in turn rejected by
the Chief of Staff and by the Security Council and
proceeds to quote declarations made before the Council
in the past as evidence for their contention. The declarations, cited out of their context, however, do not
at all show a rejection of Syrian arguments.

122. Dans sa declaration, le representant d'Israel
affirme ensuite que tous les arguments de la Syrie ont
ete rejetes run apres l'autre par le Chef d'etat-major
et par le Conseil de securite. Cependant, les d~clarations
faites devant le Conseil dans le passe - que le representant d'Israel, pour etayer sa these. a citees hors de
leur contexte - ne montrent aucunement que les arguments syricns aient ete rcjetes.
123. L'affirmation selon laquelle le general Riley et
le Conscil de securite ont « repousse categoriqucment
l'argument selon lequel les travaux de developpement

123. The contention that General Riley and the
Sccurity Council" explicitly rejected the argument that
development work in the demilitarized zone dependcd

de la region demilitarisee dependaient d'une maniere
quelconque du consentement de la Syrie» [780 e seance,
par. 126] est entierement dementie par les faits, comme
le demontre le passage suivant d'une intervention du
general Riley tire du compte rendu de la 541 e seance
du Conseil de securite :
c( Le Chef d'etat-major estime que, aussi longtemps
que les Gouvernements syrien et israelien ne se seront
pas mis d'accord au sujet des travaux qui se poursuivent actuellement dans la zone demilitarisee en
vue de I'assechement des marais du lac Houle,
ni la Palestine Land Development Company ni aucune
des organisations qui pourraient lui succerler ne
sont fondees a poursuivre les travaux de ce genre.»
[541 e seance, par. 24.]
Le general Riley parlait d'un accord mutuel entre la
Syrie et Israel, et il est evident qu'un accord de cette
nature ne peut pas avoir ete obtenu sans le consentement de la Syrie.

in any way upon the consent of Syria" [780th meeting,
para. 126.] is completely at variance with the facts,
as evidenced by the following quotation of General
Riley from the record of the 541sh meeting of the
Security Council :
" Until such time as a mutual agreement is reached
between the Governments of Syria and Israel, with
respect to the work now being conducted in the
demilitarized zone in connexion with the drainage of
the Lake Huleh marshes, the Palestine Land Development Company or any successors are, in the opinion
of the Chief of Staff, not justified in continuing such
work." [541st meeting, para. 24.]
General Riley spoke of a mutual agreement between
Syria and Israel and it is obvious that such an agreement cannot have been reached without Syria's consent.
124. Israel accuses us of inaccuracies, misstatements,
omissions and misinterpretations. We accuse Israel
of the same thing. Yet both of us are basing our statements and interpretations on the same body of documents. Therefore, there must surely be some way to
determine which statements and interpretations are
correct and which are not. It is our sincere hope that
the members of the Security Council will see fit to
consider this matter, to analyse the relevant documents
and clarify the principles which are at issue.

124. Israel nous impute des inexactitudes, des declarations fausses, des omissions et des interpretations
inexactes. Nous portons la meme accusation contre
Israel. Or nous fondons les uns et les autres nos declarations et nos interpretations sur le meme ensemble
de documents. Des lors, il doit exister un moyen de
determiner quelles sont les declarations et interpretations qui sont exactes et quelles sont celles qui ne le
sont pas. Nous esperons sincerement que les membres
du Conseil de securite jugeront bon d'examiner cette
question, d'analyser les documents pertinents et de
. tirer au clair les principes en jeu.

125. To us the wording of the General Armistice Agreement, the statement of Mr. Bunche and the resolution
of 18 May 1951 seem clear enough. We do not see how
misinterpretation is possible. Yet we are accused of
that. Therefore, we al'lk - indeed we plead - for
action from the Security Council that will make further
quibbling over the interpretation of these documents
unnecessary,

125. Pour nous, les termes de la Convention d'armistice general, le commentaire de M. Bunche et la resolution du 18 mai 1951 sont suffisamment clairs. Nous ne
voyons pas comment on pourrait se meprendre sur
leur sens. Et pourtant, on nous accuse d'en donner une
interpretation erronee. C'est pourquoi nous demandons
au Conseil de securite - bien plus, nous l'en supplions -:- de prendre une decision qui rende inutile
toute nouvelle discussion touchant I'interpretation
de ces documents.

126. We have already given many examples of
Israel's misquotations and distortions. We should
like to draw the attention of the Council to some other
passages contained in the Israel statement.

126. Nous avons deja donne maints exemples de citations erronees et des textes deformes presentes par
Israel. Nous voudrions maintenant appeler I'attention
du Conseil sur quelques autres passages de cette meme
declaration du representant d'Israel.

127. The Israel representative first quoted a statement made by General Riley at the 544th meeting of
the Security Council:
"I feel that the United Nations should never
impede progressive work. However I am involved
here with the Armistice Agreement in which the
Uuited Nations is charged with the normal restoration of civilian life. I have never found fault with
the concession and I never will. However, without
deepening and widening the Jordan River within
the demilitarized zone, I understand that the project
cannot be carried out. I have asked and I have been
informed that Israel has also investigated in order
to find some other way of draining Lake Huleh
a?d the marshes without going into the demilitarIzed zone. Therefore I have no quarrel with the
project itself. I feel that is not a matter which affects

127. Voici quelle est la premiere citation que fait
le representant d'Israel; elle relate une declaration
du general Riley a la 544e seance du Conseil de securite :
c( A mon avis I'Organisation des Nations Unies
ne devrait jamais gener les travaux qui constituent
un progres. Cependant, en l'occurrence, je dois
m'occuper de la Convention d'armistice en vertu
de laquelle I'Organisation des Nations Unies doit
assurer le retablissement de la vie civile normale.
Je n'ai jamais trouve a redire a la concession, et je
ne changerai jamais d'avis. Cependant, si je comprends
bien, le plan ne peut etre execute si le Jourdain
n'est pas elargi et approfondi a l'interieur de la zone
demilitarisee. J'ai pose des questions et j'ai appris
qu'Israel avaft egalement cherche s'il n'existait pas
d'autres moyens qui anraient permis d'assecher le
lac HouIe et les marais avoisinants sans penetrer
27

"~~<

either Syria or the United Nations." [780th meeting,
para. 126.]

dans la zone demilitarisee. Je ne m'oppose donc pas
au projet en tant que tel. A mon avis, c'est la un
suje.t qui ne concerne ni la Syrie, ni 1'0rganisation
des Nations Unies.» [780 e seance, par. 126.]

128. This quotation is not distorted, and is it signilicant to note that the meeting, the date and the
paragraph of the official record where the quotation is
found are given this time as reference. We wonder if
the Israel representative may not have felt embarrassed
to cite such a quotation, for it does not specify approval of the drainage work conducted in the demilitarized
zone. The Chief of Staff asked the Israelis if the work
could be done without going into the demilitarized
zone, which obviously implied that he did not wish
to see them going into the zone.

128. Cette citation ne contient aucune deformation,
et il est interessant de noter qu'elle est, cette fois-ci,
suivie de la reference indiquant le numero de la seance,
ainsi que la date et le paragraphe du compte rendu
officiel contenant le texte cite: Nous nous demandons si le representant d'lsrael n'a pas eprouve un
certain embarras a citer pareil texte, car il ne contient
aucune approbation speciale des travaux d'assechement
effectues dans la zone demilitarisee. Le Chef d'etatmajor a demande aux Israeliens si les travaux pouvaient etre effectues sans penetrer dans la zone demilitarisee : cela implique evidemment qu'il ne souhaitait
pas que ces travaux empietent sur la zone.

129. The second quotation made by the Israel representative, also from General Riley's statement, omits
a sizable and significant portion of the General's statement. It reads, in the Israel statement, as follows:

129. La deuxieme citation faite par le representant
d'lsrael, empruntee elle aussi a la declaration du general
Riley, omet une partie assez longue et assez importante
de cette declaration. Dans !'intervention du representant d'lsrael, elle est rapportee comme suit:
« Voici le nreud de la question : La Syrie a-t-elle
son mot a dire sur ce que les Israeliens font dans le
territoire place sous le contr61e d'lsrael ? Les marais
et le lac Houle font partie du territoire place sous
le contrllle d'lsrael.•. Par consequent, si les Israeliens
desirent poursuivre l'assechement des marais du lac
Houle et s'ils peuvent le faire sans violer les dispositions de la Convention d'armistice ou sans empecher
le retablissement de la vie civile normale dans cette
zone, mon opinion est que la Syrie n'a aucune decision
a imposer a Israel dans cette affaire.» [Ibid.]
Or, le texte integral des paroles du general Riley est
le suivant :
« Voici le nreud de la question : La Syrie a-t-elle
son mot a dire sur ce que les Israeliens font dans le
territoire place sous le controle d'lsrael ? Les marais
et le lac Houle font partie du territoire place sous
le controle d'lsrael. Si l'on y procede a des travaux
d'assechement, il reste a regler la question de la
limitation des forces armees qui peuvent rester
dans cette region, car « -et je souligne ces mots -»
celle-ci comprend une zone defensive qui s'etend it
cinq ou six kilometres en arriere de la ligne de demarcation. Par consequent, si les Israeliens entendent
poursuivre l'assechement des marais du lac Houle
et s'ils peuvent le faire sans violer les dispositions
de la Convention d'armistice ou sans empecher le
retablissement de la vie civile normale dans cette
zone, mon opinion est que la Syrie n'a aucune decision
a imposer a Israel dans cette affaire.» [544e seance,
par. 190.]
On constate, en comparant ces deux textes, que la
delegation israelienne, de propos delibere, a omis d'inclure dans sa citation la reference a la zone defensive
qui figure dans le texte original, et ce pour tenter de
faire croire a l'auditeur que le terme « zone» qui figure
dans le texte cite dans la declaration israelienne se
rapporte a la zone demilitarisee, alors qu'en fait le
general Riley pt.dait de la zone defensive.

" The key to this problem is whether or not Syria
-can dictate what the Israelis do in Israel-controlled
territory. The swamps and Lake Huleh come within
Israel-controlled territory... So if the Israelis desire
to proced with the drainage of Lake Huleh and the
swamps, and can do it without violating the Armistice-Agreement or interfering with the normal
restoration of like within that zone, then I do not
consider that it is a matter in which Syria can dictate
to Israel." [Ibid.]
The complete text of this statement is as follows:
"The key to this problem is whether or not
Syria can dictate what the Israelis do in Israelcontrolled territory. The swamps and Lake Huleh
come within Israel-controlled territory. If they are
drained, then there is still the limitation of the
number of defensive forces that can be in that area,
- and I underline these words - because we have a
defensive zone in that area that stretches back
five or six kilometres from the demarcation line."
" So if the Israelis desire to proceed with the drainage of Lake Huleh and the swamps, and can do it
without violating the Armistice Agreement or interfering with the normal restoration of life within
that zone, then I do not consider that it is a matter
in which Syria can dictate to Israel ". [544th meeting,
para. 190].
It becomes apparent, from a comparison of these two
texts, that the Israel delegation deliberately omitted
in their quotation the reference to the defensive zone
which appeared in the original statement in order to
make the listener believe that the word "zone"
contained in the text quoted in the Israel statement
referred to the demilitarized zone instead of to the
defensive zone of which General Riley was in fact
speaking.

28

I

130. The third quotation in the Israel statement is the

Netherlands representative's declaration at the 547th
meeting that " neither of the parties possesses in practice a veto power over the other" [780th meeting,
para. 126]. The complete and undistorted version,
reads as follows:
" I merely wish to express my appreciation for
the clarifications with regard to the questions I
raised this afternoon which have been given me by
the representatives of the United Kingdom, France
and the United States. They have confirmed my
impression that all means for a peaceful settlement
are indeed not exhausted and that, so far as the
question of drainage is concerned, there might
be a succession of settlements by negotiations between
the parties, which finally could end up in either of
the parties placing the matter before the Security
Council. This, in effect, would mean that neither
of the parties possesses in practice a veto power over
the other in this respect, which I believe is a very
sound position. " [547th meeting, para. 152.]
This statement refers, obviously, not only, to the Syrian
veto power; it refers also to negotiations between the
parties to the General Armistice Agreement.

130. La troisieme citation contenue dans l'intervention du representant d'lsrael est empruntee a la declaration faite par le representant des Pays-Bas au cours
de la 547 e seance du Conseil. Israellui fait dire qu' « aucune des parties n'a, en pratique, le droit de veto sur
l'autre» [780 e seance, par. 126]. La version complete
et correcte de cette declaration se lit comme suit :
« Je voudrais simplement remercier les representants du Royaume-Uni, de la France et des EtatsUnis des eclaircissements qu'ils ont donnes au sujet
des questions posees cet apres-midi. lIs m'ont confirme dans mon impression que tous les moyens de
reglement pacifique ne sont nullement epuises et
qu'en ce qui concerne la question de l'assechement.
une serie de reglements pouITont intervenir par voie
de negociations entre les parties, a la suite de quoi
l'une ou l'autre des parties pouITait porter la question
devant le Conseil de securite. Cela revient a dire
qu'aucune des deux parties ne peut exercer a cet
egard le droit de veto a l'encontre de l'autre partie ;
cette situation me parait tres satisfaisante.» [5478
seance, par. 152].
Manifestement, cette declaration ne parle pas seulement d'un droit de veto de la Syrie, elle mentionne
egalement des negociations entre les parties a la Convention d'armistice general.

131. The fourth quotation is taken from Mr. Lodge's

131. La quatrieme citation faite par le representant

declaration at the 648th meeting, which, in the Israel
statement, says merely that " ... no Government
should, in our opinion, exercise a veto power over
legitimate projects in the demilitarized zone." [780th
meeting, para. 127.] We have already shown, during our
intervention on 23 May, how this statementwas distorted
in the Israel background note. It is disquieting and
disheartening to see Mr. Lodge's declaration distorted for
the second time. This declaration, as registered in the
official records of the Security Council reads as follows:
" Any unilateral action, from whatever side, which is not
consistent with the authority of the Chief of Staff
threatens the effective operation and enforcement
of the Armistice Agreement." [648th meeting, para 4.]
The President, in his capacity as representative of
the United States, has repeated that very same statement today. The part of the statement quoted by
the representative of Israel comes immediately after
the sentence I have just read.

d'lsrael est empruntee a la declaration de M. Lodge,
lors de la 648 e seance. Le texte tel que le relate le representant d'lsrael lui fait dire simplemeIit : « Nous estimons qu'aucun gouvernement ne devrait s'opposer a
des projets legitimes dans la zone demilitarisee en exer~ant un droit de veto» [780 e seance, par. 127]. Nous
avons deja montre dans notre intervention du 23 mai
a quel point cette declaration avait ete deformee
dans la note documentaire publiee par les services
israeliens. Il est vraiment troublant et decourageant
de voir cette declaration deformee une deuxieme fois.
Telle qu'elle figure dans les comptes rendus officiels
du Conseil de securite, la declaration de M. Lodge
se lit comme suit: « Toute action unilaterale, de quelque
ce.te qu'elle soit prise, qui ne respecte pas cette autorite
du Chef d'etat-major, menace la mise en vigueur et le
respect effectif de la Convention d'armistilce.») [6488
seance, par. 4]. En sa qualite de representant des EtatsUnis, le President a repete aujourd'hui la meme declaration. Quant it la partie de la declaration que le representant d'lsrael a citee, c'est celle qui fait immedh<;ement suite a la phrase que je viens de lire.

132. I would like now to deal with the question of

132. J'aimerais parler, a present, de la question de
l'avantage militaire, telle qu'elle est presentee dans la
declaration du representant d'lsrael. Selon cette declaration, les arguments tires de l'avantage militaire
n'ont pas plus ete retenus par le Conseil de securite en
1953 qu'en 1951.

military advantage, as it is presented in the Israel
statement. It is said in that statement that the military
advantage arguments also received short shrift at the
hands of the Security Council, both in 1951 and 1953.
133. As far as the discussions of 1951 are concerned,
the Israel views are based on statements, partly cited,
of General Riley. The first statement is as follows:

" Although I have already covered that question
of the military advantages pro and con in my memorandum to the Mixed Armistice Commission in reply
a specific question that had been put me by the

133. Au sujet des discussions de 1951, les vues israeliennes sont fondees sur les declarations, citees en partie,
du general Riley. La premiere de ces declarations est la
suivante:
« J'ai deja traite les deux cotes de la question des
avantages militaires dans le memorandum que j'ai
adresse a la Commission mixte d'armistice pour
repondre a une question precise qui m'avait ete

parties themselves [8/2049, Sect. IV, para. 3], I
would prefer staying away from the question of
military advantages either for Syria or for Israel,
for the simple reason that it is contrary to the Armistice Agreement. I base myself on a civilian project,
and a civilian project only, on land that is in Israelcontrolled territory and on land not in the demilitarized zone. Whether Israel drains or does not drain
that land and lake is a decision that can be made
only by Israel, without asking permission of Syria."
[514th meeting, para. 167.]

The second statement reads:
cc It can be argued that in the draining of the
Lake Huleh marshes, any military advantage which
will accrue to one party shall be equally enjoyed
by the other party. It should be pointed out that
the terrain along the demarcation line and east
of the international border between Syria and Palestine in the vicinity of the H uleh marshes is in itself
a . natural obstacle to the movement of military
forces. These topographical features and extremely
high ground present a dominating military terrain
feature from which the Syrians can control the
ground which is now marsh-land. The argument of
Sytia that in drawing up the Armistice Agreement a
demilitarized zone was created where no natural
obstacles existed is not valid.••
cc
cc Article

V, sub-paragraph 5 (a) states in part:

" 'Where the armistice demarcation line does not
correspond to the international boundary between
Syria and Palestine, the area between the armistice
demarcation line and the boundary, pending final
territorial settlement between the parties, shall
be established as a demilitarized zone.'
" From these articles, it is conclusive that a demilitarized zone was created where the truce lines did
not correspond to the international border between
Syria and Palestine, and not in locations where no
natural obstacles prevented the movement of armed
forces.
" It is concluded that:
"(i) In draining Lake Huleh, the Israelis will not
enjoy any military advantages not equally applicable
to the Syrians;
" (ii) The demilitarized zone was not created
where natural obstacles to the movment of armed
forces were non-existent." [8/2049, sect. IV, para. 3
(a).]
134. It will be noted from this quotation that our
argument on the nature of the demilitarized zone was
ruled invalid. While we cannot say that the ruling of
the Chief of Staff was not a disappointment to us, we
have, nevertheless, accepted it, without trying to
force our interpretation by omitting contrary rulings
from quotations and pretending that they have never
been made.
30

posee par les parties elles-memes [8/2049, lVe part~::'c'"
par. 3]. Je voudrais cependant m'abstenir de parler
de la question des avantages militaires, tant pour la
Syrie que pour Israel, pour une raison fort simple,
a savoir que cela serait contraire a la Convention
d'armistice. Je pars du point de vue suivant : il
s'agit d'un projet civil - purement civil; il s'agit
de travaux qui se deroulent en territoire sous contrOle
israelien et sur des terrains qui ne se trouvent pas
dans la zone demilitarisee. La question de savoir si
Israel va assecher ces terres et ce lac represente une
decision que seul Israel peut prendre, sans avoir
a demander l'autorisation de la Syrie.» [544e seance, I
par. 167.]
Quant a la deuxieme declaration du general Riley,
elle est ainsi conc;ue :
« On peut faire valoir que tout avantage militaire
que rune des parties tirerait de l'assechement des
marais du lac HouIe profiterait egalement a l'autre
partie. 11 y a lieu de signaler que le terrain que
traverse la ligne de demarcation et a rest de la
frontiere internationale entre la Syrie et la Palestine, pres des marais du lac HouIe, constitue en
lui-meme un obstacle naturel au mouvement de
forces armees. Ces caracteristiques topographiques,
et le fait que le terrain est extremement eleve,
fournissent aux Syriens, du point de vue militaire,
des positions dominantes d'oil ils peuvent contrOler
la zone actuellement marecageuse. L'argument de
la Syrie, selon lequel la Convention d'armistice a
cree une zone demilitarisee sans obstacle naturel 1
n'est pas valable.
•

I

L:~rticle

V, paragraphe 5, a, contient, entre
:
autres dispositions, ·le passage suivant :
It La oil la ligne de demarcation d'armistice ne
correspond pas a la limite internationale entre la
Syrie et la Palestine, la zone entre la ligne de demarcation d'armistice et cette limite constitue, en attendant un reglement territorial final entre les parties,
une zone demilitarisee... »
« Ces articles montrent de fac;on concluante que
la zone demilitarisee a ete creee la oil les signes de
treve ne correspondaient pas a la frontiere internationale entre la Syrie et la Palestine, et non pas
dans les secteurs oil aucun obstacle naturel ne s'opposait au mouvement de forces armees. Les conclusions du Chef d'etat-major sont les suivantes :
«i) Les Israeliens ne retireront de l'assechement
du lac Houle aucun avantage militaire qui ne profiterait pas egalement aux Syriens;
« ii) La zone demilitarisee n'a pas ete creee la
oil aucun obstacle naturel ne s'opposait au mouvement de forces armees.ll [8/2049, lVe partie,
par. 3, a.]
134. On peut remarquer, d'apres cette citation, que
notre argument relatif a la nature de la zoned6militarisee a ete juge non valable. Encore que nouS ne
puissions dire que cette decision du Chef d'etat-major
n'a pas ete decevante pour nous, nous l'avons neanmoins acceptee et nous n'essayons pas d'imposer notre
interpretation en omettant, dans les citations, les
decisions contraires et en pretendant qu'elles n'ont
jamais ete prises.

1

135. A further close scrutiny of the statements of
the Chief of Staff however, leads us to several important conclusions: First, the argument relating to military advantage considered by General Riley in his
two statements is the advantage derived from the
drainage of the marshes. The military advantage
derived from a bridge with military value and controlled
by one party was not considered; Secondly, General
Riley's conclusion that in draining Lake Huleh the
Israelis would not enjoy any military advantage not
applicable equally to the Syrians does not apply to a
bridge which cannot be used by the Syrians; Thirdly,
General Riley did not, as is claimed in the Israel statement, state categorically that the invocation of military advantage was contrary to the Armistice Agreement and therefore inadmissible; Fourthly, when
General Riley, as quoted above, said he would prefer
to stay away from the question of military advantage,
because it was contrary to the General Armistice
Agreement, he based himself on the fact that he was
dealing with a civilian project in Israel-controlled
territory, where he has no special authority. He was
speaking of a situation quite different from the one at
hand.

135. Un examen plus approfondi des declarations
du Chef d'etat-major nous conduit cependant a plusieurs conclusions importantes : Premierement, l'argument de l'avantage militaire considere par le general
Riley dans ses deux declarations porte sur l'avantage
obtenu par suite de l'assechement des marais. L'avantage militaire resultant de l'existence d'un pont qui
presenterait un interet militaire et qui serait controle
par l'une des parties n'a pas eM envisage. Deuxiemement, la conclusion du general Riley selon laquelle,
en assechant le lac Houle, les Israeliens n'auraient
aucun avantage militaire que ne possederaient pas
egalement les Syriens, ne s'applique pas a un pont
qui ne peut pas etre utilise parIes Syriens. Troisiemement, le general Riley n'a pas affirme categoriquement, comme l'a pretendu le representant d'lsrael
dans sa declaration, que le fait d'invoquer l'argument
de l'avantage militaire etait contraire a la Convention
d'armistice et par consequent inadmissible. Quatriemement, lorsque le general Riley a declare, dans les
termes cites ci-dessus, qu'il preferait s'abstenii' de
parler de la question des avantages militaires parce
que cela serait contraire a la Convention d'armistice
general, il se fondait sur le fait qu'il traitait d'un projet
de travaux civils sur un territoire place sous controle
israelien, oil il ne possede pas d'autorite speciale. 11
parlait d'une situation entierement differente de celle
dont nous nous occupons maintenant.

136. It is, therefore, permissible to say that the 136. On peut donc dire que les elements dont le
elements which at that time formed the basis for general Riley tenait compte, a l'epoque, dans sa declaGeneral Riley's statement were different from those . ration, etaient differents de ceux que nous envisageons
which we are considering now: namely, a bridge built en ce moment, a savoir : un pont construit dans la
in the demilitarized zone, where the Chief of Staff zone demilitarisee, la oil le Chef d'etat-major a des
has special responsibility; a bridge with military value, responsabilites particulieres; un pont qui represente
controlled by one of the parties to the General Armis- un interet militaire, et qui est place sous le controle
tice Agreement; a bridge built in a comparatively de l'une des parties a la Convention d'armistice general;
low area where the Israel armoured vehicles and un pont construit dans une zone relativement basse,
tanks could easily deploy. The precedent cited by oil les vehicules blindes et les tanks israeliens pourIsrael cannot, therefore, be properly applied to the raient aisement se deployer. Le precedent cite par
present case.
Israel ne peut donc raisonnablement s'appliquer au
cas actuel.
137. It is also necessary to draw attention to General
Riley's statement concerning the military activity
ia the demilitarized zone:
"The demilitarized zone was the indispensable
basis for agreement on this particular armistice.
...There has been no question-and I believe there is
none - with regard to the fact that neither party
can undertake any military activity in this zone
without serious and dangerous violation of the
Armistice Agreement." [542nd meeting, para. 94.]

137. Il convient egalement d'attirer l'attention du
Conseil sur la declaration du general Riley concernant
les activites militaires dans la zone demilitarisee.
Cette declaration se lit comme suit :
« La creation d'une zone demilitarisee constituait
la base essentielle d'une convention d'armistice...
Le fait qu'aucune des parties ne peut entreprendre
d'activites militaires dans cette zone sans violer serieusement et dangeureusement la Convention d'armistice a toujours ete reconnu - et je pense qu'il rest
toujours - par les deux parties.» [542e seance,
par. 94.]

138. If we keep in mind the fact that the construction
of a bridge with military value can safely be considered
as a military activity in its present and future implications, we are permitted to say that the bridge must
not be allowed in the demilitarized zone in violation
of the General Armistice Agreement.

138.. Si l'on songe que la construction d'un pont
ayant un interet militaire peut etre considere a juste
titre comme une activite militaire, par ce qu'elle rend
possible dans l'immediat et dans ravenir, il nous est
permis de dire que le pont ne doit pas etre autorise
dans la zone demilitarisee en violation de la Convention
d'armistice general.

139. However, we do not feel there is a necessity to
base our arguments on military activity alone. We
could easily find in the 1953 case and in General Vagn

139. Cependant, nous ne pensons pas qu'il soit necessaire de fonder nos arguments sur des considerations
portant sur les seules activites militaires. Il nous serait

.3t

Bennike's remarks, which were maliciously avoided
by the Israel delegation, a safe and sound basis for the
arguments relating to military advantage. We consider
that General Bennike's conclusions constitute a satisfactory precedent for the guidance of our present
deliberations.

facile de trouver, dans le cas qui s'est presente en
1953 comme dans les observations du general Vagn
Bennike que la delegation israelienne s'est gardee de
rnentionner, une base si\re et solide pour les arguments
tires de la question de l'avantage militaire. Nous
estimons que les conclusions du general Bennike constituent un precedent qui peut inspirer de falion satisfaisante nos presents debats.

140. We should like to point out, first of all, that
General Bennike did not avoid the question of military advantage when this question was raised by Syria
in its complaint regarding work undertaken in the
demilitarized zone in 1953. Dealing directly with the
question, General Bennike said, and I quote from the
report dated 23 October 1953 by the Chief of Staff
of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
in Palestine, submitted to the Secretary-General for
the information of the Security Council:

140. Nous voudrions souligner, tout d'abord, que le
general Bennike n'a pas evite la question de l'avantage militaire lorsqu'elle a ete soulevee par la Syrie
dans sa plainte relative aux travaux entrepris dans
la zone demilitarisee en 1953. Traitant directement
de la question, le general Bennike, it citeI' le rapport
en date du 23 octobre 1953 du Chef d'etat-major de
l'Organisme des Nations Unies pour la surveillance
de la treve en Palestine, soumis au Secretaire general
pour comml .-ation au Conseil de securite, a dit ce
qui suit:
cc En examinant les travaux entrepris dans la
zone demilitarisee en vue de la construction du
canal envisage, je me suis efforce de determiner :

"In considering the work undertaken in the
demilitarized zone with a view to the construction
of the projected canal, I have endeavoured to
determine:

"

« •••

" (c) Whether the first object of the definition

« c) Si le premier objet de la delimitation de la

of the demilitarized zone according to Article V,
paragraph 2, of the General Armistice Agreement,
viz., 'separating the armed forces of the two parties
in such manner as to minimize the possibility of
friction and incident', would be affected by work
aiming at diverting a considerable quantity of
water from the river-bed in the demilitarized zone."
[5/3122, annex I, para. 5.]

zone demilitarisee, conformement au paragraphe 2
de l'artic.le V de la Convention d'armistice general:
« separer les forces armees des deux parties de maniere it reduire au minimum les possibilites d'incidents et de froissements», sera compromis par des
travaux visant it detourner une quantite d'eau
appreciable du lit du fleuve dans la zone demilitarisee.» [5/3122, annexe I, par. 5.]

141. As the result oi his on-the-spot inquiry, General
Bennike said, and I quote again from the same report:
" As regards the military aspect of the question,
the Jordan, in its deep valley, is a serious obstacle
for any troops, particuiarly motorized troops, which
would attempt to cross it. A party to the General
Armistice Agreement which, by means of a canal,
could control the flow of the Jordan in the demilitarized zone, changing it or possibly even drying
it up at will, could alter the value to the other party
of the demilitarized zone, which has been 'defined
with a view towards separating the armed forces
~f the two Parties in such manner as to minimize
the possibility of friction and incident .. .''' [Ibid,

141. A la suite de cette enquete sur place, le general
Bennike - je cite le meme rapport - a dit ceci :
cc En ce qui concerne l'aspect militaire de la question,
le J ourdain, avec sa vallee profonde, constitue un
serieux obstacle pour toutes les troupes, en particulier pour les ti'oupes motorisees, qui chercheraient
a le traverseI'. La partie a la Convention d'armistice general qui, par un canal, pourrait controler le
cours du Jourdain dans la zone demilitarisee et
pourrait modifier ce cours ou meme assecher le
fleuve it sa guise, pourrait modifier it son gre la
valeur que la zone demilitarisee presente pour
l'autre partie; cette zone a ete « definie en vue de
separer les forces armees des deux parties, de maniere a reduire au minimum les possibilites d'incidents et de froissements.» [Ibid., par. 7, e.]

para. 7 (e).]
142. It is very useful, for a clear understanding of
the differences which exist between the situation examined by General Riley and that considered by General
Bennike, to ,;;ive attention to the following statement
made by General Bennike in his clear-cut reply to the
Israel Minister of Foreign Affair,,>:
.

142. Il est fort utile egalement, pour bien comprendre
les differences qui existent entre la situation examinee
par le general Riley et celle qu\~tudiait le general
Bennike, de retenir la declaration suivante, faite par
le general Bennike, dans sa reponse claire et nette au
Ministere des affaires etrangeres d'Israel:

'S I shall rec>'u in this connexion that at a meeting
of the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission
held on 21 February 1951, one month after the
execution of the Huleh drainage scheme had started,
the two parties agreed to seek the opinion of my
predecessor, General W. E. Riley, on the question
whether the execution of the scheme would give

« Je rappellerai it ce sujet que, lors d'une reunion
de la Commission mixte d'armistice syro-israelienne
tenue le 21 fevrier 1951, un mois apres la mise en
train des travaux d'assechement du lac HouIe, les
deux parties sont convenues de demander l'avis de
mon predecesseur, le general W. E. Riley, sur ~e
point de savoir si l'execution du projet confereralt

32

en
agn
de
ents
ous
onstis-

Israel a military advantage. After studying the
terrain along the demarcation line and east of the
international border between Syria and Palestine
in the vicinity of the Huleh marshes, General Riley
concluded that in draining Lake Huleh, the Israelis
would not enjoy any military advantages not equally
applicable to the Syrians [5/2049, part IV, para. 3].
The question of the military advantages which the
execution of the scheme might give to Israel was
thus settled in the negative, following an agreed
procedure between the parties (request addressed
to the Chief of Staff). The absence of an agreed procedure in the case of the present Israel project, which
would considerably alter the flow of the Jordan in
the demilitarized zone, does not, in my view, relieve
the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission of
the responsibility of considering the military consequences of such a project in the light of the provisions
of the General Armistice Agreement." [5/3122,

e le
ranyrie
lans
!ent
oart
: de
mce
eral
l ce

annex 111, para. 4.]

la
du
er :

143. The following, are the conclusions which can 143. Les conclusions que 1'on peut tirer de ces textes,
safely be drawn from these texts inasmuch as they dans la mesure ou Us se rapportent a 1'affaire actuelle,
relate to our present case. First, the military aspect sont les suivantes : Premierement, 1'aspect militaire
of the construction of a bridge in the demilitarized de la construction d'un pont dans la zone demilitarisee
zone and over the Jordan River - otherwise a serious et sur le Jourdain, lequel constitue autrement un obsobstacle for any troops - has to be taken into account; tacle serieux pour les troupes, doit etre pris en consiSecondly, the Israelis, by using the bridge for military deration. Deuxiemement, les Israeliens, en utilisant
purposes, could alter the value to the other party, le pont a des fins militaires, pourraient modifier la
namely, Syria, of the demilitarized zone, which has been yaleur que presente pour 1'autre partie - c'est-a-dire
" defined with a view toward separating the armed forces la Syrie - la zone demilitarisee, qui a ete « definie
of the two parties in such manner as to minimize the en vue de separer les forces armees des deux parties,
possibility of friction and incident"; Thirdly, the Chief de maniere a reduire au minimum les possibilites
of Staff and the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Com- d'incidents et de froissements ». Troisiemement, le
mission have special responsibilities regarding the demil- Chef d'etat-major et le President de la Commission
itarized zone. Military considerations cannot, therefore, mixte d'armistice sont charges de taches speciales
be dismissed by them.
en ce qui concerne la zone demilitarisee. Les considerations d'ordre militaire ne sauraient donc etre
meconnues d'eux.

,e 2
'al :
mancides
'eau
oiliera!

,

i

II

1

Idre
inee
leral
par
~ au
oion

~

~

i'

~

~

144. The Israel statement did not think of these
conclusions but said: " Syria raised the same argument
in 1953 and met with the same response from ... the
Security Council" [780th meeting, para. 131]. The
Israel representative then turned to the declaration
of Mr. Hoppenot, the representative of France, who said
that "it would be unjust and contrary to the spirit
of the United Nations if the future and economic
development of a region were to be decided by theoretical military exercises carried out on maps" [Ibid.,
para. 132.] We wish to declare that we entertain great
respect for the statements made by members of the Secur
ity Council. We should, however, stress the fact that
Mr. Hoppenot, although the able representative of a
permanent member of the Security Council, does not
represent a majority in the Council. In fact, General
Bennike's conclusions were neither challenged nor
dismissed but were, in fact, upheld by the majority
of the Council.

144. Le representant d'Israel n'a pas envisage ces
conclusions, il a declare : « La Syrie a presente le meme
argument en 1953 et la majorite du Conseillui a fourni
la meme reponse» [780 e seance, par. 131]. Le representant d'Israel a cite ensuite la declaration de M. Hoppenot, representant de la France, en ces terme8 : « il
serait... injuste et contraire a 1'esprit des Nations Vnies
que le sort et le developpement economique d'une
region puissent etre determines par des exercices de
Kriegsspiel effectues sur la carte» [ibid., par. 132].
Nous tenons a declarer ici que nous avons le plus profond respect pour les declarations faites par les membres
du Conseil de securite. Nous devons cependant souligner
que M. Hoppenot, encore qu'eminent representant
d'un membre permanent du Conseil de securite, ne
represente pas une majorite au Conseil. En fait, loin
d'avoir ete contestees ou abandonnees, les conclusions
du general Bennike ont ete au contraire soutenues parla majorite du Conseil.

145. We have already refuted, in our previous statement, the assertion by the representative of Israel
that the principle of military advantage which was
effective during the truce is no longer applicable under
the armistice. We have based ourselves, in so doing,

145. Nous avons deja refute, dans notre declaration!
precedente, 1'affirmation du representant d'Israel selon.
laqueIle le principe de 1'avantage militaire, qui etait.
valable pendant la treve, ne s'applique plus dans le.
cadre de 1'armistice. Nous nous sommes fondes, ce;

~nne

e en
, les
s de
11' le
erait

etudie le terrain le long de la ligne de demarcation
et a 1'est de la frontiere internationale qui separe
la Syrie de la Palestine au voisinage des marais du
lac Houle, le general Riley est arrive a la conclusion
qu'en assechant le lac HouM, les Israeliens ne s'assureraient aucun avantage militaire dont les Syriens
ne beneficieraient pas dans la meme mesure [5/2049,
IVe partie, par. 3]. La question des avantages militaires que 1'execution du projet pourrait conferer
a Israel a ete ainsi resolue par la negative selon une
procedure sur laquelle les parties s'etaient mises
d'accord (requete adressee au Chef d'etat-major).
L'absence de tout accord sur la procedure a suivre
dans le cas de 1'actuel projet israelien, qui modifierait considerablement le cours du Jourdain dans
la zone demilitarisee, ne decharge pas, a mon avis,
le President de la Commission mixte d'armistice
de 1'obligation d'examiner les consequences militaires de ce projet a la lumiere des dispositions de
la Convention d'armistice general.» [5/3122, annexe
111, par. 4.]

~ la

ion,
un
Irtiient
mis:1' le
: et
le
~ la
lour
l de
ma,nci-

a Israel des avantages d'ordre militaire. Apres avoir

33

on article 11, paragraph I, of the General Armistice
Agreement, which clearly recognizes the principle of
military and political advantage.

faisant, sur le paragraphe premier de l'article 11 d~''''~'~
la Convention d'armistice general, qui reconnait claire. .
ment le principe de l'avantage militaire et politique.

146. We must add, in order to clarify this point,
that the Security Council's resolution of 17 April 1948
[8/723] 3, which called upon all parties concerned to
comply with the specific terms for a truce in Palestine,
contained a certain number of restrictions, such as
prohibition of the importation or the acquisition of
weapons or war materials. It also recognized the principle of political advantage. The Security Council
resolution of 29 May 1948 [8/801] 4 referred to some
other similar restrictions.

146. Afin de preciser cette question, nous devons
ajouter que la resolution du Conseil de securite du
17 avril 1948 [8/723] 3, qui invitait toutes les parties
interessees a respecter les termes de la treve en Palestine, prescrivait un certain nombre de mesures restrictives, notamment l'interdiction de l'importation ou de
l'acquisition d'armes et de materiel de guerre. Elle
reconnaissait egalement le principe de l'avantage poUtique. La resolution du Conseil de securite du 29 mai
1948 [8/801] 4 stipulait d'autres restrictions similaires.

147. The ninth paragraph of the resolution of 15 July
1948 [8/902J] 5, stipulated as follows:

147. Dans son neuvieme paragraphe, la resolution
du Conseil de securite du 15 juillet 1948 [8/902] 5,
stipulait ce qui suit :
« Decide que, sous reserve de toute nouvelle decision du Conseil de securite ou de l'AssembIee generale,
la treve demeurera en vigueur, conformement it la
presente resolution et a la resolution du 29 mai 1948,
jusqu'a ce qu'un ajustement pacifique de la situation
future de la Palestine ait ete realise.»

" Decides that, subject to further decision by the
Security Council or the General Assembly, the
truce shall remain in force, in accordance with the
present resolution and with that of 29 May 1948,
until a peaceful adjustment of the future situation
of Palestine is reached."
148. As to the principle of military advantage, it
was mentioned for the first time in the last paragraph
of the resolution of 19 August 1948 [8/983] 6 follows:
" No party is entitled to gain military or political advantage through violation of the truce."

148. Quant au principe de l'avantage militaire, il
fut mentionne pour la premiere fois dans le dernier
paragraphe de la resolution du 19 aout 1948 [5/983] s
dans les termes suivants : « Il n'est loisible a aucune
partie d'obtenir des avantages militaires ou politiques
par des violations de la treve.»

149. The operative part of resolution of 11 August 1949
[8/1376] 7, upon which the Israelis base their argument,
states inter alia:
" Finds that the armistice agreements constitute
an important step toward the establishment of permanent peace in Palestine and considers that these
agreements supersede the truce provided for in the
resolutions of the Security Council of 29 May and
15 July 1948."

149. Le dispositif de la resolution du 11 aout 1949
[8/1376] 7 sur laquelle Israel fonde ses arguments
dit notamment ce qui suit :
« Constate que les accords d'armistice constituent
une etape importante vers l'instauration d'une paix
permanente en Palestine et estime qu'ils se substituent a la treve desormais caduque etablie par les
resolutions du Conseil de securite du 29 mai et du
15 juillet 1948.»

150. However, the Armistice Agreement, which is
the sole text from which the intentions of the signatories can be deduced, has recognized, as we have
previously stated, the principle of political and military
advantage. This is further confirmed by the Council
resolution of 8 May 1951 [8/2130], which goes back
to the obligations of the parties under the Security
Council's resolution of 15 July 1948 [8/902], the operative paragraph of which reads as follows:
" Calls upon the parties or persons in the areas
concerned to cease fighting and brings to the attention
of the parties their obligations under Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Security Council's resolution of 15 July
1948 and their commitments under the General

150. Cependant, la Convention d'armistice - seul
texte qui permette de connaitre, par deduction, les
intentions des signataires - a reconnu, comme nous
l'avons deja dit, le principe de l'avantage politique et
militaire. Cela est confirme, en outre, par la resolution
du Conseil de securite du 8 mai 1951 [8/2130], qui
remonte aux obligations incombant aux parties en
vertu de la resolution du Conseil de securite du 15 juillet 1948 [8/902], et dont le dispositif est ainsi COTI\lU :
« Invite les parties et tous ceux qui se trouvent
dans les regions interessees a cesser les hostiIites;
appelle l'attention des parties sur les obligations qui
leur incombent aux termes du paragraphe 4 de
l' Article 2 de la Charte des Nations Unies et de
la resolution du Conseil de securite en date du 15 juil-

8 Official Records of the Security Council, Third Year, Supplement for April 1948.
• Ibid., Supptement for May 1948.
i Ibid., Supplement for July 1948.
• Same text as S/981. See Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fourth Session, Supplement No. 2, pps. 40 and 41.
7 Same text as S/1367. See Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 2, p. 19.

a Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, troisieme
annee, Supplement d'avril 1948.
• Ibid., Supplemenl de mai 1948.
6 Ibid., Supplement de juillet 1948.
8 Meme texte que celui du document S/981. Voir Documents
officiels de I' Assemblee generate, quatri~me session, supplt!ment
no 2, p. 40 et 42.
7 Meme texte que celui du document S/1367. Voir Documents
olflciels de I' Assemblee generale, cinquieme session, supplt!ment
nO 2, p. 19.

34

'~'d:i' ·;r···i:~~;::::::"':;e~:::~~~·"~n:·:~cordinglY ~s - u~o:·~-."....,-le-t~19~48~•.,..a.,..i··7n=sl=·=qu=e~~r les :~gag:ments ~::~:: ont

~aire-

lque.

I

them to comply
commitments."

with

these

obligations

and

pris en vertu de la Convention d'armistice general.
et les invite donc a se conformer a ces obligations
et engagements.»

151. The important conclusions to be drawn from
these various texts are: (1) the truce introduced some
restrictions; (2) the Armistice agreement adopted some
of these restrictions and neglected others; (3) among
the restriction.s maintained by the Armistice agreement
is the principle of military and political advantage;
(4) the principle of political advantage must be applied
wherever and whenever the political restrictions of the
General Armistice Agreement are applicable; (5) the
principle of military advantage must be applied wherever and whenever the military restrictions of the
General Armistice Agreement are applicable.

151. Les importantes conclusions que 1'0n peut tirer
de cesdifferents textes sont celles-ci : 1) La treve pr&voyait certaines restrictions ; 2) Certaines de ces restrictions ont ete retenues dans la Convention d'armistice.
tandis que d'autres etaient laissees de cote; 3) Parmi
les restrictions maintenues par la Convention d'armistice se trouve celle qui est relative au principe de l'avantage militaire et politique ; 4) Le principe de l'avantage
politique doit s'appliquer dans chaque cas et dans chaque
lieu OU s'appliquent les restrictions d'ordre politique
prevues dans la Convention d'armistice general;
5) Le principe de l'avantage militaire doit s'appliquer
dans chaque cas et dans chaque lieu OU s'appliquent
les restrictions d'ordre militaire prevues dans la Convention d'armistice general.

152. We would like to add, in order to be clearer,
that the General Armistice Agreement cannot restrain
Israel from acquiring armaments or war material as
long as these armaments and war material are not
used in a manner that violates the military restrictions
of the General Armistice Agreement; but the acquisition
of such armaments was forbidden by the restrictions
established under the truce.

152. Pour etre parfaitement clair, je voudrais -;j-mrteique la Convention d'armistice general ne peut empecher
Israel d'acquerir des armes ou du materiel de guerre.
aussi longtemps que ces armes et ce materiel de guerre
ne sont pas utilises de fallon telle que les dispositions
restrictives d'ordre militaire de la Convention d'armistice general soient violees; mais l'acquisition de ces
armements etait interdit en vertu de la treve.

153. If the Israel argument - that the clause relating
to military advantage is no longer valid under the
armistice - is accepted, tho same should also apply to
the clause relating to political advantage. an application which would have far-reaching consequences.
We do not, therefore. entertain the idea that the Council
would seriously consider such a possibility.

153. Si 1'0n devait accepter l'argument israelien
selon lequel la clause relative a l'avantage militaire
n'est plus valable dans le cadre de l'armistice. il faudrait
l'appliquer aussi a la clause concernant l'avantage
politique. et cela aurait des consequences d'une grande
portee. Nous ne voulons donc pas penser un seul instant que le Conseil pourrait envisager serieusement
une telle possibilite.

154. The Israel statement continues: "Six years
have now passed and the Huleh reclamation project
is approaching completion" [780th meeting, para. 136].
This assertion is aimed at making the Council believe
that the bridge will be a temporary one. We do not,
however, take this gratuitous assertion for granted.
Then the Israel statement adds: " In another 100.000
years... the barrier will have worn away, and there
would then be no need to worry about Syrian objections to the Huleh reclamation scheme. Israel does
not wish'to wait so long, so we have decided to antcipate nature by mechanical means" [ibid.].

i54:" Il est dit encore dans la declaration du representant d'Israel : « Six annees se sont maintenant ecoulees
et le projet d'amenagement du lac Houle est pres d'etre
terminell [780 e seance, par. 136]. Cette affirmation tend a
faire croire au Conseil que le pont sera provisoire, mais
nous ne considerons pas le fait comme acquis sur la
foi d'une declaration gratuite de cette nature. La declarations israelienne. au surplus. ajoute que « d'ici 100.000
ans... l'eau aura use ce barrage et il n'y aura plus. alors.
a se soucier des objections syriennes au projet d'amenagement de Houle. Israel ne veut pas a.ttendre si
longtemps; aussi avons-nous decide de devancer la
nature par des moyens mecaniques» [Ibid.l.

155. This product of Israel humour might be funny
to some, and did receive some laughter from the audience
the other day. For those who have followed closely
the record of Israel aggressions and expansionist schemes
in the area, it sounds rather as a sinister warning.

155. Ce trait d'humour israelien. a p'u ..mbler drQle a
certains, et il a ete accueilli par quelques rires du public.
l'a.utre jour. Pour ceux qui ont suivi de pres l'histoire
des agressions d'Isra.el et de ses projets d'expansion
dans la region. il sonne plutot comme une menace
sinistre.

156. We already know that Israel is impatient to
pull down all physical and legal barriers. His statement
strengthens our knowledge and belief in this regard.

156. Nous savons deja qu'Israel desire impatiemment
supprimer toutes les ba.rrieres materielles et juridiques.
Cette declaration ne fait que confirmer nos renseignements et notre conviction sur ce point.

157. We feel sure that the happiness of the Israel
representative when he told us of the first use of the
bridge in the presence of United Nations observers

157. Nous sommes certains que le bonheur affiche
par le representant d'Israellorsqu'il nous parlait de la
premiere utilisation du pont en presence des observa-

vons

e du

lrties
13,lesstricU de
Elle
polimai
lires.
Ition

02] 5.

deciJrale.
a la
1948.
ation

'e, il
rnier
183] s
!cune
iques

1949
lents

;uent
paix
subslr les
:t du
seul
, les
nous
le et
Ition
, qui
s en
juilil~U :

lvent
ibis;
s qui
! de
:t de
juil-

isi~me

menls
'dmenf
menls
'dment

will fade away when he is asked how the bridge is
going to be used in the absence of those observers.

teurs des Nations Unies se dissiperait si on lui demandait
comment le pont sera utilise en l'absence des memes
observateurs.

158. We agree with the Israel representative when
he acknowledges the possible military value of the
bridge, but we cannot reconcile his ackowledgement
with his assertion twenty lines later that the civilian
character of the bridge is indisputable.

158. Nous sommes d'accord avec le representant
d'!sraeI lorsqu'il l'econnait l'interet militaire que peut
presenter le pont, mais nous ne pouvons concilier cet
aveu avec l'affirmation - que l'on trouve vingt !ignes
plus loin - que le pont a indiscutablement un caractere
civil.

159. We cannot follow him when he says: "The
Huleh reclamation project was approved six years
ago by the Security Council. During the past six years,
the character of this project has not changed." [ibid.,
780th para. 139.] We are at a loss to find any resolution
in which the Council approved the drainage work being
pursued in the demilitarized zone. We are also at a loss to
find a resolution in which the Council approved of the
?bjectives of the project in their entirety six years ago, as
IS asserted by theIsrael representative. Perhaps he can
direct my delegation to the whereabouts of those
resolutions.

159. Nous ne pouvons le suivre lorsqu'il declare :
Il y a six ans, le Conseil de securite a approuve les
travaux d'amenagement du lac HouIe. Au Cours des
six annees ecoulees, la nature de ces travaux n'a pas
change» [ibid., par. 139]. Nous ne pouvons trouver
la moindre resolution du Conseil de securite approuvant
les travaux d'assechement entrepris dans la zone
demilitarisee. Nous ne trouvons pas davantage de resolution dans laquelle le Conseil aurait approuve les ohjectifs du projet, dans leur totalite, il y a six ans, comme
l'a affirme le representant d'!srael. Peut-etre le representant d'Israel pourrait-il nous indiquer ce qu'il est
advenu de ces· resolutions.

160. Speaking of Arab lands in the demilitarized
zone which would be affected by the drainage scheme,
representative said:

160. Parlant des terres arabes qui, dans la zone demilitarisee, seraient affectees par le plan d'assechement,
le representant d'Israel a dit :
« La majorite du Conseil de securite etait tellement convaincue que, « a n'en pas douter» - pour
reprendre les paroles du representant du RoyaumeUni « le programme d'assechement du lac Houle
contribuerait au bien-etre general de la region que,
pour des raisons d'ordre general, [le Conseil de seeurite] aimerait... qu'il soit mis en reuvre le plus tot
possible» - « qu'elle a exprime son desir, si les
negociations avec les proprietaires devaient echouer,
de considerer avec sympathie une demande israelienne d'expropriation des terres en question.»
[Ibid., par. 134.]
Ceci est un mensonge, et nous mettons la delegation
d'Israel au defi de faire etat devant le Conseil d'une
telle majorite. Nous avons deja attire l'attention des
membres du Conseil, dans notre declaration precedente,
sur la procedure a suivre en cas d'echec des negociations. Cette procedure n'avait aucunement trait it
l'expropriation de terres. De plus, le general Riley,
le 17 avril 1951, a declare inacceptable une telle expropriation s'exprimant en ces termes :
« ...Toutes lois, tous reglements et toutes ordonnances en vigueur avant la signature de la ConventiQn
d'armistice et applicables a tout territoire situe
dans la zone demilitarisee sont nuls et non avenus.
En consequence, les concessionnaires ne sont habilites
ni a exproprier aucune terre ou immeuble, ni it oeeuper temporairement des terres, ni a forcer les proprietaires a accepter une indemnite. Il n'existe aueune
loi permettant l'expropriation a l'interieur de.la
zone demilitarisee. Toute occupation temporalre
ou permanente de terres s'effectuant sans le plein
consentement du proprietaire fait obstacle au retablissement, dans la zone demilitarisee, des conditions
d'une vie civile normale et constitue une violation
du paragraphe 2 de l'article V de la Convention
d'armistice.» [541 e seance, par. 24.]

" '" The majority of the Security Council were
so convinced - in the words of the representative
of the United Kingdom, that the Lake Huleh project
would undoubtedly promote the general welfare
of the area, and [that] on general grounds, therefore,
[the Security Council] would like, ... to see it put into
effect as soon as possible that they expressed their
readiness, if negotiations with the landowners were
to fail, to consider sympathetically an Israel request
to expropriate the lands in question." [Ibid., para.
134.]
This a lie, and we challenge the Israel delegation to
unfold before the Council such views of the majority.
We have already drawn attention in our previous
statement to the procedure to be followed in case the
negotiations were to fail. This procedure did not refer
to expropriation. Such expropriation was, furthermore, ruled out by General Riley in his statement,
on, 17 April 1951:
" ... Any laws, regulations or ordinances in force
prior to the Armistice Agreement which affected
any areas included in the demilitarized zone are
null and void. Therefore, the concessionaires do not
enjoy the right to expropriate lands or buildings, to
occupy lands temporarily or to force the owners
of lands to accept compensation. There is no law
of expropriation within the demilitarized zone. Any
occupancy of lands either temporary or permanent,
without the full consent of the landowners, is a
hindrance to the restoration of normal civilian life
in the demilitarized zone, and a violation of article V,
paragraph 2, of the Armistice Agreement." [541st
meeting, para. 24.]

«

161. Furthermore, our present complaint did h?t
deal with the seven acres of Arab lands alluded to In
the Israel statement. It cannot, therefore, be adduced,
by way of suggestion, that our present argumentation
is mainly based on these seven acres.

161. En outre, notre plainte actuelle ne portait pas
sur les hectares de terres arabes mentionnes dans la
declaration du representant d'Israel. On ne saurait
donc faire valoir, a titre d'interpretation, que notre
argumentation actuelle est fondee principalement sur
le cas de ces 2 hectares de terrain.

162. When, however, the Israel representative affirms:
cc When this last obstacle was surmounted, the Chief
of Staff authorized the resumption of the work, and the
Huleh reclamation project was carried forward with all
the energy and devotion that an enterprise so vital
to the future of the area required." [780th meeting,
para. 135.] we would make the following observation.
It is quite true that the project was carried forward,
but this was done without the consent of the Arab
landowners; and without the authorization of the
Chief of Staff. This is brought out in the letter of
16 August 1951 from the Chief of Staff of the Truce
Supervision Organization to the Secretary-General
[8/2300], in which the Chief of Staff stated that early
in June 1951 he authorized the continuance of work
in the demilitarized zone in lands that were not in
dispute.

162. Cependant, quand le representant d'Israel declare:
«Lorsque ce dernier obstacle eut ete surmonte, le Chef
d'etat-major autorisa la reprise des travaux, et le
projet d'amenagement de HouIe fut poursuivi avec
toute l'energie et le devouement qu'exigeait une entreprise aussi vitale pour l'avenir de la region)) [780 e
seance, par. 135], nous desirons faire la remarque suivante : il est tout a fait evident que le projet a ete
poursuivi, mais cela s'est fait sans le consentement
des proprietaires arabes et sans l'autorisation du Chef
d'etat-major. En temoigne la lettre en date du 16 aout
1951 adressee au Secretaire general par le Chef d'etatmajor de l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la
treve [8/2300], dans laquelle le Chef d'etat-major
declarait qu'au debut de juin 1951, il avait autorise la
reprise du travail dans la zone demilitarisee sur des
terrains qui ne faisaient pas l'objet d'un differend.

163. However, when the work reached a stage where
it was necessary, for its continuance, to extend its
scope by building a dam across the Jordan, which
would stop the flow of the river for a number of days
each week for an indefinite period, the Chief of Staff
concluded as follows:

163. Cependant, lorsque les travaux en furent au
point oil il fallait, pour les poursuivre, leur donner une
plus grande extension en construisant un barrage sur
le Jourdain, lequel devait arreter le cours de la riviere
pendant un certain nombre de jours chaque semaine
pour une periode indeterminee, le Chef d'etat-major
.conclut en ces termes :
.
«Dans les circonstances actuelles, l'extension a
la rive est du Jourdain des travaux que les groupes
d'etude de la Palestine Land Development Company
poursuivent dans la zone demilitarisee, et la construction dans cette zone d'un barrage arretant
l'ecoulement du Jourdain, aggraveraient considerablement une situation deja tendue et risqueraient
de provoquer de nouveaux troubles dans la region
et plus loin dans la valIee du Jourdain.
« En consequence, etant donne les obligations
qui incombent au President de la Commission mixte
d'armistice au titre de l'article V de la Convention
d'armistice general et conformement a ]a resolution
S/2157 du Conseil de securite en date du 18 mai 1951,
qui habilite le Chef d'etat-major «a prendre telles
mesures necessaires pour restaurer la paix dans cette
zone et faire aux Gouvernements d'Israel et de Syrie
telles representations qu'il estimerait necessaires ));
etant donne, en outre, que des consultations sur les
problemes en suspens sont envisagees dans la lettre
que M. Eban m'a adressee le 4 aout 1951, je demande
instamment qu'il soit interdit a la Palestine Land
Development Company d'envoyer un groupe d'etude
sur la rive est du Jourdain et de poursuivre la realisation du projet de barrage sur le Jourdain.» [8/2300.
par. 7,)

cc The extension in present circumstances of the
work in the demilitarized zone by the Palestine
Land Development Company survey crews to the
east bank of the Jordan River and the construction
in the demilitarized zone of the dam stopping the
flow of the Jordan River would greatly aggravate
an already tense situation and probably provoke
new disturbances in the area and further along the
course of the Jordan..
cc Therefore, in view of the responsibility given to
the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission
by article V of the General Armistice Agreement
and in accordance with the instructions contained in
Security Council resolution S/2157 dated 18 May 1951,
which authorizes the Chief of Staff 'to take such
measures to restore peace in the area and to make
such representation to the Governments of Israp.I
and Syria as he may deem necessary,' and further
in view of the consultations on outstanding problems
envisaged in Mr. Eban's letter to me of 4 August 1951,
I urge strongly that the Palestine Development
Company be restrained from dispatching a survey
team to the east bank of the Jordan and from proceeding with the proposed emplacing of the dam across
the Jordan. " [8/2300, para 7.]

164. A la 544e seance du Conseil de securite, le general
Riley, en reponse a une question qu'avait posee le
representant des Etats-Unis au sujet du moment et
du lieu oil la Palestine Land Development Company
avait commence ses operations dans la zone, et des
circonstances dans lesquelles cela s'etait produit. a
declare ce qui suit :

164. At the 544th meeting of the Security Council,
General Riley, in response to the United States representative's question about the fime, place and circumstances under which the Palestine Land Development
Company had begun operations in the zone, stated as
follows:
37

cc I believe it was in October or early November
1950. The senior member of the Israel delegation
to the Mixed Armistice Commission asked the senior
Syrian representative if it would be all right to put
a water survey team into the demilitarized zone.
An affirmative answer was given. Later on, in the
month of November, I believe that they repaired
the dam which is just south of Lake Huleh. Then,
on 12 or 13 February 1951, Israel workmen started
to work on the straightening of the Jordan River
about three kilometres south of Lake Huleh."
[544th meeting, para. 49.]

«Je crois que c'etait en octobre ou au debut de
novembre 1950. Le principal representant d'lsrael
it la Commission mixte d'armistice a demande au
representant principal de la Syrie s'il n'y avait
pas d'inconvenient it envoyer dans la zone demilitarisee un groupe charge de proceder it une etUde
d'hydraulique. La reponse a eM affirmative. Plus
tard, au mois de novembre, ils ont, si je ne me trompe,
repare la digue qui se trouve immediatement au
sud du lac Houle. Puis, le 12 ou le 13 fevrier 1951,
des ouvriers israeliens ont commence les travaux
de redressement du cours du. Jourdain it trois kilometres environ au sud du lac ,~oule.» [544e seance,
par. 49.]

165. The United States representative asked General
Riley: "Was this done with the knowledge of the
Chairman himself?" [Ibid., para. 50.] The General
replied:
" I do not believe that it was taken up with the
Chairman except when the Israel representative asked
whether a water survey team could go into the
demilitarized zone. I am quite certain that the
works project that was started on 12 or 13 February
1951 was without his knowledge and that he was
informed of that after it had started" [Ibid., para. 51.]

165. Le representant des Etats-Unis demanda au
general Riley : « Le President lui-meme etait-il au
courant 1» [Ibid., par. 50], sur quoi le general repondit:

166. To the United States representative's question,
cc Was there any work done as a result of or following
approval by the Chairman?" the General stated:
" I know of none." [Ibid., paras. 52 and 53.]

166. En reponse it la question suivante du representant des Etats-Unis : « Certains travaux ont-ils
ete entrepris it la suite de l'approbation du President ?»
le general declare : « Je n'en ai pas connaissance»
[ibid., par. 52 et 53].

167. A little later in the course of the questioning,
the representative of Ecuador said: "I should like
to know whether the landowners directly affected
by the present work refuse altogether to sell their
parcels of land, or if they do not agree with the amount
of indemnity offered" [ibid., para. 101]. General Riley
replied: " The seven acres in question, I believe, which
are two or three kilometers south of Lake Huleh
on the Jordan River, are the only land involved. I
believe that the Israelis practically any price to the
owners for compensation and for expropriation;
no price has been acceptable to the Arab landowners"
[ibid., para. 102].

167. Un peu plus tard, parmi les questions posees,
le representant de l'Equateur demanda : « Je voudrais
savoir si les proprietaires directement affectes par les
travaux en cours refusent de vendre leur terrain ou
si le desaccord ne porte que sur le montant de rindemnite qu'on leur offre». [Ibid., par. 101]. Le general
Riley repondit : « A ma connaissance,les seuls terrains dont il s'agit sont les 2 hectares 80 de terrain
qui sont situes it deux ou trois kilometres au sud du
lac Houle, le long de la rive du Jourdain. Je crois que
les Israeliens ont offert de payer n'importe quelle
somme aux proprietaires it titre d'indemnite d'expropriation. Aucune somme n'a ete jugee acceptable par
les proprietaires arabes» [Ibid., par. 102].

168. These statements clearly show that the Israelis
have not been authorized by the Chief of Staff - in view
of the far-reaching implications of the project - to
continue the drainage operation in the demilitarized
zone. They show, further, that the consent of the
Arab landowners has not been obtained, nor any agreement reached with Syria.

168. Ces declarations indiquent clairement que lell
Israeliens n'ont pas ete autorises par le Chef d'etatmajor - etant donne les consequences de grande
portee du projet - it poursuivre les travaux d'assechement dans la zone demilitarisee. De plus, ces declarations prouvent que le consentement des proprietaires arabes n'a pas ete obtenu et qu'aucun accord
n'a ete conclu avec la Syrie.

169. We have noted the assurances given by the
Israel representative to the Council regarding freedom
of movement of the United Nations military observers
in the demilitarized zone. We consider, however, that
thc conditions to which this " freedom " is subjected
violate the General Armistice Agreement and completely
nullify the assurances which have been given here.

169. Nous avons pris note des assurances donnees
au Conseil par le representant d'Israel au sujet de la
liberte de deplacement des observateurs militaires
des Nations Unies dans la zone demilitarisee. Cependant, nous estimons que les conditions auxquelles
cette « liberte» est subordonnee sont contraires it la
Convention d'armistice general et annulent completement les assurances donnees ici.

170. As to the assertion that the freedom of movment and access of United Nations observers is not

170. Quant it l'assertion selon laqueli-~ la libert~ de
deplacement et d'acces des observateurs des Nations
38

« Je ne pense pas que la question ait ete examinee
avec le President, sauf lorsque }.:) representant
d'lsrael a demande si un groupe d'experts en hydrologie pouvait se rendre dans la zone demilitarisee.
Je suis tout it fait certain que les travaux ont ete
entrepris le 12 ou le 13 fevrier 1951 it son insu et
qu'il en a ete informe ulterieurement.» [Ibid., par. 51].

respected by Syria, we are ready to consider any
official report confirming that baseless and unfounded
accusation.

I Unies n'est pas respectee par la Syrie, nous sommes

prets a examiner tout rapport officiel qui confirmerait
cette accusation denuee de tout fondement.

171. The report of the Acting Chief of Staff, when
referring to the Israel refusal, stated that it was the
first time, to the Chairman's knowledge, that a
party had refused to allow a United Nations investigation in the demilitarized zone or in any other area.

171. Le Chef d'etat-major par interim, apropos du
refus israelien, a declare dans son rapport que c'etait
la premiere fois, a la connaissance du President, qu'une
des parties avait refuse qu'une enquete des Nations
Unies soit effectuee dans la zone demilitarisee ou en
toute autre region.

172. I must apologize for the length of this statement.
Had the Israel argumentation not been so rife with
calculated error, or had it been motivated by a sincere
desire to clarify the disputed issues, we could have
limited ourselves to a mete statement of our arguments.
This, however, has been rendered impossible by the
incredible distortions, misstatements and misreprentations embodied in the Israel statement.

172. Je dois m'excuser de la longueur de cette declaration. Si l'expose du representant d'lsrael n'avait
pas ete si riche en erreurs volontaires, ou s'il avait ete
inspire par un dcsir sincere de preciser les questions
en litige, nous aurions pu nous borner a enoncer simplement nos arguments. Toutefois, cela n'a pas ete
possible a cause des deformations incroyables et des
affirmations erronees comprises dans la declaration
israelienne.

173. We should like, before concluding, to sum up
the three main conclusions we have reached so far, as
follows:
(1) The resolution of the Security Council of 18 May
1951 [S/2167] stopped all operations in the demilitarized zone, pending the conclusion of an agreement
between the parties concerned through the good offices
of the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission.
(2) Israel has pursued drainage operations in the
demilitarized zone without the authorization of the
Chief of Staff, the consent of the Arab landowners,
or the agreement of Syria, party to the General Armistice Agreement, in violation of article V of the General
Armistice Agreement and the resolution of 18 May 1951.

173. Avant de terminer, nous voudrions resumer
comme suit les trois principales conclusions auxquelles
nous sommes arrives jusqu'ici :
1) La resolution du Conseil de securite du 18 mai
1951 [S/2167/Reu.1] a fait cesser toutes operations
dans la zone demilitarisee, en attendant qu'un accord
soit conclu entre les parties interessees par l'intermediaire du President de la Commission mixte d'armistice.
2) Israel a poursuivi ses travaux d'assechement
dans la zone demilitarisee sans l'autor~sation du Chef
d'etat-major, sans le consentement des proprietaires
ou l'accord de la Syrie qui est partie a la Convention
d'armistice general, violant ainsi l'article V de la
Convention d'armistice general et la resolution du
18 mai 1951.
3) La construction sur le Jourdain - qui constitue
un obstacle naturel dans la zone demilitarisee - et
dans une region relativement basse oil les troupes
motorisees israeliennes pourraient aisement se deployer,
d'un pont qui presente un interet militaire, et qui
est controIe par Israel, correspond a un avantage militaire obtenu par Israel et represente une activite militaire qui contrevient a la Convention d'armistice
general.

(3) The construction of a bridge with military value,
controlled by Israel, on the Jordan River, which
forms a natural obstacle in the demilitarized zone, and
in a comparatively low area, where Israel motorized
troops could easily deploy, constitutes a military advantage gained by Israel and a military activity, in violation
of the General Armistice Agreement.

174. These main conclusions, added to the violations
we have noted in our previous statement and in the
present one, viewed in the light of the jurisprudence
established by the Security Council in its previous
resolutions, make it incumbent upon the Council to
give our present complaint sympathetic consideration.
Such consideration would, in our view, be facilitated
by the presence of the Acting Chief of Staff of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization. This
has already been suggested by the representative of
Iraq. Therefore, it might be advisable for the Council
to request his participation in our current discussions,
according to procedures which have been followed
in the past.

174. Ces principales conclusions, s'ajoutant a l'expose
des violations que nous avons relevees dans notre
precedente declaration et dans celle-ci, et considerees
a la lumiere de la jurisprudence etablie par le Conseil
de securite dans ses resolutions anterieures, font un
devoir au Conseil d'examiner avec bienveillance la
plainte que nous presentons actuellement. Cet examen
serait, a notre avis, facilite par la presence du Chef
d'etat-major par interim de l'Organisme des Nations
Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve. Cela a
deja ete suggere par le representant de l'lrak. Par
consequent, il serait peut-etre bon que le Conseil
demande au Chef d'etat-major de participer a nos
debats actuels, conformement a une procedure qui a
deja ete appliquee dans le passe.

175. We are confident, as we have previously stated,
that the Council will not reverse its previous judgement
?f 1~ May 1951, either by omission or commission:
It WIll not, commit a denial of justice and bow in the
accompli.

175. Nous sommes certains, comme nous l'avons
deja dit, que le Conseil ne reformera pas son jugement
du 18 mai 1951, par omission ou par commission :
il ne commettra pas un deni de justice en s'inclinant
devant le fait accompli.

176. I now have only a few remarks to add. We
have listened today to many interesting views concerning the present case. We should like to comment very
briefly on the main points raised in some of the
statements.

176. Je n'ai plus que quelques observations a ajouter.
Nous avons entendu aujourd'hui de nombreux avis
interessants au sujet de la question dont le Conseil
est saisi. Nous voudrions commenter tres brievement
les principales observations qui ont ete faites dans ces
declarations.

177. Most of the representatives have based their
views on the assumption that the bridge constitutes
our sole complaint. They have therefore limited their
remarks to this point, without devoting much attention
to the basic implications of the Syrian complaint
regarding the construction of the bridge in the demilitarized zone. These implications affect the whole status
of the demilitarized zone and the Armistice Agreement
as a whole. We have, to a large extent, explained the
various violations that are involved in the present
case and stated that these repeated violations compel
the Council to take a closer look at the problem involved.

177. La plupart des representants se sont foudes
sur I'hypothese que le pont etait l'unique objet de
notre plainte. 11s ont donc borne leurs observations
a cette question, sans accorder beaucoup d'attention
aux incidences implicites de la plainte syrienne relative
a la construction du pont dans la zone demilitarisee.
Ces incidences interessent tout le statut de la zone
demilitarisee et la Convention d'armistice dans son
ensemble. Nous avons explique, dans une large mesure,
les diverses viOlations qui sont en jeu dans la presente
affaire et nous avons declare que ces violations repetees
obligent le Conseil a suivre le probleme de tres pres.

178. It seems to us that the representative of the
United Kingdom has misunderstood our complaint
in basing his remarks on the construction of the bridge,
on the one hand, and on respect for the authority of
the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission,
on the other.

178. 11 nous semble que le representant du RoyaumeUni n'a pas bien compris notre plainte lorsqu'il a
fonde ses observations sur la construction du pont,
d'une part, et le respect de l'autorite du President
de la Commission mixte, d'autre part.

179. We have steadfastly agreed with the Acting
Chief of Staff when he suggested that his powers and
those of the observers should be strengthened. But the
strengthening of the powers of the Acting Chief of
Staff and the attributions of the observers does not
mean, as far as we are concerned, that they have exclusive responsibility for the supervision of the demilitarized zone. If such a position were to be entertained,
the Mixed Armistice Commission, which is the most
important instrument of the armistice machinery and
which is entitled to supervise the implementation of all
of the provisions of the General Armistice Agreement,
would become useless.

179. Nous avons toujours ete de l'avis du Chef d'etatmajor par interim qui estimait que ses pouvoirs et
ceux des observateurs devraient etre renforces. Mais
le renforcement des pouvoirs du Chef d'etat-major
par interim et des attributions des observateurs ne
signifie pas, en ce qui nous concerne, qu'ils soient charges,
a l'exclusion de tous autres, de la surveilla,uce de la
zone demilitarisee. Si l'on acceptait une telle position,
la Commission mixte d'armistice, qui est l'instrument
le plus important du dispositif d'armistice et qui a
le droit de surveiller l'application de toutes les dispositions de la Convention d'armistice general, deviendrait inutile.

180. On the other hand, we can concur, in view of
the various implications of the present case, with the
suggestion made by the representative of the United
Kingdom that it would be of value to the Council to
receive from the Chief of Staff a report on conditions
in the demilitarized zone so far as they relate to the
provisions of the Armistice Agreement. This suggestion
has already been found useful by the representatives
of the Philippines, Sweden, China, the Soviet Union,
Colombia and the United States of America.

180. Par contre, etant donne les nombreuses incidences de la question, nous pouvons accepter la suggestion du representant du Royaume-Uni, qui pense
qu'il serait utile, pour le Conseil, de recevoir du Chef
d'etat-major un rapport relatif a la situation dans la zone
demilitarisee, dans la mesure oil s'y rapportent les dispositions de la Convention d'armistice. L'interet de cette
suggestion a ete reconnue par les representants des
Philippines, de la Suede, de la Chine, de I'Union sovietique, de la Colombie et des Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

181. As to the new interpretation of the Security
Council's resolution of 18 May 1951 presented by the
United Kingdom representative, we have already
implied in our previous statement that such an interpretation does not harmonize with the clearly stated
provision of that resolution suspending all drainage
operations in the demilitarized zone, without reference
to Arab or Israel lands. Nor is this new interpretation
consistent with the explanations given at that time by
the authors of the resolution.

181. Quant a la nouvelle interpretation que le representant du Royaume-Uni a donnee de la resolution
du Conseil de securite du 18 mai 1951, nous avons
deja laisse entendre, dans notre declaration precedente, qu'elle n'est pas en harmonie avec la disposition
tres claire de cette resolution qui avait pour objet de
faire cesser toutes operations d'assechement dans la
zone demilitarisee, sans qu'il soit aucunement question
des terres arabes ou israeliennes. Cette interpretation
n'est pas davantage conforme aux explications qui
ont ete donnees a l'epoque par les auteurs de la resolution.

182. The provision of the resolution of 18 May 1951
relating to complaints has been repeatedly cited in
the course of the present debate. We should like to
point out that the provision of the Armistice Agreement

182. Une disposition de la resolution du 18 mai 1951
relative aux plaintes a ete citee a differentes reprises
au cours de l'actuel debat. Nous aimerions faire observer
que la regIe etablie par la Convention d'armistice en

concerning complaints does not distinguish between
types of complaints. It does not say that some complaints have to be presented to the Mixed Armistice
Commission and others to the Chairman of the Mixed
Armistice Commission. Article VII, paragraph 7, of
the Armistice Agreement states:
" Claims or complaints presented by either party
relating to the application of this Agreement shall
be referred immediately to the Mixed Armistice
Commission through its Chairman. The Commission
shall take such action on all such claims or complaints by means of its observation and investigation
machinery as it may deem appropriate, with a view
to equitable and mutually satisfactory settlement."
In fact, practically all complaints are submitted to
the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission,
whether they concern the demilitarized zone or the
other provisions of the General Armistice Agreement.

ce qui concerne les plaintes ne fait aucune distinction
entre les types de plaintes. Elle ne dit pas que certaines
plaintes doivent etre presentees a la Commission
mixte d'armistice et que d'autres doivent etre soumises
au President de cette Commission. Le paragraphe 7
de 1'article VII de la Convention d'armistice stipule :
« Les reclamations ou les plaintes presentees par
1'une ou l'autre partie, relativement a 1'application
de la presente Convention, devront etre soumises
immediatement a la Commission mixte d'armistice
par 1'intermediaire de son President. La Commission
prendra, au sujet de ces reclamations ou plaintes,
toutes les mesures qu'elle jugera appropriees, en
faisant usage de ses moyens d'observation et de
controle, en vue d'un reglement equitable et satisfaisant pour les deux parties.»
En fait, presque toutes les plaintes sont presentees
au President de la Commission mixte d'armistice, qu'il
s'agisse de la zone demilitarisee ou qu'elles se rapportent
a d'autres dispositions de la Convention d'armistice
general.

183. If we keep in mind the fact that the Security
Council resolution cannot amend the provisions of the
General Armistice Agreement, signed by the two parties, the only conclusion which can be drawn is that
the Armistice Agreement is the only document upon
which one can base interpretations so far as complaints
are concerned.

183. Si nous gardons bien a 1'esprit que la resolution
du ConseiI de securite ne peut amender les dispositions
de la Convention d'armistice general signee par les deux
parties, la seule conclusion que 1'on puisse tirer est que
la Convention d'armistice general est le seul document
sur lequel il soit possible de fonder une interpretation
quant aux plaintes.

184. In the course of his statement this afternoon,
the representative of the Philippine..>, whom I hold in
the highest esteem, said that the submission of the
Syrian complaint to the Mixed Armistice Commission
would have amounted to a mere formality. I beg to
differ with General Romulo on this point. I may observe
that we cannot safely say what the Mixed Armistice
Commission would have done if it had been convened
according to the provisions of the General Armistice
Agreement. I must add that this formality constitutes
a basic provision of the General Armistice Agreement.
The formality cannot be avoided or sidetracked without
violating the General Armistice Agreement.

184. Au cours de la declaration qu'il a faite cet apresmidi, le representant des Philippines, pour qui j'ai la
plus haute estime, a dit que si la plainte syrienne avait
ete presentee a la Commission mixte d'armistice, cela
n'aurait constitue qu'une simple formalite. Je me permettrai de n'etre pas d'accord sur ce point avec M. Romulo. Nous ne pouvons pas prevoir ce que la Commission
mixte d'armistice aurait fait si elle avait eM convoquee
conformement aux dispositions de la Convention d'armistice general. J'ajouterai que cette « formalite»
correspond a un principe fondamental de la Convention
d'armistice general et qu'elle ne peut etre esquivee ou
ignoree sans qu'il y ait violation de la Convention
d'armistice general.

185. I again apologize to the President and other
members of the Security Council for the length of my
statement, and I thank them for their patience and
tolerance.

185. Je m'excuse a nouveau aupres du President et
des autres membres du Conseil de securite de la longueur
de ma declaration et je leur sais gre de leur patience et
de leur tolerance.

186. Mr. KIDRON (Israel): I wish to thank the Council
for giving me another opportunity to make a statement.
J shall be brief.

186. M. KIDRON (Israel) [traduit de l'anglais] :
Je remercie le Conseil de me donner a nouveau la possibilite de faire une declaration. Je serai bref.

187. Having heard the detailed commentary on my
first statement just given by the representative of
Syria, I must say that there is nothing in that statement
which I would wish to alter today. Moreover, I shall
not endeavour to follow the representative of Syria
down the paths of irrelevance into which he tried to
lead the Council last Thursday. I shall confine myself
strictly to the matter on the agenda, which is the
complaint by Syria about a bridge which is being
constructed by an Israel contractor over the Jordan
at its outlet at the southern end of Lake HUleh, in the
demilitarized zone.
.

187. Ayant entendu le representant de la Syrie commenter de fal.(on detaiIlee ma premiere declaration,
je dois dire qu'il n'y a rien dans cette declaration que
je sois dispose a modifier aujourd'hui. De plus, je
n'essayerai pas de suivre le representant de la Syrie
dans les voies d'inconsequence sur lesquelles il a essaye
d'entrainer le ConseiI jeudi dernier. Je m'en tiendrai
rigoureusement a la question de notre ordre du jour,.
a savoir, la plainte de la Syrie relative au pont construit
actueIlement au-dessus du Jourdain par un entrepre-.
neur israelien, a 1'extremite meridionale du lac HouM•.
dans la zone demiIitarisee.

inte;:~~

188. Colonel Leary, the Acting Chief of Staff, has
made a personal investigation of this bridge, and his
report is before the Security Council [S/381.5].

188. Le colonel Leary, chef d'etat-major par
a fait une enquete personnelle sur le chantier de cons-- .
trucl,on du pont et le Conseil de securite est saisi ,
de son rapport [S/3815.]
l

189. Now, what, in essence, does Syria contend about
this bridge, and what does the Acting Chief of Staff
have to say about the Syrian contentions? Syria contends that, in undertaking the construction of the
bridge, Israel was engaging ;0 an activity prohibited
by the provisions of the Gel.~ral Armistice Agreement.
The Acting Chief of Staff says that he is satisfied,
after personal investigations on the spot and the conversations he has had regarding the matter, that the
bridge has been erected in connexion with the Huleh
reclamation project, with a view to facilitating its
completion. The Huleh reclamation project is an
enterprise which, six years ago, was authorized by the
then Chief of Staff under the authority of the Security
Council. It is thus clearly not contrary to the General
Armistice Agreement, nor can the construction of a
bridge which is part of that project be contrary to the
General Armistice Agreement.

189. Qu'affirme donc la Syrie, en substance, au sujet
de ce pont, et que dit le Chef d'etat-major par interim
relativement aux affirmations syriennes? La Syrie
pretend qu'en entreprenant la construction du pont,
Israel s'est livre a une activite qui est interdite par les
dispositions de la Convention d'armistice general. Le
Chef d'etat-major par interim declare qu'il est convaincu,
a la suite de l'enquete personnelle qu'il a effectuee
sur place et des conversations qu'il a eues a ce sujet,
que le pont a ete construit pour faciliter les travaux
d'amenagement du lac Houle. Le projet d'amenagement
du lac Houle a ete autorise, il y' a six ans, par celui
qui etait alors Chef d'etat-major, sous la caution du
Conseil de securite. Ainsi, il est clair que ces travaux
ne constituent aucunement une infraction a la Convention d'armistice general, pas plus que la construction d'un pont qui fait partie de ces travaux.

190. Syria contends that the construction of the bridge
constitutes a military activity. Colonel Leary is satisfied that it constitutes a civilian activity.

190. La Syrie pretend que la construction du pont
represente une activite militaire. Le colonel Leary
est persuade qu'elle constitue une activite de caractere
civil.

191. Syria contends that the construction of the
bridge is likely to give Israel a military advantage, in
defiance of the provisions of the General Armistice
Agreement. Colonel Leary says that an assumption
that a party would use the bridge for military purposes,
in violation of the provisions of the General Armistice
Agreement, is an assumption which he is not entitled
to cOI!sider; that is to say, the contention of military
advantage is ultra vires the General Armistice Agreement. The preamble to the General Armistice Agreement, which describes the purpose of that Agreement
as " to facilitate the transition from the present truce
to permanent peace in Palestine " and article I, which
prohibits military activity, make this perfectly obvious.

191. La Syrie affirme que la construction du pont
risque de donner a Israel un avantage militaire, au mepris
des dispositions de la Convention d'armistice general.
Le colonel Leary dit que l'hypothese selon laquelle
l'une des parties interessees se servirait du pont a des
fins militaires, violant ainsi les dispositions de la Convention d'armistice general, est de celles qu'il n'a
pas a envisager; cela veut dire que l'argument de
l'avantage militaire depasse le cadre des dispositions \
de la Convention d'armistice general. Le preambule
de la Convention d'armistice general, qui decrit l'objet
de la Convention comme etant de « faciliter la transition
de l'etat de treve a celui d'une paix definitive en Pales- I
tine» et l'article I. qui interdit les activites militaires,
le montrent d'une fac;on tout a fait evidente.

192. Syria contends that the construction of the
bridge is bound to prejudice the interests. of Arab
civilians in the demilitarized zone. The Acting Chief
of Staff says that the construction of the bridge does
not prejudice the interests of any Arab civilians in
the demilitarized zone.

192. La Syrie pretend que la construction du pont
est de nature a porter prejudice aux interets des civils
arabes vivant dans la zone demilitarisee. Selon le Chef
d'etat-major par interim, la construction du pont
ne porte pas prejudice aux interets des civils arabes
qui se trouvent dans la zone demilitarisee.

193. On the basis of its contentions, Syria demands
that the bridge be .dismantled. The Acting Chief of
Staff says that on the basis of his personal investigation,
he does not think that he would be justified in asking
for the removal of the bridge.

193. Se fondant sur ses affirmations, la Syrie demande
que le pont soit demonte. Le Chef d'etat-major par
interim declare que, compte tenu de ses constatations
personnelles, il ne pense pas etre autorise a demander
que le pont soit demonte.

194. My delegation notes with appreciation that the
majority of the members of the Security Council uphold
the findings of the Acting Chief of Staff, rather than
the objections of Syria. In doing so, they have endorsed
the view held by the Security Council for the pas.
six years that developments projects which promote
the general welfare - and the Huleh reclamation

194. Ma delegation est heureuse de constater que la
majorite des membres du Conseil de securite ont
appuye les opinions exprimees par le Chef d'etat-major
par interim, de preference aux objections presentees
par la Syrie. De la sorte, ils ont adopte la these soutenue
par le Conseil de securitependant les six dernieres
annees. these selon laquelle les travaux de develop·

!

,

~

are to be applauded

penient qui ont pOUf but d'ameliorer le niveau de vie
general - et les trava.ux d'amenagement du lac Houle
appartiennent manifestement II cette categorie meritent d'etre encourages.

195. My delegation is also sensible of the sympathy
which members of the Security Council have consistently accorded to Israel's efforts to restore its land
to the prosperity which that land enjoyed in ancient
days. These efforts, as the Council has reason to know,
have frequently been attended by entirely unmerited
difficulties, interferences and obstructions. An example
of which the Council might wish to take note occurred
only yesterday, when the Prime Minister of Syria, in
reply to a question concerning what Syria would do
if the Security Council did not compel Israel to dismantle the bridge, announced that Syria reserved to
itself the right to take its own steps to force Israel
to remove the bridge.

195. La delegation est egalement sensible a la comprehension que les membres du Conseil de securite ont
temoignee a l'egard des efforts faits par Israel pOUf
rendre a son territoire la prosperite qu'il connaissa.it
en d'autres temps. Ces efforts, comme le Conseil ne peut
I'ignorer, ont ete frequemment entraves et se sont
heurtes a des obstacles et des obstructions entierement
immeritees. Peut-etre le Conseil prendra-t-il note,
avec interet, d'un fait qui s'est produit hier. Je veux
parler de la reponse donnee par le Premier Ministre
de Syrie a la question de savoir ce que serait I'attitude
de son pays dans le cas oil le Conseil de securite ne
contraindrait pas Israel a demolir le pont. Le Premier
Ministre de Syrie a. declare que la Syrie se reserverait
alors le droit de prendre par elle-meme des mesures
pour obliger Israel a supprimer le pont.

196. My delegation feels encouraged to hope that the
Council will disregard this pettifogging attempt to
arrest a constructive and worthy enterprise and will
enable the work to go forward to its beneficial conclusion.

196. Ma delegation espere vivement que le Conseil
ignorera cette tenta.tive mesquine de faire obstacle
a une entreprise constructive et meritoire, et qu'll
permettra que cette reuvre puisse progresser vers
son objectif final et profitable a tous.

197. The PRESIDENT: I should like to make the
following brief statement.

197. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je voudrais, en ma qualite de President, faire la br~ve declaration suivante :

198. The Security Council has considered the communication from the representative of Syria and the
report of the Acting Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine. It has heard the
representatives of Syria and Israel, and all members
of the Council have presented their views.

198. Le Conseil de securite a examine la communication presentee par la. delegation de~ la Syrie ainsi
que le rapport du Chef d'etat-major par interim de
I'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve en
Palestine. Il a entendu les representants de la Syrie
et d'Israel, et tous les membres du Conseil ont fait
connaitre leur opinion.

199. All members of the Council appear to agree that
the authority of the Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision Organization should be respected and that the
parties should co-operate with him. It was noted that
in the instance before us he was delayed in his inspection
of the bridge and in discharging other duties.

199. Les membres du Conseil semblent tous reconnaitre
que I'atitorite du Chef d'etat-major de l'Organisme
charge de la surveillance de la treve doit etre respectee
et que les parties doivent collaborer avec lui. Il a ete
releve que, dans le cas soumis au Conseil, le Chef d'etatmajor a ete retarde dans I'inspection du pont et dans
l'execution de ses fonctions.

200. Some members of the Council made it dear that
they did not agree with the decision of the Acting
Chief of Staff on the right of Israel to build the bridge.
However, the majority have pointed out that the
Chief of Staff is the proper authority for ensuring full
implementation of the provisions of article V of the
Armistice Agreement and have supported his decision.
The parties have been asked to co-operate fully with
the Acting Chief of Staff and to assist in any practical
~rrangements that
he might feel are necessary
In carrying out his responsibilities.

Certains membres du Conseil ont nettement
declare qu'ils n'etaient pas d'accord avec le Chef
d'etat-major par interim en ce qui concerne le droit
d'Israel de construire le pont. Cependant, la majorite
a releve que le Chef d'etat-major est l'autorite competente pour assurer la pleine execution des dispositions
de I'article V de la Convention d'armistice, et elle a
par consequent appuye sa. decision. Les parties ont ete
invitees a cooperer entierement avec le Chef d'etatmajor par interim et a lui preter assistance pOUf appliquer toutes les mesures pratiques qu'il pourrait cOllsiderer comme necessaires dans l'execution de se:;;
fonctions.

201. Note has also been taken of references in the
:eport by the Acting Chief of Staff to other problems
In the demilitarized zone, and the majority of the
members have suggested that the Acting Chief of Staff
submit an additional report at the. proper time concerCOILdi1:ioIlS in the zone, including his freedom of

201.

project manifestly does that and encouraged.

200.

Il a egalement ete pris note des observations que
le Chef d'etat-major par interim a faites dans son rap··
port au sujet d'autres problemes qui se posent dan!
la zone demilitarisee, et la majorite des membres du
Conseil ont suggere que le Chef d'etat-major par interim
presente, en temps voulu, un rapport suppIementaire

----~-~~

__

~.M~_~

__

~· ----~--~~-~~--~-------~-~-----------

-~-~1

I

access to the zone. Various inquiries have been made
which might be covered in such a report. In this case,
it is clear that the achievement of better conditions
in the Near East is the Council's overriding objective. The
United Nations and its representatives can continue to
make an important contribution to this end. To do so, it
needs the full co-operation ofthe Governments concerned.

sur la situation dans la zone, et notamment sur son
libre acces a cette zone. Plusieurs questions qui ont ete
posees pourraient recevoir une reponse dans ce rapport.
Il est clair que l'amelioration de la situation dans le
Moyen-Orient constitue I'objectif d'ensemble du Conseil.
L'Organisation des Nations Unies et les representants
designes par elle peuvent continueI' a contribuer, dans
une large mesure, a atteindre cet objectif. Pour ce faire,
I'entiere cooperation des gouvernements interesses
sera necessaire.

202. Mr. AL-SHABANDAR (Iraq): We agree with
what the President has proposed. We should only
like to give a more specific time-limit for the coming
report. The President said "at the proper time". I
think that perhaps we would prefer to say a month,
three weeks or four weeks to have a timeolimit because
the situation in the Middle East is very serious now
and it is in the interest of all of us that something
should be done quickly.

202. M. AL-SHABANDAR (Irak) [traduit de l'anglais]: '
Nous approuvons ce que vient de proposer le President.
Nous aimerions cependant qu'un delai precis soit fixe
pour la presentation du rapport envisage. Le President
a employe les mots « en temps voulu ll, mais nous
prefererions que I'on precise une date. On pourrait
fixer un delai de trois semaines ou d'un mois; I'important est d'avoir une date limite, car la situation est
actuellement tres grave dans le Moyen-Orient et il est de
l'interet de tous que quelque chose soit fait rapidement.

203. The PRESIDENT: I feel that I am not qualified
to specify the time. I would consider that that would
be for the Acting Chief of Staff to do, in the light of
the circumstances. But of course if the Council wishes
to stipulate a time, it is free do so.

203. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je ne
pense pas etre qualifie pour preciser une date. J'estime
qu'il faut s'en remettre, a cet egard, au Chef d'etatmajor par interim. qui pourra prendre une desision
en tenant compte des circonstances. Cependant, si le
Conseil desire une date limite, il lui est evidemment
loisible de le faire.

204. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I understood the President's conclusion, his summing up of what has taken
place in the Security Council, to mean that the Council
has not yet finished its discussion of the Syrian complaint and that another report from the Acting Chief
of Staff of the Truce Supervision Organization is necessary to provide us with additional material for the
~urther consideration of this complaint.

204. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) [traduit du russe] : j'ai interprete
les conclusions ou le resume des deliberations du Conseil
de securite, presentes par le President comme signifiant
que I'examen de la plainte syrienne n'est pas encore
acheve et qu'avant de poursuivre la discussion, il conviendrait d'obtenir les renseignement suppIementaires
qu'apporterait un nouveau rapport du Chef d'etatmajor par interim de 1'0rganisme des Nations Unies
charge de la surveillance de la treve.

205. If that is so and it seems to be, and since the
majority of the members of the Council have expressed
a wish to have this additional material in connexion
with our discussion of the Syrian Government's complaint, I think we should limit the time for the submission of this report and, for this purpose, that the period
suggested by the representative of Iraq or indeed any
other limited period of time would be better than
saying simply " at the proper time ".

205. Si mon interpretation est exacte - et il semble
bien en etre ainsi puisque la majorite des membres
du r.onseil ont exprime le desir d'obtenir des informations suppIementaires afin de poursuivre la discussion
sur la plainte de la Syrie -, il serait bon que l' on fixe
une date limite pour la presentation de ce rapport. A
cette fin, le delai propose par le representant de I'Irak
- ou tout autre, a condition qu'il soit limite - serait
preferable aux termes « en temps voulu ll.

206. I would therefore support any proposal setting
a time-limit for the submission of such a report.

206. C'est pourquoi j'appuierai !'idee d'un delai
fixe pour la presentation d'un tel rapport.

207. Mr. ASHA (Syria): I was going to raise the
same point - the question of the proper time was a
little unclear to me - that was raised hy both the
representatives of Iraq and the Soviet Union.

207. M. ASHA (Syria) (traduit de l'anglais) : J'allais
moi-meme soulever la question dont les representants
de I'Irak et de I'Union sovietique ont parle, car l'expression : « en temps voulu II ne me paraissait pas parfaitement claire.

208. The PRESIDENT: There is no proposal before
the Security Council for a report, and I was merely
summarizing opinions that had been expressed during
the course of the debate.

208. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Aueune
proposition n'a ete deposee devant le Conseil de securite
en vue d'un rapport. Le President s'est borne a resumer les opinions exprimees au cours du debat.

44

209. Mr. AL·SHABANDAR (Iraq): May I propose a

month for this report, in the event it is suitable for the
members of the Council and for the Secretary-General?

209. M. AL-SHABANDAR (Irak) [traduit de l'anglais] :
Je me permets de proposer un delai d'un mois pour la
remise du rapport, si cela convient aux membres du
Conseil de securite et au Secretaire general.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Les
membres du Conseil ont entendu la suggestion du representant de I'Irak. Quelqu'un voudrait-il faire des
observations au sujet de cette proposition ?

210. The PRESIDENT: The members of the Council
have heard the motion of the representative of Iraq.
Does any member of the Council wish to comment on
the motion?

210.

211. Mr. WALKER (Australia): I was not one of
the members of the Council who asked for a further
report from the Chief of Staff. I said that so far as the
question of the bridge was concerned, I felt that we
should content ourselves with the report before us and
that no further action was required by the Council
in the present circumstances.

211. M. WALKER (Australie) [traduit de l'anglais] :
Je ne suis pas de ceux des membres du Conseil de
securite qui ont demande que le Chef d'etat-major
soumette un rapport complementaire. En ce qui concerne la question du pont, j'ai exprime l'opinion que
nous devrions nous en tenir au rapport dont le Conseil
est actuellement saisi et que dans les conditions actuelles,
le Conseil de securite n'avait pas d'autres decisions a
prendre.

212. Of course, the Australian delegation will be very
happy at any time to join with our colleagues on the
Council in discussing further observations that the
Chief of Staff may wish to make regarding the situation
in the zones and I understood that the suggestions
made were that the Council, might receive such a
report on the general conditions iu the demilitarized
zone. Although we did not propose any such report,
we certainly would be very happy to entertain such
a report and to consider it. But I certainly would not,
like to support any proposal that fixed a time-limit
for the preparation of such a report, which it seems to
me would be a matter on which we could trust the
Chief of Staff to use his judgement.

La delegation australienne - cela va de soi sera toujours tres heureuse de participer avec les autres
membres du Conseil a la discussion des observations
que le Chef d'etat-major pourrait vouloir presenter
ulterieurement au sujet de la situation existant dans la
zone; j'ai crn comprendre, d'apres les suggestions
emises, que. le Conseil pourrait recevoir un rapport
de ce genre sur la situation generale dans la zone demilitarisee. Bien que nous n'ayons pas.propose la presentation d'un tel rapport, nous serons assurement heureux de le recevoir et de l'examiner. Mais, ce qui est
certain, c'est que je ne voudrais pas donner mon appui
a une proposition qui fixerait un delai determine pour
la preparation d'un rapport de cette nature; il me
semble que nous pourrions faire confiance au jugement du Chef d'etat-major sur ce point.

213. I certainly would reject any suggestion that my
delegation's position on the question of this bridge
would depend upon the recei.pt of the report by the
Chief of Staff within any definite limit of time.

213. Je ne saurais accrediter l'idee que la position
de ma delegation au sujet de la question du pont
puisse- dependre de la presentation au Conseil d'un
rapport complementaire du Chef d'etat-major a soumettre dans un delai determine.

214. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: In the light of

Le SECRETAIRE GENERAL (traduit de l'anglais) : Compte tenu de cet echange de vues et en
l'absence d'une decision formelle, je prierai, bien entendu
le Chef d'etat-major, de presenter un rapport sur la
situation dans la zone demilitarisee. Je ne crois pas
que, de son point de vue, la preparation de ce rapport
doive prendre beaucoup de temps. En tout cas, nous
pouvons compteI' que ce rapport parviendra rapidement
au Conseil.

this discussion, and without any formal decision, I
will, of course, request the Chief of Staff to present a
report on the situation in the demilitarized zone. I
do not think that from his point of view that will
prove to be very time-consuming work. Therefore,
at all events, we may expect it soon.

212.

214.

215. If I were to indicate to him that it is desirable
that he present such report, let us say, within a month,
I think that it might not be necessary for the Council
to take a formal decision.

215. Si j'indiquais au Chef d'etat-major qu'il serait
souhaitable qu'il presente ce rapport, d'ici un mois,
je ne pense pas qu'il serait necessaire que le Conseil
prenne sur ce point une decision formelle.

216. The PRESIDENT: There appears to be approval
of this idea and if there is no objection, we will proceed
on that basis.

216.

217. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): I just
wanted to make my own position on this quite clear.

217. Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
l'anglais] : Je. tiens a preciseI' mn position. Je suis

45

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je constate que cette idee semble avoir l'approbation du
Conseil; si aucune objection n'est soulevee, nous
procederons de la sorte.

-.~

I welcome the idea of a report from the Acting Chief
of Staff and indeed was, I think, the first speaker
today to suggest it. Such a report, to my mind, would
be, as I said earlier this afternoon, on conditions in the
demilitarized zone so far as they relate to the provisions
of the Armistice Agreement.

favorable a la presentation d'un rapport par le Chef
d'etat-major; je crois avoir ete, en fait, le premier
orateur a la suggerer aujourd'hui. A mes yeux - je
l'ai deja dit cet apres-midi - ce rapport devrait traiter
la situation dans la zone demilitarisee, dans la mesure
ou elIe tombe 801,1S le coup des dispositions de la Convention d'armistice.

218. As far as the particular question of the bridge
is concerned, I have already explained my position
on that matter and would not expect my views to
be affected by any further report. I explained that in
our view the decision of the Acting Chief of Staff
concerning the bridge is within his authority and should
therefore be upheld.

218. Pour ce qui est de la question du pont, j'aideja
explique ma position : mon opinion ne pourrait guere
etre influencee par un nouveau rapport. J'ai precise
qu'a notre avis, la deCIsion prise par le Chef d'etatmajor par interim au sujet du pont releve bien de son
autorite et que, par consequent, elIe doit etre consideree comme valable.

219. The PRESIDENT: There are no more speakers
on the list. In' accordance with the usual practice,
arrangements for a further discussion of this question
will be made by the President of the Security Council
in consultation with those concerned.

219. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Aucun
autre orateur n'est inscrit sur la Iiste. Conformement
a l'usage etabIi, le President du Conseil de securite
consuItera les interesses avant de convoquer une
nouvelIe seance au sujet de la plainte syrienne.

The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.

La seance est levee a19 h. 5.

46

Printed in France

Pric~" : tU.S. 0.40 .~ 3/-stg. ; Sw. fr. 1.50
(Oil' equivalent in other currencies)

9204-August 1958-1,800·
