United Nations

A/RES/59/281

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 May 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 77

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 29 March 2005
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/59/472/Add.1)]

59/281. Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant
resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of
disputes, including through its peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its
capabilities in the field of peacekeeping and to enhance the effective and efficient
deployment of its peacekeeping operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of the United Nations
make to peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations expressed by Member States, in particular
troop-contributing countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and
strengthening the effectiveness of the work of the Special Committee,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations; 1
2.
Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special
Committee, contained in paragraphs 22 to 154 of its report;
3.
Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United
Nations to take all necessary steps to implement the proposals, recommendations
and conclusions of the Special Committee;

_______________
1
A/59/19 and Corr.1. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 19.

04-49312

A/RES/59/281

4.
Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors
to the United Nations peacekeeping operations in years to come or participate in the
future in the Special Committee for three consecutive years as observers shall, upon
request in writing to the Chairman of the Special Committee, become members at
the following session of the Special Committee;
Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate,
5.
shall continue its efforts for a comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects and shall review the implementation of
its previous proposals and consider any new proposals so as to enhance the capacity
of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this field;
Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the
6.
General Assembly at its sixtieth session;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
item entitled “Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects”.
84th plenary meeting
29 March 2005

2
