A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/110
4 March 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 110 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/619/Add.3 and Corr.1)]
51/110.

Human rights in Haiti

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights1 and the International Covenants on
Human Rights,2
Recalling its resolution 50/196 of 22 December 1995, and taking note of
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1996/58 of 19 April 1996,3
Taking into account the report of the independent expert of the
Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Haiti, Mr.
Adama Dieng,4 appointed to assist the Government of Haiti in the area of human
rights, to consider the development of the human rights situation in that
country and to verify compliance by it with its obligations in that field, and
the recommendations contained in that report,
Recognizing the important contributions of the International Civilian
Mission to Haiti, the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti and the National
Commission for Truth and Justice in the establishment of a climate of freedom

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1996, Supplement
No. 3 (E/1996/23), chap. II, sect. A.
4

E/CN.4/1996/94.

97-77113

/...

A/RES/51/110
Page 2

and tolerance propitious to the respect for human rights and the restoration
and spread of democracy in Haiti,
Welcoming the renewal by the General Assembly in its resolution 50/86 C
of 29 August 1996 of the mandate of the International Civilian Mission to
Haiti,
Welcoming also the improvements in the situation of human rights in
Haiti, and noting the policy statements by Haitian authorities that the
Government of Haiti remains committed to upholding human rights and improving
accountability,
Expressing concern at the increase in common crime, and noting the
continuing need for technical training of the Haitian National Police and for
strengthening of the judicial system,
Expressing its satisfaction with the invitation to visit the country
extended by the Government of Haiti to the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on violence against women, its causes and
consequences,
Considering the request of the Government of Haiti for technical
assistance and advisory services in the field of human rights addressed to the
Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat,
1.
Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for Haiti for their efforts in favour of the consolidation of
democratic institutions in Haiti and the respect of human rights in that
country;
2.
Welcomes the satisfactory evolution of the political process in
Haiti and the holding of presidential elections on 17 December 1995, which
permitted the first transfer of power between two democratically elected
Presidents;
3.
Takes note of the report of the independent expert of the
Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Haiti and the
conclusions and recommendations contained therein;4
4.
Expresses its concern about recent and other persistent security
challenges to Haitian society caused, inter alia, by difficult economic and
social conditions, which threaten progress in the field of human rights and
democratic stability in the country;
5.
Welcomes the report of the National Commission for Truth and
Justice, as well as reports by the International Civilian Mission to Haiti on
Haitian justice and on respect for human rights by the Haitian National
Police, and urges the Government of Haiti to undertake appropriate follow-up
action on the recommendations contained in these reports, with the support of
the international community;
6.
Supports the Government of Haiti's ongoing process of reform of
the judicial system, including instructions in international human rights law
and human rights;

/...

A/RES/51/110
Page 3

7.
Requests the international community, including the United Nations
Development Programme, to continue providing funds for the reform of the
judicial system and for those activities that contribute to the social and
economic development of Haitian society;
8.
Encourages the international community to contribute generously to
the United Nations trust fund for the Haitian National Police, which will be
needed to respond to the request of the Government of Haiti for a technical
adviser programme;
9.
Welcomes the establishment of the programme of technical
cooperation prepared by the Centre for Human Rights aimed at strengthening
institutional capacity in the field of human rights, in particular in the
areas of legislative reform, training of justice administration personnel and
human rights education, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the implementation of this programme to the General Assembly at its fiftysecond session;
10.
Invites the international community, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, to continue their involvement in the reconstruction and
development of Haiti;
11.
Invites the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its
causes and consequences to consider favourably the invitation to visit the
country extended to him by the Government of Haiti, with the support of the
United Nations Population Fund;
12.
Decides to continue its consideration of the situation of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in Haiti at its fifty-second session.
82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996
