S/PRST/2004/1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 January 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4896th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 January 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Small arms”, the
President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the Report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of his recommendations to the Council entitled Small
Arms (S/2003/1217) of 31 December 2003, and reaffirms the Statements of its
President of 31 October 2002 (S/PRST/2002/30), of 24 September 1999
(S/PRST/1999/28), and of 31 August 2001 (S/PRST/2001/21).
“The Security Council recalls its primary responsibility under the Charter
of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security,
in view of which its attention is drawn inevitably to the illicit trade of small
arms and light weapons, as such weapons are the most frequently used in
armed conflicts. The Council reaffirms the inherent right of individual or
collective self-defence in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations and, subject to the Charter, the right of each State to import,
produce and retain small arms and light weapons for its self-defence and
security needs.
“The Council welcomes all efforts already undertaken by Member States
and calls upon them to fully implement at the national, regional and
international levels the recommendations contained in the Programme of
Action adopted by the July 2001 United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its aspects.
“The Council welcomes the resolution 58/241 of 23 December 2003 of
the General Assembly by which, among other things, it decided to establish an
open-ended working group to negotiate an international instrument to enable
States to identify and trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms
and light weapons and calls upon all Member States to support all efforts
aimed at this purpose.
“The Council encourages the arms-exporting countries to exercise the
highest degree of responsibility in small arms and light weapons transactions.
It also encourages international and regional cooperation in the consideration
of the origin and transfers of small arms and light weapons in order to prevent
their diversion to terrorist groups, in particular, Al Qaida. The Council

04-21265 (E)

190104

*
0
4
2
1
2
6
5
*

S/PRST/2004/1

welcomes the significant steps that have been taken by Member States in this
regard. The obligation of Member States to enforce the arms embargo should
be coupled with enhanced international and regional cooperation concerning
arms exports.
“The Security Council reiterates its call on all Member States to
effectively implement arms embargoes and other sanction measures imposed
by the Council in its relevant resolutions, and urges Member States in a
position to do so to provide assistance to interested States in strengthening
their capacity to fulfil their obligations in this regard. The Council encourages
Members to undertake vigorous actions aimed at restricting the supply of
small arms, light weapons and ammunitions to areas of instability. The
Council further encourages Member States to provide the Sanctions
Committees with available information on alleged violations of arms
embargoes and also calls on Member States to give due consideration to the
recommendations of the related reports.
“The Council continues to recognize the need to engage the relevant
international organizations, non-governmental organizations, business and
financial institutions and other actors at the international, regional and local
levels to contribute to the implementation of arms embargoes.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of carrying out
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Programmes, an increasingly
essential component of peacekeeping mandates, as comprehensively and
effectively as possible in post-conflict situations under its consideration.
“The Security Council takes note of the inclusion of Man-Portable AirDefence Systems (MANPADS) on an exceptional basis in the United Nations
Register on Conventional Arms.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to update the
Council for its next meeting on the subject on the further implementation of
the recommendations contained in his report entitled ‘Small arms’ of 20
September 2002 (S/2002/1053).”

2
