S/PV.8140

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8140th meeting

Monday, 18 December 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Awad
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons (S/2017/1025)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-44805 (E)
*1744805*

S/PV.8140

Small arms

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms
and light weapons (S/2017/1025)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/1025, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nakamitsu.
Ms. Nakamitsu: At the outset, please allow me
to express my gratitude to Japan for convening this
meeting on the issue of small arms and light weapons
and for giving me this opportunity to brief the Security
Council. I welcome the Council’s commitment to
considering small arms on a regular basis.
At a time of deepening regional tensions,
expanding terrorist and criminal networks and
traditional and non-traditional conflicts wreaking
havoc on communities, it is indeed important that
Council members are meeting to discuss one of the key
determinants of crises — small arms, light weapons
and their ammunition. In that context, I am pleased
to offer some remarks this afternoon, including some
reflections on the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1025) just circulated to Council members.
Given the wide-ranging impact of the misuse and
illicit circulation of small arms and light weapons,
an earlier report of the Secretary-General from 2015
(S/2015/289) recommended that the Security Council
consistently address the arms situation when considering
both geographic and thematic issues on its agenda. I
can only reiterate that recommendation here today. The
issue of small arms and light weapons is so essential to
the full spectrum of the Council’s work, that this organ
requested the Secretary-General, through resolution
2220 (2015), to include in reports and briefings on
country-specific situations more comprehensive and
2/21

18/12/2017

detailed information and recommendations relating
to the impact of the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons. I would certainly support that practice and
encourage broader and deeper mainstreaming of
relevant arms and ammunition considerations into the
Council’s work.
While the Council has addressed small arms in the
framework of its thematic and country-specific agenda
items, its decision to take up this matter as a standalone agenda item, first in 1999, has created a new
avenue that allows for an inclusive and comprehensive
approach to small arms. This inclusive approach is
vital given the relevance of small arms to a range of
contexts — from arms embargoes, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), child soldiers
and counter-terrorism, to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict and transnational organized crime.
The multidimensional and cross-cutting nature of
small arms is indisputable. The biennial reports of the
Secretary-General, issued in 2008 (S/2008/258), 2011
(S/2011/255), 2013 (S/2013/503), 2015 and now 2017,
offer a wealth of reflections that demonstrate just how
critical small arms, light weapons and their ammunition
are in the context of threats to international peace
and security.
While the focus of the report of the SecretaryGeneral and my remarks here today is on small arms,
recent Council discussions on the use of heavy weapons
and their impact on civilians are also demonstrative of
the increasing salience of addressing conventional arms
more broadly in contemporary conflicts. Furthermore,
in many countries, attacks using improvised explosives
now kill and injure civilians and combatants more than
any other type of weapon. Effectively dealing with this
growing threat requires a comprehensive approach,
including action by the Security Council. I would
encourage Council members to continue considering the
role of all types of conventional arms in perpetuating
conflict and in contributing to its humanitarian toll.
I would now like to turn to the substance of
the Secretary-General’s report and highlight some
salient points he raises in the substantive trends and
developments section. The Secretary-General describes
various trends and developments organized by
substantive theme, inter alia, the protection of civilians
and human rights; terrorism and violent extremism; and
United Nations support for weapons and ammunition
management. He offers to Council members a useful
17-44805

18/12/2017

Small arms

reflection on how small arms and light weapons, as
well as their ammunition, impact threats to peace and
security, and notes the various actions taken, including
by this very body, to address these challenges. Like
previous ones, this report paints a vivid picture of
how extensive the implications of small arms and light
weapons can be in the context of the Council’s work.
While the report notes some successes achieved
in the past two years, the global picture of small
arms is nonetheless sobering. The impact of the wide
availability, misuse and destabilizing accumulation of
small arms is vast and well documented. A significant
portion of direct-conflict deaths are attributable to
the use of small arms, and nearly half of all violent
deaths are nowadays caused by firearms. Significantly,
firearms-related homicides in post-conflict societies
frequently outnumber battlefield deaths.
Small arms are force multipliers whose availability,
ownership and use contribute to the initiation and
sustainment of conflict, and they can facilitate all forms
of conflict, including civil wars, inter-State conflict
and the perpetration of violent crimes. They are key
determinants in the lethality and longevity of conflicts.
There are three key observations.
First, arms flows into conflict-affected and
violence-ridden societies exacerbate already fragile
circumstances. It is important that the Council remain
cognizant of the destructive effect of weapons and
ammunition flows into these settings. By way of
example, I note the decision of the Security Council to
empower the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei to confiscate and destroy weaponry and report on
possible arms movements into the Abyei area through
resolution 2287 (2016). This mandate is an effective
response to the previous recognition by the Council of
the threat to peace and security in the Abyei area arising
from the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons.
Secondly, high levels of illicit arms and
ammunition in circulation also contribute to violations
of international humanitarian and international
human rights law. Small arms are often used in the
commission of human rights violations such as killing
and maiming, rape and other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence, torture and the recruitment of
children. More human rights violations and abuses are
committed with them than with any other weapon, from
the recruitment of children as soldiers to acts of sexual

S/PV. 8140

violence perpetrated in conflict. Small arms are often
a common denominator in such circumstances. United
Nations personnel are not immune from such tragedies.
Small arms frequently play a role in the deaths of
United Nations employees and peacekeepers, as well
as workers from humanitarian and non-governmental
organizations. The human cost of the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
runs very deep.
Thirdly, of growing concern are the increased
links between transnational organized crime, illicit
small-arms trafficking and terrorism, as well as the
mounting use of the Internet, including the “dark web”,
and of emerging technologies for illicit trafficking and
production. The use of illicit previously deactivated
firearms in the terror attacks in Paris in November 2015
is evidence of the need to restrict the supply of all types
of weapons to terrorist groups.
In this context, I welcome the work of the Council,
including the adoption of resolution 2370 (2017),
on denying terrorists access to weapons and urging
States to undertake the national measures necessary to
eliminate this supply. The issue of improvised explosive
devices is, of course, of relevance in this regard, and I
would underscore in particular the potential diversion
of ammunition and explosives for the manufacture of
such devices.
On a positive note, weapons and ammunition
management has become a critical component of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and in Security
Council activities to address conflict-affected situations
more generally. Attention to this issue was often
reflected in DDR programmes or physical-security and
stockpile-management activities. For example, in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Mali, DDR components have established
weapon-registration and marking systems to ensure the
traceability of all weapons and ammunition collected
during the DDR process. This is a welcome trend. The
United Nations stands ready to continue supporting
States in this regard. I would like to point out the
table on pages 5 and 6 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, which provides several examples of United
Nations support to managing arms and ammunition in
peacekeeping settings.
I would like also to highlight the table of
recommendations included as annex I to the report
under the Council’s consideration. The table reflects

17-448053/21

S/PV.8140

Small arms

an effort to assist States in the operationalization of
many of the small-arms-related recommendations that
have been previously made to the Council through
the four previous reports of the Secretary-General on
this topic. While the majority of actions are directed
towards States, either Security Council members or the
broader United Nations membership, the SecretaryGeneral also identifies actions for the United Nations
system and relevant entities. Forty eight concrete
recommendations have been made to the Council on
how best to address small arms, light weapons and
ammunition in the context of this organ’s work. Many
of those recommendations remain highly relevant.
While not all 48 recommendations are included in the
table, the table represents a solid mix of suggested
actions on the key areas of concern for the Council,
including weapons and ammunition management,
peacekeeping, arms embargoes, community safety
and law enforcement, the protection of civilians, and
armed violence. Consideration is also given to gender
mainstreaming and to the value of applying international
standards and guidelines. The actions suggested are
intended to be as concrete and specific as possible.
I would encourage Council members to review the
suggested actions identified by the Secretary-General
and consider their operationalization.
Annex II of the report is submitted to the Council
pursuant to the request made in resolution 2220 (2015)
for the Secretary-General to compile best practices and
arrangements that could be used by United Nations
peacekeeping operations and other relevant Councilmandated entities to guide the implementation of tasks
related to arms embargoes. The Secretary-General has
examined various mechanisms that the United Nations
has instituted in its field missions and drawn best
practices from those experiences for the consideration
of Council members.
I would be remiss if I did not underscore the
particular significance of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and its relationship to peace
and security. In a 1999 presidential statement, the
Security Council acknowledged that “the challenge
posed by small arms is multifaceted and involves
security, humanitarian and development dimensions.”
(S/PRST/1999/28) That statement could be seen as a
foreshadowing of the critical acknowledgement in
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of the
inextricable link between peace and development. The
report of the Secretary-General on small arms and
4/21

18/12/2017

light weapons notes the significance of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) because of their explicit
recognition of the link between arms regulation and
development, as well as between the illicit trafficking
in arms and organized crime. As members are aware,
one of the targets under Goal 16 includes a significant
reduction in illicit arms flows.
As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
the significance of target 16.4 is threefold. First,
it closely connects adequate arms regulation with
proper functioning institutions, which thereby ensure
the sustainability of implementation over the longterm. Secondly, by virtue of that target, States have
acknowledged that arms regulation is not only relevant
for national security and defence sectors, but it also
benefits communities by mitigating the proliferation of
illicit weaponry, thereby creating the security conditions
conductive to social and economic development.
Thirdly, the new development agenda demonstrates
that arms regulation, more than ever, should be pursued
through policies and actions anchored in a measurable
way. The Secretary-General encourages the integration
of measurability in all small arms-control related
activities and has suggested that the development of
indicators on that topic in the context of the SDGs
is an excellent means of monitoring concrete and
demonstrable signs of progress towards a specific goal.
While Goal 16 is the most explicit in recognizing
the relationship between peace and development,
the entirety of the 2030 Agenda can be viewed in the
framework of peace. At the sixth Biennial Meeting
of States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action on Small Arms, States noted
that the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
has implications for the realization of several SDGs
in addition to Goal 16, including those related to
poverty reduction, economic growth, health, gender
equality and safe cities. As the development agenda
was intended to be a comprehensive and inclusive
framework, the mainstreaming of security-related
issues into implementation efforts is most logical.
Before I conclude, and with your permission,
Mr. President, I would like to say a word on the
Secretary-General’s approach to conventional weapons,
including small arms. The Secretary-General is deeply
committed to crisis prevention, which he has placed
at the centre of his reform agenda. We believe that
investing in the effective management of small arms
and light weapons, including their ammunition, is to
17-44805

18/12/2017

Small arms

invest in conflict prevention. Disarmament and arms
control are key enablers of sustainable peace, and
have long played a role in preventing conflict, easing
international tensions and creating space for dialogue.
Owing to the breadth and depth of their impact,
adequate controls for small arms and their ammunition
are vital. When armed conflict rages, effective arms
and ammunition management is imperative. When
international security is challenged, that is precisely
when such control efforts should be pursued with even
greater urgency.
The President: I thank Ms. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate the Japanese presidency on taking the
initiative to convene today’s briefing on these crucial
topic. I also wish to commend Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu for her insightful contribution to
our discussion.
I reiterate Italy’s unwavering commitment to
participating in multilateral forums to fight the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. We attach
the utmost importance to the universalization of the
relevant multilateral instruments.
Illicit trafficking constitutes a very serious threat
to peace and security throughout the world. The
international community is well aware of the devastating
consequences resulting from the widespread illicit
availability of such weapons, which contributes to
instability, violence and insecurity and undermines the
effectiveness of States’ development efforts.
As the Secretary-General points out in his latest
report (S/2017/1025), only peaceful societies will achieve
their desired level of sustainable development. That is
also why the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
sets target 16.4, which calls for a significant reduction in
illicit arms flows. The illegal flow of arms is constantly
evolving, and nowadays trafficking in weapons is not
only associated with transnational organized criminal
groups, but is increasingly fuelled by terrorist entities.
The use of the online market, including the dark web,
to sell and acquire weapons and their components poses
further challenges for law enforcement agencies and
national Governments. The anonymity enabled by that
platform makes preventing the illegal trade and linking
it to specific individuals increasingly difficult.

S/PV. 8140

Furthermore, over recent years, non-State
actors have improved their capacity to design and
manufacture improvised explosive devices out of
commercially available dual-use components. In an
effort to mitigate the threat of weapons falling into
the hands of malicious actors, last August the Security
Council adopted resolution 2370 (2017), which not
only represented a remarkable step forward in the fight
against the scourge of terrorism, but also a substantial
commitment to prevent and detect the illicit supply of
arms. The resolution, the first of its kind, underscores
the urgent need to adopt comprehensive measures aimed
at, inter alia, enhancing Member States’ strategies to
ensure the safe management of ammunition stockpiles,
the implementation marking and tracing processes for
weapons and the development of adequte judicial and
border control capabilities.
Addressing the disposal of small arms and excess
ammunition is critical in a post-conflict context. I
recall, in that regard, the ongoing efforts carried out
in the Western Balkans by national authorities in
partnership with the United Nations Development
Programme, the European Union and the Regional
Cooperation Council. Illegal arms trafficking is a
fundamental driver of violence, and it contributes to
eroding institutional stability and the rule of law. The
Security Council has often addressed this scourge by
mandating that peacekeeping operations assist national
authorities in controlling the flow of small arms,
developing a proper legal framework and improving
policy capacity and practices.
There are many crucial actions that Member
States should take with the support and expertise of
the United Nations, and several tools that should be
effectively deployed to tackle the illegal flow of arms.
In that regard, I would like to draw attention of two
important initiatives.
First, I wish to recall the relevance of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, the third Review Conference of which will
be held in New York in June of next year. The Review
Conference will provide an opportunity to achieve
concrete progress in countering the illicit trade of small
arms and light weapons, including by increasing the
mobilization of all stakeholders in the security arms
control development sector and by exploiting all the
potential synergies among existing instruments.

17-448055/21

S/PV.8140

Small arms

Secondly, I would like to underscore the importance
of the INTERPOL Illicit Arms Records and Tracing
Management System. That tool enables information
exchange and investigative cooperation among law
enforcement agencies in relation to the international
movement of illicit firearms, as well as legal firearms
that have been used to perpetrate crimes. In that
vein, let me underscore the crucial importance of the
implementation of international tracing instruments,
in keeping with the requirement of marking, record
keeping and ensuring international cooperation in
tracing illicit small arms and light weapons.
It is important to recall that illegal arms usually
start off as legally produced and traded weapons.
However, diversion and irresponsible exports can
produce damaging effects and facilitate the spread of
illegal flows. The Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) is a crucial
instrument that has the potential to mitigate that risk by
regulating international trade in conventional weapons
and making it more responsible and transparent. In
addition, the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing
of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and
Components and Ammunition, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, is a very powerful tool for achieving
our common objective, since its States parties commit
to adopting and implementing serious crime-control
measures against the illicit manufacturing of, and
trafficking in, firearms, their parts and components
and ammunition.
Italy stands ready to actively contribute to the
efforts of the international community to curb the
destabilizing accumulation of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, and will continue to
offer its cooperation to interested States and partners.
In that regard, we welcome the review and update of
the European Union small arms and light weapons
strategy, with due regard to cross-cutting issues such
as an analysis of the regional dynamics of small arms
and light weapons, trafficking and new technological
developments to secure small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition and mitigate the risk of diversion.
Lastly, I would like to speak specifically about
Africa. The African continent is particularly affected
by armed violence fuelled by illicit small arms and light
weapons. In that regard, we support any initiative taken
and owned by the States of the region, like the Central
African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and
6/21

18/12/2017

Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture,
Repair and Assembly. We encourage the signatories
to fully implement the Convention, which provides a
unique framework for addressing the specific issues of
the Central African region. We also fully support the
Group of Seven-African Union initiative on small arms
and light weapons control in the extended Sahel, as well
as the Africa-wide action plan aimed at implementing
the 2018-2020 road map for “Silencing the guns
by 2020”.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I thank the UnderSecretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu, for her briefing
and for highlighting the threat to peace and security
posed by illicit trading in small arms and light
weapons. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/1025)
also indicates that the poor regulation of such weapons
is a key enabler of armed conflict and a means of
sustaining it.
Small arms and light weapons must therefore be
seriously considered by the Security Council so that
multilateral efforts aimed at preventing and combating
the uncontrolled circulation of such weapons can be
strengthened to reduce their excessive and destabilizing
accumulation throughout the world. The spread of illicit
weapons impedes the goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and all other global processes
aimed at achieving a sustainable and safer world.
Therefore, action must be taken to prevent the
illegal diversion of small arms and light weapons into
the criminal sphere. The following measures must be
applied in a universal manner: improving stockpile
management, with adequate monitoring in terms of
protection; controlling the sales, exports and imports
of small arms and light weapons and related mediation;
protecting military arsenals; disrupting the network
of transnational organized syndicates and eliminating
their weapon- storage sites; improving border control
and customs mechanisms; and enhancing vigilance over
the storage conditions of weapons. The age of booming
digital technology requires greater control of trade in
arms and arms trafficking on the Internet, in particular
through the trading platforms of the dark web. In that
context, we must fully support the Secretary-General’s
recommendations to overcome the multidimensional
challenges encountered.
Kazakhstan calls for closer collaboration, transparency,
enhanced legislation and stricter control — not just at the
17-44805

18/12/2017

Small arms

national and regional levels but also at the international
level. The ability to implement the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in
each country will determine the global success. We also
underscore the gender-based implications of the illegal
trading in small arms and light weapons, which results
in conflict-related deaths — with several thousand
men, women and children killed each day.
The small arms and light weapons dimension
should become an integral part of the mandate of all
peacekeeping missions of the United Nations and of
the African Union. An adequate response to the issue
will mitigate the impact that those weapons have on
conflicts and will allow us to prevent unnecessary
deaths and reduce terrorism and extremism.
Peacekeeping operations should also include a
comprehensive long-term programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. That will require work
on harmonizing the relevant legal instruments, exportcontrol programmes, mutual information-exchange
and implementing joint law enforcement activities,
including cooperation between customs and border
guard units. Likewise, small arms and light weapon
considerations should be an integral aspect of all
sanctions committees, so as to prevent the illicit flow
of weapons in and out of specific countries under
sanctions regimes.

S/PV. 8140

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her briefing.
The international security situation is currently
undergoing profound and complex changes, with
traditional and non-traditional security threats
intertwined and the frequent occurrence of regional
conflicts and hotspot issues. The illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons fuels regional armed
conflicts in peace, peace processes and post-conflict
reconstruction, facilitates the spread of terrorism and
transnational organized crime and is detrimental to
efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
In recent years , the international community has
taken a series of measures to address the problem of
small arms and light weapons and to achieve progress
in that regard. The Security Council has adopted
resolutions 2117 (2013) and 2220 (2015) and issued
relevant presidential statements, thereby demonstrating
the political will of the international community to
address this problem. In order to further prevent and
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
China wishes to make the following proposals.

Kazakhstan is constantly implementing strict
control measures over manufacture, export and supply
to mitigate any possible illicit proliferation of small
arms and light weapons. We are also focusing on
the region of Central Asia, with the aim of enacting
regional inter-State legislation in the area of exports
control, as well as focusing on a regional approach
and collaboration with specialized organizations, such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and INTERPOL.

First, we must eliminate the cause of the problem of
small arms and light weapons through efforts to achieve
peace, cooperation and development. The international
community must adhere to political and diplomatic ways
as a means to settle disputes and maintain international
and regional peace and stability. At the same time,
there is a need to strengthen peacekeeping in postconflict reconstruction in order to help the countries
concerned resume economic development, restore social
stability as soon as possible and realize sustainable
development. Only by taking a multi-pronged approach
to address both the symptoms and the root causes can
it be possible to eradicate the problem of small arms
and light weapons and build a peaceful and prosperous
world without guns and violence.

We consider the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms to be the most important component
of the export-control system, and therefore provide data
on military expenditures on a regular basis. Kazakhstan
recently ratified the Arms Trade Treaty and we will
implement it on the national level. In that effort, I
assure the Council of Kazakhstan’s full commitment to
other Member States and to the United Nations in order
to achieve our common goals.

Secondly, we should give full play to the important
leading role of multilateral institutions, including the
United Nations. The United Nations has successively
adopted the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International
Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in
a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons, thereby providing a policy basis for

17-448057/21

S/PV.8140

Small arms

the international community in its efforts to respond
to the problem of small arms and light weapons. It
is necessary for all parties to comprehensively and
effectively implement the Programme of Action and
the International Tracing Instrument to push for
further progress in the combat against illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons at national, regional and
international levels. China pays great attention to the
Secretary-General’s latest report on small arms and
light weapons (S/2017/1025) and supports the Secretary
General, various United Nations agencies, INTERPOL
and other multilateral organizations in playing an active
role in addressing the problem.
Thirdly, we should strengthen and control small
arms and light weapons and enhance international
cooperation and assistance in that regard. National
Governments bear the primary responsibility in
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. They must implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions to the letter, adopt responsible
arms trade policies, improve laws and regulations
and intensify law enforcement to prevent small arms
and light weapons from flowing into illegal channels.
There is a need to strengthen information exchange
and pragmatic cooperation among countries and
between countries and international organizations.
It is particularly necessary to increase assistance
to developing countries to help them enhance their
capacity in stock management, marking and tracing, as
well as collecting and destroying illegal firearms.
The Chinese Government has always been
firmly against the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. We have been conscientiously implementing
the Programme of Action and the International Tracing
Instrument and we have submitted compliance reports
on time.
China has been steadily strengthening domestic
legislation and law enforcement and has supported
and taken an active part in international and regional
cooperation in combating the illicit trade in firearms.
China has participated in three consecutive conferences
of States parties to the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) as an
observer. We hope that the ATT will help resolve the
problem of the illicit trade in conventional weapons,
including small arms and light weapons — without
prejudice to the sovereignty, security and legitimate
national defence needs of countries and without
affecting normal and legal arms trade among countries.
8/21

18/12/2017

The outcome document of the Ssxth Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the Programme of Action has laid a sound foundation
for the third Review Conference on the Programme of
Action, to be held in 2018. China is ready to take an
active part in the relevant work within the framework
of the United Nations, strive with others for a positive
result of the third Review Conference and contribute to
the international endeavour for an early solution of the
problem of small arms and light weapons.
Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my thanks to Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing on the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/1025) on small arms and light weapons
pursuant to resolution 2220 (2015). I would also like it
to express the great importance that Egypt attaches to
the issue of the illicit trafficking and supply of small
arms, which has major security, economic and social
impact, especially if such weapons fall into the hands
of terrorist groups or armed movements.
The Middle East and Africa, where Egypt is situated,
are the most affected worldwide by the dangerous and
unprecedented increase in small weapons falling into
the hands of terrorists, armed groups and criminal
organizations. Unfortunately, it seems that this
development is supported by the Governments of some
countries in order to serve rejected political objectives
that run counter to some of the most important purposes
and principles of the United Nations and international
legitimacy, the foremost being the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of countries,
respect for sovereignty and State monopoly over the
legitimate right to use force.
We have recently seen a dangerous increase in the
number of martyrs and injured among the ranks of
civilians and security forces in different countries in
our region and the world, owing to some countries that
supply such terrorist and criminal organizations with
weapons. We want to clarify the extent of the imminent
danger of such a development, which lacks an agreement
on a comprehensive, legally binding international
framework to prohibit and halt it completely. That could
be achieved through the precondition of an official
license granted to the parties concerned by the supplier
country to ensure that such imports are legitimate.
Egypt recognizes that the core of the current
challenge does not lie in the lack of national control
regimes on exports, instead it is due to the deliberate
17-44805

18/12/2017

Small arms

S/PV. 8140

direct or indirect contribution of some countries that
provide terrorist and criminal groups and other armed
movements with illegal weapons and the necessary
funding to acquire such weapons.

regard, Egypt looks forward to receiving more detailed
information from the Secretariat on the procedures
adopted to implement resolution 2370 (2017) on
preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons.

We have taken note with interest of the SecretaryGeneral’s report and would like to stress that Egypt
is seriously concerned about the increasing negative
impact, be they social, economic or security, due to
the illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons.
In that connection, we call upon the international
community, and especially the countries producing
and exporting such weapons, to spare no effort and
cooperate to counter this dangerous development.
We would also like to emphasize that we are still
committed to the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. We also reaffirm the
need to respect the scope of both documents.

Thirdly, Egypt believes that the proposal to develop
an international framework to document, collect and
standardize end-user certificates requires in-depth
study and prior consensus on the relevant terms of
reference. We must develop an international consensus
on a concrete definition of what is trafficking or the
illicit supply of weapons, which should be prevented
and countered, versus the legitimate and lawful trade
in weapons, which should not be restricted, while
considering the promotion of measures regulating such
trade in order to limit illicit trafficking. Egypt stresses
the need to avoid renewed controversial discussions
that attempt to politicize or restrict the legitimate trade
in weapons.

In principle, the delegation of Egypt welcomes a
number of positive recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report. However, we still need
some time to study in depth such recommendations. As
such, we would like to make the following comments
on the content of the Secretary-General’s report.
First, many of the recommendations contained in the
report that are directed to the Security Council should,
in principle, be directed to the General Assembly and
to the Review Conference on the Programme of Action
on countering the illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons. The issues of legalizing and regulating
trade in conventional weapons and the adoption of
special mechanisms to counter the illegitimate trade
nationally and internationally fall under the mandate of
the General Assembly and the Review Conference, not
under the mandate of the Security Council.
Secondly, the report does not accord the necessary
priority to the security threats arising from the impact
of the illicit supply of small weapons on the issues of
terrorism and organized crime. Those are the most
important and dangerous repercussions of the problem
under review, if we compare them to the focus on the
social, economic and humanitarian impacts. We do
not underestimate the importance of such aspects,
but we believe that focusing on the symptoms would
make tackling the root causes more effective. In that

Fourthly, we would like to stress that measures
aimed at securing weapon and ammunition stockpiles
and disposing of excessive such materials is in principle
a purely national responsibility to be shouldered by
the Governments of the countries concerned. The
United Nations took great strides to develop a number
of guidelines that assist countries in developing such
procedures and measures and in providing international
assistance based on the request of the country concerned.
In conclusion, Egypt suggests that we consider
launching various initiatives or mechanisms to provide
developing countries with the necessary equipment
to monitor and control borders in order to counter the
illicit influx of weapons, especially in the areas of
the Middle East and Africa that are ravaged by armed
conflicts and where there are many terrorist groups.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu for her
briefing on the report of the Secretary-General on
small arms and light weapons (S/2017/1025) issued
pursuant to resolution 2220 (2015), which sheds light
on the developments and trends with regard to small
arms and light weapons.
The threat posed by the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons and its devastating
consequences for international peace and security
is indeed a source of serious concern. We know its
devastating consequences from the experiences of
our region, which has been awash with such weapons.
Small arms and light weapons are by far the most

17-448059/21

S/PV.8140

Small arms

widespread and most used weapons in different parts
of the world, and they continue to be key enablers
of numerous international conflicts and civil wars,
which has resulted in enormous harm to civilians,
including women and children. Furthermore, small
arms and light weapons are creating instability and
long-term governance challenges, thereby complicating
conflict resolution and peacebuilding efforts. Such
weapons also end up in the hands of both domestic and
transnational terrorist groups. The increased linkages
between transnational organized crime and terrorism,
as well as the wider use of emerging technologies for
illicit trafficking and production, is therefore a matter
of growing concern that should be seriously addressed.
The role of the Security Council in addressing the
illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons in an integrated and
holistic manner that incorporates political, security,
development, human rights and rule-of-law activities is
imperative. We could agree more with the SecretaryGeneral on the need to mainstream the issue of the
illicit trade, misuse and excessive accumulation of
weapons into all relevant Council discussions. We also
recognize that addressing the scourge of illicit small
arms and light weapons requires coordinated action at
the national, regional and international levels.
For us in Africa, the African Union’s strategy
on the control of illicit proliferation, circulation and
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, as well
as corresponding action plans, is the comprehensive
policy framework to carry out the fight against illicit
arms. There is a need to support such regional efforts,
and we appreciate the existing cooperation with the
relevant United Nations entities in that regard. We hope
they will continue to be strengthened.
At the international level, we note the positive
progress achieved during the reporting period, which
include the unanimous adoption of the Disarmament
Commission’s recommendations on practical confidence­
building measures in the field of conventional weapons.
We believe that will be instrumental in enhancing
cooperation and confidence-building measures with a
view to promoting progress in arms control.
The third Review Conference on the Programme
of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons, which
is scheduled to be held in June 2018, will be an
important platform to encourage Member States to
undertake a set of measures at the national level and to
10/21

18/12/2017

further strengthen efforts at subregional and regional
cooperation, coordination and information-sharing
mechanisms, in particular transborder customs
cooperation and information-sharing, with a view
to preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit
transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse of
small arms and light weapons.
In conclusion, we need to underscore the critical
importance of addressing the resource constraints and
restrained capacities that different United Nations
entities and international organizations encounter in
addressing those challenges.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
High Representative for her briefing on the report of
the Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons
(S/2017/1025).
Sixteen years ago, the General Assembly adopted
by consensus the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. In that
landmark achievement of the international community,
we committed to concrete actions to reduce illicit
trafficking in small arms. The United States remains
fully committed to implementing the Programme
of Action, as well as the 2005 International Tracing
Instrument. We have worked, and will continue to work,
side by side with other countries and international and
regional organizations to combat the illicit small arms
trade. Indeed, we continue to be a leading donor in
this field, including through our conventional weapons
destruction programme, which has provided over
$2.9 billion in assistance to more than 100 countries
since 1993.
Yet the international community as a whole
continues to struggle with challenges in implementing
existing commitments on small arms, and we see
the consequences on a range of issues before the
Security Council. More needs to be done, whether it
be on tackling arms smuggling in Central Africa or
on small arms falling into the hands of terrorists and
criminal groups. It is tempting to hold more meetings
to negotiate more international commitments, but
that approach misunderstands the problem. Rather
than trying to identify every perceived gap in the
international normative framework, we just need more
countries to implement those basic commitments that
we adopted back in 2001. Progress will be incremental;
17-44805

18/12/2017

Small arms

many countries are only now taking first steps, such as
implementing arms tracing.
The Secretary-General’s report gives some cause
for optimism. As noted in the report, the Security
Council has adjusted the mandates of United Nations
missions to tackle the problem of small arms. Côte
d’Ivoire, for example, is a success story in which the
Government, with United Nations support, is better
securing its stockpiles and has successfully traced a
weapon recovered from an illicit trafficker. We can
learn from those experiences and, as appropriate,
mandate United Nations missions to build capacity on
stockpile security and small arms management.
Unfortunately, we have some concerns about the
Secretary-General’s report. When discussing issues
related to domestic misuse of small arms in non-conflict
settings, the report goes beyond its remit. Additionally,
we are disappointed by the Secretary-General’s
continued advocacy for the use of the International
Small Arms Controls Standards (ISACS). Despite the
name, those guidelines are generally not standards.
Unlike the International Ammunition Technical
Guidelines, which were drafted by Government experts,
ISACS were created by a small group of self-selected
experts. In some cases, the authors cherry-picked from
existing instruments and developed those new so-called
standards in an arbitrary and opaque manner, without
referring to existing best practices.
Promoting the ISACS guidelines has resulted in
some unusual situations. In Somalia, we understand that
a United Nations representative advised local officials
not to use regional marking standards developed by
States parties to the Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention,
Control and Reduction of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of
Africa. Although those standards met the requirements
of countries in the region, the United Nations said that
they were not “ISACS compliant”. Given the diversity
of views, we hope that future reports will more aptly
characterize ISACS as voluntary guidelines and not as
practical standards.
We also note with concern references to the tracing
of small arms ammunition. Although it is possible to
assess the original manufacturer of a given round of
ammunition from lot markings and other identifiers,
that is not the same thing as tracing, which is the
systematic tracking from the point of manufacture
or importation to the point at which an item became

S/PV. 8140

illicit. Just noting that a rifle round was produced in a
given country, often legally, does not explain how that
round ended up illegally in the hands of a criminal or
a terrorist.
The United States takes the illicit trafficking of
ammunition very seriously, but measures to combat
the illicit trafficking of ammunition differ from those
needed to prevent the illicit trade in the weapons
themselves. That is why the United States supported
a General Assembly resolution establishing in 2020
a group of governmental experts to discuss problems
arising from the accumulation of conventional
ammunition stockpiles in surplus.
The United States will continue to take concrete
and effective steps at the national, regional and global
levels to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. We welcome today’s discussion and urge all
countries to join us in strengthening the implementation
of our existing commitments and obligations in the field.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing on small arms and light weapons presented
by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu.
Bolivia is a pacifist State that does not produce,
store or export weapons of any kind. We therefore firmly
believe that mitigating the use, trade and trafficking of
small arms and light weapons is vital to the success
of the peacebuilding and stabilization efforts of
countries in conflict. We are concerned about the issue
of the illegal trade of small arms and light weapons,
which is an ongoing challenge that contributes to the
permanent destabilization and lack of security in areas
where armed conflicts are being fought. We are equally
concerned to see that the great challenge to combating
the illicit arms trade has not yet been overcome by the
United Nations or the international community.
We believe that, in addition to being a criminal
activity, illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons further exacerbates armed conflicts,
accentuates tensions, encourages terrorism and
transnational organized crime, and causes serious
injuries and deaths to innocent civilians. We emphasize
that addressing the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is of vital importance to maintaining
regional peace and stability and thereby to promoting
development in the affected countries in the framework
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

17-4480511/21

S/PV.8140

Small arms

The gravity of the problem is rooted in the trade
in small arms and light weapons, as evidenced in
the figures cited in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/1025), which estimates that the financial value
of that lucrative business was worth at least $6 billion in
2014 alone. Moreover, illicit arms trafficking generates
a parallel market whose profits are then injected into
the global financial system through money-laundering
and tax havens, which tend to diminish or eliminate
controls, especially through the investment services of
the tertiary sector, which is used by organized crime
groups to legitimize their profits.
When it comes to the issue of the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, we are compelled to
address the aspect of their illegal transfer to non-State
actors. In that regard, we consider it necessary to define
the concept of non-State agents, and in that regard there is
a substantive history of resolutions — such as resolution
1540 (2004) — that have been negotiated, agreed and
stipulated in the context of the non-proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. Non-State
actors — who are illegally supplied with weapons
and ammunition — provoke and deepen conflicts,
destabilize States, commit crimes against humanity,
war crimes and serious violations of human rights,
spread destruction, and subject the civilian population
to the most despicable acts.
Undoubtedly, the aspect related to the management
of ammunition and weapons is a substantial component
of the United Nations system, whether in peacekeeping
operations or in the activities of the Security Council
and other bodies that are associated primarily with
programmes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, in addition to activities related to the
registration and marking of weapons, which allows
them to be traced.
On the other hand, inadequate arms management
remains a cause for concern. We firmly believe that the
specialized agencies of the Organization, such as the
United Nations Mine Action Service and the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms, should be
strengthened, as that would contribute positively to the
handling, storage, removal and destruction of small
arms and light weapons. Similarly, we are convinced
that international and national controls must be
strengthened with regard to those weapons.
Globalized arms trafficking requires global
controls that significantly reduce the risk of those types
12/21

18/12/2017

of weapons being spread and continuing to endanger
the lives of millions of people. We therefore believe it
essential to have mechanisms in place that prohibit the
supply of small arms and light weapons to unauthorized
entities in the receiving States, and to ensure the strict
regulation of their trade activities and a total ban on the
re-exportation of unauthorized weapons and on their
production, with or without expired licenses.
It cannot be denied that violence, transnational
crime and terrorism are closely linked to the illicit
arms trade. The international criminal groups and
terrorist groups that the Council and every member
of the Organization are combating are its biggest
beneficiaries. That is why, in relation to the principles
that govern the activity of this organ in the context of
threats to international peace and security, it is vital to
lay concrete foundations to tackle that scourge, which
endangers human rights and life itself.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for
her important briefing and the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/1025). We welcome the inclusion
in the report of recommendations that offer means of
implementation for Member States and the Secretariat
and provide a clear road map for the future. We also
welcome the initiative of the Secretary-General to
address past recommendations.
Today’s discussion is particularly timely and
important as we approach the third United Nations
Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and its International
Tracing Instrument, which will take place in June 2018.
The humanitarian consequences of the illicit flows of
those weapons are devastating, resulting in civilian
casualties and hampering development. Weapons and
ammunition flows have a particularly destructive effect
in vulnerable and fragile settings. Preventing armed
conflict and building sustainable peace cannot be
achieved without addressing the wide-reaching harm
caused to civilians by small arms and light weapons.
For that reason, it is necessary to mainstream the
issue of small arms and light weapons into all relevant
discussions on the Council’s agenda. That includes the
mandating of peacekeeping operations and efforts to
sustain peace throughout the conflict cycle. Sweden
will continue to support efforts to prevent the flows of
17-44805

18/12/2017

Small arms

small arms and light weapons and ammunition as an
integral part of our work to sustain peace and prevent
conflict, including through our current membership of
the Council.
We are encouraged to see that significant
developments and trends in weapons and ammunition
management in peace operations and conflict-affected
settings are addressed in the Secretary-General’s
report. It is vital to tackle the complex linkages between
transnational illicit trafficking in weapons and the
resilience of conflict-affected and post-conflict States,
especially in our discussions on peace operations.
The effective control of small arms and light
weapons requires the effective control of ammunition,
since those weapons can be operated and misused only
if ammunition is available. Significant efforts to further
regulate and control ammunition is therefore needed.
The illicit spread of small arms and light weapons
enables and fuels armed conflicts that are having
devastating effects on sustainable development. We
welcome the call for improved controls and regulation as
a means to reduce armed violence and achieve the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We also welcome
the fact that the relationship between the international
trade in arms and the Sustainable Development Goals
is a theme in the Arms Trade Treaty.
We strongly welcome the focus on gender in the
report of the Secretary-General. Mainstreaming
gender issues in arms control efforts is of the utmost
importance to addressing the consequences of illicit
arms flows. Armed violence affects women, men and
children differently. While recognizing that women
and men alike can be victims and perpetrators of armed
violence, cases where small arms contribute to acts of
sexual and/or gender-based violence are of particular
concern. We must also promote the role of women in
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons.
This has been a long-time priority for Sweden. One
example of Sweden’s support is a project of the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament,
which actually commences today and which aims to
improve the contribution and participation of women
in disarmament work. The project focuses on the
prevention of acquisition of small arms, light weapons
and ammunition by terrorist groups in the Lake Chad
basin and countries of the Sahel. While the strength of

S/PV. 8140

Boko Haram has been severely weakened, the threat
of attacks and the prevalence of terrorism remain all
too real for the people of the region. As members of
the Council witnessed and concluded during their visit
to Lake Chad, the recognition of women as agents
for change is central to countering radicalization and
building a sustainable future.
The European Union (EU) is currently in the final
stages of developing a revised EU Strategy to Combat
Illicit Accumulation and Trafficking of Small Arms
and Light Weapons and their Ammunition. The new
Strategy presents a shared vision on how to address the
threat of those weapons and their ammunition. It also
presents common actions to be implemented by the EU
and its member States.
The human, economic and social toll from the
use of illicit arms and light weapons is immense.
Preventing, combating and eradicating that destructive
trade is urgent and essential if we are to achieve both
the 2030 Agenda and the sustaining peace agenda. We
will continue to do all we can to that end.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank our briefer,
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Nakamitsu.
Last year, 560,000 people died at the hands of small
arms and light weapons. That is more than one death
every minute of every day for an entire year. That is the
tragic reality that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1025) brings to life. Illicit small arms are tools
of daily destruction. There is never a shortage. They are
easy to acquire and they have an unparalleled impact
on lives and communities. The Saferworld organization
estimates that the majority of deaths from direct
conflicts in the developing world are the result of the
use of small arms.
The hundred and thousands of deaths are just the
tip of the iceberg. Illicit small arms add fuel to the fire
of armed conflicts around the world. They facilitate the
most heinous human rights violations and abuses. They
are the preferred instruments of war for those who carry
out mass killings and rape. They equip terrorists and
violent extremists. And where we find transnational
criminals dealing in human lives, illicit drugs or illegal
wildlife products, there is little doubt that we will also
find small arms.
Nowhere is that more apparent than in South Sudan.
It is no longer soldiers who carry weapons. Small arms

17-4480513/21

S/PV.8140

Small arms

have become the norm. When they become violent,
local-level disputes are resolved not with homemade,
traditional weapons, but with guns. Even children
herding cattle must carry arms to protect themselves
and their livelihood. In that culture of weapons, local
disputes now escalate faster and increasingly result
in large-scale casualties. For a country torn apart by
a national level conflict, this is a price that South
Sudanese communities cannot afford to pay. Armed
fighting widens rifts between groups and entrenches
issues, and community conflict-resolution is far less
effective because of heavily armed groups.
And the problem does not stop at the borders of
conflict zones. Transfers of weapons and trained
fighters spread the threat to neighbouring countries.
We have seen that in Somalia, Syria and elsewhere. If
we are to make any progress in tackling that challenge,
we need to work collectively to strengthen arms control,
destroy excessive stockpiles and tackle the drivers of
instability and conflict that fuel the demand for illicit
weapons. It is for those reasons that we were proud to
adopt resolution 2220 (2015) and continue the Council’s
focus on that important issue.
Outside of the Council, the Arms Trade Treaty is
one of our most powerful tools in the ongoing fight to
stop irresponsible arms transfers. The Treaty’s vision of
a globally well-regulated, legal trade in arms is one that
the United Kingdom fully supports. Universalization,
especially getting the right States around the table, must
remain a priority. Greater participation would increase
the treaty’s influence, strength and reputation, and we
encourage all States that have not yet done so to make
ratification or accession a national priority.
Universalization must go hand in hand with
implementation. That means doing all we can to stop
diversion, tackle corruption, dismantle trafficking
networks and strengthen information-sharing. Since the
United Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms
and Light Weapons was adopted in 2001, we have seen
more and more States take action to improve stockpile
management. That is a recognition of the impact on
their communities of weapons diverted from national
stockpiles to criminal activity, and of the devastating
consequences of explosions of ammunition depots.
As we look ahead to the third United Nations
Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
14/21

18/12/2017

Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and its International
Tracing Instrument next year, it is important that we
continue to encourage States to prioritize resources for
stockpile security and surplus destruction.
The United Kingdom is proud to provide technical
and financial support both bilaterally and through
regional and multilateral organizations, such as the
African Union, the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe and the Commonwealth.
Through such support, we help countries to strengthen
arms control frameworks, implement better stockpile
management procedures and tackle the drivers of
terrorism, crime, poverty and exclusion, which fuel the
demand for illicit weapons.
I would like to conclude by looking forward to 2030.
A report recently published by Small Arms Survey
shows us how the world could look if we all implement
violence reduction initiatives. If we embrace action,
quell the conflicts and realize the peacful societies
envisaged in Sustainable Development Goal 16, we
could save 1.2 million lives. That outcome would befit
the body charged with upholding international peace
and security.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would also
like to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her enlightening
briefing on the important issue of small arms and
light weapons. The control of such weapons is without
question of crucial importance for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1025)
before us today is timely in view of the persistence of
numerous hotbeds of tension throughout the world,
in particular in Africa and the Middle East, which
shows that the maintenance of peace and stability
remains a battle that is far from being won. Indeed, the
consequences of the misuse and the illicit circulation of
small arms and light weapons continue to be a source
of great concern to the United Nations and to the entire
international community. West Africa and the Sahel
have clearly not been spared that scourge. That region
faces multifaceted threats, including the proliferation
and the illicit trafficking of conventional arms and
drugs, as well as the activities of terrorist groups.
The inadequate regulation of such weapons is
a significant factor of conflict. Added to that is the
availability or even the proliferation of weapons in the
absence of adequate control systems, which fosters
a wide range of human rights violations, resulting
17-44805

18/12/2017

Small arms

in, among other things, increased poverty and an
impediment to sustainable development. In September
2015, during the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, Member States therefore
recognized that sustainable development is impossible
without peace and security and that without sustainable
development peace and security will continue to
be threatened. Furthermore, target 4 of Sustainable
Development Goal 16, which focuses on the promotion
of peaceful societies, access to justice for all and the
establishment of effective institutions, provides for a
significant reduction in arms trafficking.
Although many problems remain, the past two
years have been marked by some successes in the area
of conventional weapons. For example, we would note
the adoption by consensus of the outcome document
of the sixth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eliminate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. There were also some
recommendations on concrete confidence-building
measures in the area of conventional weapons, adopted
by consensus by the Disarmament Commission at its
substantive session of 2017 after two decades of work
without success. Those recommendations underscore
the importance of conventional arms control to
the maintenance and enhancement of regional and
international peace and security.
For its part, Senegal wishes to recall its commitment
to the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), the first international
convention whose specific purpose is to regulate the
international arms trade in order to put an end to the
disastrous consequences resulting from the transfer
of conventional arms between countries. We therefore
again call for the universalization of the Treaty and of
the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition.
In addition, we encourage regional cooperation in
order to share best practices and the ongoing involvement
of civil society in awareness-raising actions regarding
the ATT. West Africa, which has taken a number of
initiatives to harmonize regional legislation with a
view to promoting common actions to combat the illicit
circulation of small arms and light weapons, is an
excellent illustration of that regional cooperation.

S/PV. 8140

The proliferation, illicit transfer, accumulation and
diversion of small arms and light weapons continue
to jeopardize international peace and security, with
devastating effects on civilian populations, particularly
women and children, in conflict and post-conflict
situations. That is why we should pay closer attention
to the implementation of the Programme of Action
and work towards strengthening physical security
measures and stockpile management for weapons
and ammunition.
We therefore reaffirm our country’s commitment
to fully implementing the Programme of Action and to
strengthening cooperation and assistance. To that, we
must add the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons and international
cooperation and assistance for the implementation
of the Programme of Action and the International
Tracing Instrument, in particular capacity-building
and training, as well as the transfer of technology and
equipment to States that have requested such a transfer.
We also call on the Security Council, as the
Secretary-General does in his report, to periodically
review the issue of small arms and light weapons, in
particular by holding a regular debate specifically on
that issue. We also encourage national authorities to
use existing standards and practical guidelines, such
as the International Small Arms Control Standards and
the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines,
to strengthen the control of small arms and light
weapons, as well as ammunition, in order to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, for introducing the report of
the Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons
(S/2017/1025). While the report in general covers the
broad scope of the issue under consideration, it also
contains a number of questionable points, to which we
would like to draw attention.
Russia has consistently supported the enhancement
of the United Nations role in coordinating the efforts
of the international community to address the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. The illicit
weapons trade remains the main source of financing
for terrorist and extremist groups and a major factor in
the proliferation and deterioration of local conflicts and
armed violence. Despite some progress in a number of

17-4480515/21

S/PV.8140

Small arms

areas, we have not yet seen a significant improvement
in the fight against the illegal trade in small arms and
light weapons in the world. The pace of implementing
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eliminate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects remains inadequate. We
have also seen slippage in the implementation of the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. The black and grey
markets in which such weapons are traded continue
to fuel the activities of terrorists, extremists, illegal
armed groups, organized crime and street crime, as
well as various types of conflict. It is therefore long
past time to reinforce the Programme of Action with
provisions such as the following that will enable it to
significantly reduce the risk of weapons moving from
legal into illegal circulation.
The first would introduce a universal ban on the
transfer of any type of small arms or light weapons to
entities that are not authorized by the States to which
they are sent. Secondly, States should be required to
enact strict regulations and exercise direct control
over arms-export brokering activities in areas under
their jurisdiction and limit the numbers of brokers
themselves to the absolute minimum. Thirdly, there
should be a ban on re-exporting imported small arms
and light weapons without the written consent of the
initial exporting State. Fourthly, the manufacture of
small arms and light weapons on expired licenses or
without licenses from the countries that own the rights
to the manufacturing technology should be banned.
Such measures could be based on the relevant best
practices of States, including Russia, which has highly
refined legislation in this area. For our part, we stand
ready to help States interested in learning from Russia’s
experience so as to strengthen their legislation and
law-enforcement activities in every area related to the
control of small arms and light weapons.
In the context of establishing criteria for assessing
the effectiveness of the Programme of Action, it has
not escaped our notice that the standardized electronic
format for providing annual national reports does
not allow for potentially significant information for
other States Members of the United Nations regarding
advanced developments in the implementation of
the Programme of Action, or, on the contrary, about
existing problems with it. Unlike many other countries,
Russia has consistently made its national report on its
16/21

18/12/2017

implementation of the Programme of Action available as
a separate document, which provides a comprehensive
overview of the full range of that implementation.
From a substantive point of view, the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) is frankly a weak document that is not
capable of fully enabling the implementation of its own
provisions. For example, it does not include a direct ban
on unlicensed arms production or transfers to non-State
actors, and it has no provisions regulating the re-export
of items intended for military use. The risk of weapons
falling into the hands of criminals and terrorists
therefore remains, along with potential threats to the
further destabilization of situations in various hotspots.
The Treaty’s practical implementation also raises
serious questions. In our view it is unacceptable that
individual parties continue to supply goods for military
use, directly or indirectly, to areas dealing with internal
armed conflict. In that regard, we are particularly
concerned about the transfer of weapons and ammunition
to Ukraine during the period from 2015 to 2017. On the
one hand, we have been encouraged to accede to the
ATT as soon as possible, since it is designed to establish
general standards for regulating international trade
in conventional weapons and promote transparency
and responsible behaviour in that area on the part of
States parties. And yet in practice we have been given
to understand that those standards can be interpreted
selectively. In that context, for example, how should
we understand the Canadian Government’s decision of
13 December to include Ukraine on a list of countries
permitted to receive supplies of lethal weapons?
The process of universalizing the ATT has now
been stalled for some time. To date, only 93 States are
parties to the Treaty, less than half of the total number
of States Members of the United Nations. The number
of State signatories to the Treaty is still stuck at 131.
It has been hard to miss the significant decline in the
number of observer delegations at the ATT’s annual
conferences. Not does States’ discipline regarding
annual reports stand up to criticism. Of the 80 States
that were supposed to submit national reports on the
transfer of military goods abroad this year, only 49
complied. The number last year was 51.
The Russian Federation shares the international
community’s concerns about the uncontrolled spread
of small arms and light weapons and advocates the
continued consolidation of international efforts to
counter it, under the auspices of the United Nations.
17-44805

18/12/2017

Small arms

In that regard, we view the Third Review Conference
of the Programme of Action on Small Arms, scheduled
for next year, as very important. We hope that it will
make a practical contribution to resolving the acute and
urgent issue of small arms and light weapons ending up
in illegal circulation.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs Nakamitsu for her comprehensive
briefing. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
6 December biennial report (S/2017/1025) on small
arms and light weapons, which illustrates the very
serious and negative consequences of the misuse and
illicit circulation of small arms. We appreciate his
recommendations on the issue.
Uruguay is committed to disarmament in all its
forms and to that end has acceded to and ratified the
various related regional and international treaties.
We are therefore fully committed to combating illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, as well
as their misuse and destabilizing stockpiling. The
proliferation of conventional weapons, including small
arms, is a fundamental element in armed conflicts and
a means of sustaining them. Trafficking and trading
in arms with belligerent parties to armed conflicts
contributes directly to the suffering and death of
civilians. The acquisition of such weapons by terrorist
groups and organized criminals also represents a
serious threat and requires a significant collective
approach and effort.
Unhindered access to small arms and the absence
of adequate controls on them have adverse effects both
on the humanitarian front and on human rights and
sustainable development. They can also affect decisions
on how to carry out individual peacekeeping operations.
The statistics are overwhelming. The arms trade is
undoubtedly one of the most profitable businesses in
the world. As the Secretary-General’s report notes,
the international small-arms trade was worth at least
$6 billion in 2014 alone, with ammunition accounting
for 38 per cent of all global transfers. Nearly half of all
violent deaths between 2010 and 2015 were caused by
firearms. Regrettably, if States do not do everything in
their power to halt the illicit transfer of weapons, this
will continue. If we are to eradicate this illicit trade,
all States must cooperate in identifying the routes and
mechanisms that enable these weapons to circulate
and in strengthening border controls. International

S/PV. 8140

cooperation and assistance must be reinforced, with a
special emphasis on generating national capacities.
Controlling the international trade in arms is a
matter of urgency. As my delegation has frequently
pointed out, it is States that are primarily responsible
for adopting national standards for strengthening
regulation of the possession and use of weapons as well
as controlling their export, import and transit with a
view to preventing and combating illicit trafficking.
We believe that every State has a shared responsibility
to cooperate in confronting this global problem.
However, States that produce and sell weapons also
bear a differentiated and primary responsibility, since
the source of the problem lies in the production and
trade of such arms.
Uruguay is convinced that the historic Arms Trade
Treaty was an important step towards international
regulation and a more responsible international trade
of conventional weapons, including small arms and
light weapons and their parts and components, as well
as ammunition. The regulation of that trade would
have fundamental consequences in armed conflicts,
especially for the civilian victims of armed violence,
in particular women, children and other vulnerable
groups. It would also promote peace and security by
eradicating the transfer of arms to conflict zones.
The ratification of and accession to international
instruments aimed at protecting civilians, such as the
Arms Trade Treaty, would contribute greatly to civilian
protection. Similarly, the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its
Aspects is an instrument of vital importance and an
international benchmark in advancing the fight against
the illicit trafficking of these weapons.
Finally, as a country committed to disarmament,
Uruguay calls on all States — particularly those that
produce, sell and possess arms — to comply with
their obligations in accordance with the international
legal framework.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Japanese presidency for convening this important
meeting and the Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu, for her very
enlightening briefing.
The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
today poses a grave threat to international peace and

17-4480517/21

S/PV.8140

Small arms

security. As has been noted, these weapons claim the
highest number of victims in the world by far, as the
headlines never fail to remind us. They are responsible
for almost 90 per cent of the victims of armed conflict
and for more than 500,000 deaths a year. The stakes and
challenges involved are enormous and lie at the heart of
all topics, as the Secretary-General emphasizes in his
report (S/2017/1025).
The illicit trade in these weapons continues to fuel
conflict, exacerbate armed violence and incite organized
crime and terrorism. France, like many other countries,
has experienced this first hand during the terrorist
attacks that have struck its terroritory in recent years.
Beyond that, the stability and development of entire
regions —the Sahel and the Levant, for example — are
threatened. I recall that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development seeks a world free from corruption, illegal
trafficking and the illegal circulation of weapons, all of
which threaten the political stability and development
of humankind.
In the face of these extreme threats, we must
be able to mobilize in unison. Given that we can
respond effectively to these challenges only if we do
so together, in 2016 France took the initiative to issue
a political declaration on this subject, supported by
a cross-regional group of 63 countries. The effort
for the political mobilization of all countries of all
regions must continue. It is also important to turn this
commitment into reality by seeking to achieve the
robust implementation of existing instruments through
concrete measures. We can do so first through the
provisions of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects, which
remains the cornerstone of our work. France will have
the honour of chairing the third Review Conference,
to be held in New York in June 2018. France is also
mobilized in the context of the Arms Trade Treaty and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
Various kinds of action — upstream of weapons
trafficking to prevent their spread, and downstream
to interrupt trafficking flows — must be pursued.
Among these, I would highlight the development
of adequate national legislation, the reduction of
illicit stocks in circulation thanks to collection and
destruction campaigns, improved security and physical
management of weapons and ammunition stocks, and
the strengthening of police and customs control, which
18/21

18/12/2017

are all areas in which we could work. Significant
progress has already been achieved. Many States
have improved their legislation and the issue of small
arms is now better reflected in regional organizations.
However — and this is my third point — we cannot
stop there.
Increased international cooperation in the marking,
registering and tracing of small arms and light weapons
is also essential. The exchange of information remains
a key element if we wish to progress together. France
welcomes the introduction of various tracking systems
and databases such as iTrace and iArms. These
initiatives allow the registration of seized weapons
and, through access to the registers thereby created,
improve the sharing of information. Private actors,
especially industrial producers and civil society, also
play a central role and must therefore be involved.
France is also convinced of the central importance
of international assistance, which must be based on two
major principles. First, we must adopt a cooperative and
assistance-based approach that is tailored to the needs
of the beneficiaries. Along with capacity development,
that is one of the keys for the success of international
assistance. Secondly, it is important to seek coordination
among various assistance initiatives in order to avoid
duplication and guarantee the maximum efficiency of
all actions undertaken.
My country, for its part, resolutely contributes to
the fight against the supply of arms to armed terrorist
groups in the Sahelo-Saharan region, in particular with
Chad, the Niger, Burkina Faso, Mali and Mauritania,
which constitute the Group of Five for the Sahel. France
also conducts numerous training activities for the
benefit of States such as Benin, the Niger and Mali.
Despite our many accomplishments, many
challenges remain. We can and must do better and go
further in our efforts to strengthen the effectiveness
and coherence of our actions. At the international
level, adherence to and ratification of key international
instruments in this area is of crucial importance. That
is why France encourages all countries to accede to the
Arms Trade Treaty as soon as possible.
In conclusion, the third Review Conference of
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and its International
Tracing Instrument, to be held in June 2018, will be a
unique occasion for us to move forward. It will be a key
17-44805

18/12/2017

Small arms

opportunity for making concrete progress, including
by increasing mobilization of all actors in the security,
arms control and development sectors and by taking
advantage of all possible synergies among existing
instruments. I wish to assure members of the Council
of France’s full commitment and mobilization in this
sense, at both the national level and as President, to
ensure the success of that important Conference, which
for France is a true priority.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
the Japanese presidency for convening this important
meeting, as well as Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her informative briefing. We would also
like to commend Lithuania for initiating the important
resolution 2220 (2015) during its Council presidency
in May 2015, and which Ukraine had the honour of
co-sponsoring.
Ukraine remains gravely concerned over the fact
that the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons continue to
pose threats to international peace and security, causing
significant loss of life and contributing to instability and
insecurity in many regions of the world. In addition to
fuelling armed conflicts, illicit small arms have myriad
adverse effects on human rights and lead to negative
humanitarian and socioeconomic consequences, in
particular for the security of civilians. Armed conflicts
driven by such arms are the main reason people flee
their homes in the quest for a better life and a more
secure environment. Ukraine fully subscribes to the
view that there are ever increasing links between
transnational organized crime, illicit arms trafficking
and terrorism.
At the national level, Ukraine attaches particular
importance to ensuring effective export control
procedures in the sphere of conventional arms. We
strictly adhere to the respective resolutions and
decisions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the international export
control regime Wassenaar Arrangement. We continue
to believe that the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects is an important and universal tool in global
efforts to combat the threat posed by such weapons.
We also believe that the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms continues to be an instrumental

S/PV. 8140

transparency and confidence-building measure in the
field of the conventional arms trade. Ukraine is one
of the countries that voluntarily report on small arms
imports and exports in their yearly submissions.
I must mention the current unprecedented twentyfirst century challenges in Europe posed by the use
of illicit conventional weapons, including small arms
and light weapons, as a result of Russia’s ongoing
military aggression and occupation of Crimea and
part of the Donbas region of Ukraine. Time and again,
we have drawn the attention of the Council to the
continuing illicit supplies — both hidden and in plain
sight — of deadly weapons, ammunition and gunmen
to our territory by the Russian Federation through
the uncontrolled sections of the Ukrainian-Russian
State border.
Just a few moments ago, the Russian delegation
bragged about its experience in the area of small arms
and expressed its readiness to share its so-called best
practices. The following quote could be quite telling in
that regard.
“I am particularly concerned about the situation
on and around the border between Ukraine and the
Russian Federation. This remains a key obstacle to
the de-escalation of the situation on the ground as
arms and heavy weaponry reportedly continue to
flow unabated into Ukraine from Russia. There is
an urgent need to ensure a secure border between
the two countries, with international verification,
as discussed in the Minsk talks”.
The Russian Federation will be disappointed to
learn that that statement was not made by Ukraine
officials; it was made by the previous SecretaryGeneral. He clearly articulated those points at a press
conference held on 29 August 2014. We wonder if the
delegation of the Russian Federation would now like to
apply its propaganda cliché about anti-Russian hysteria
to the institution of the Secretary-General. We might
also wonder which country would be willing to adopt
Russian best practices, including in the area of small
arms. Such deliberate criminal activity undermines
not only subregional security, but European and
international security as well, and is therefore the
responsibility of the Council. In that regard, we urge the
Secretary-General to include the relevant information
in his next report on small arms.
In conclusion, let me stress that we fully support
the United Nations efforts, in cooperation with host

17-4480519/21

S/PV.8140

Small arms

Governments, to address the issues of weapons and
ammunition management in conflict-affected areas,
including stockpile management, physical security,
marking, tracing, record-keeping and awarenessraising. We also reiterate our support for more frequent
consideration of the small arms issue by the Council.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I would like to begin by thanking High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing on the
Secretary-General’s report on small arms and light
weapons (S/2017/1025).
Every year at least 500,000 lives are lost and
countless human rights violations, including sexual
violence and the forced recruitment of children, are
conducted as a result of the misuse and illicit transfer
of small arms and light weapons. Such weapons also
prolong and intensify conflicts and hinder humanitarian
aid, reconstruction and development, even in postconflict areas. It is imperative for the international
community to enact adequate regulations and controls
in order to reduce further armed violence involving the
misuse of such weapons.
Japan believes that disarmament that saves lives,
as called for by the Secretary-General, is an important
vision. That is the very mindset we should adopt to
tackle the issue of small arms and light weapons. From
that point of view, we welcome the recommendations
and best practices described in the report. Japan hopes
that the report will help the world take further steps to
reduce small arms-related violence.
Japan places a high priority on addressing threats
involving the misuse and illicit transfer of small arms
and light weapons. In post-conflict areas in particular,
we focus on capacity-building for competent national
institutions, such as for law enforcement and security
authority. For instance, from 2015 to 2017, Japan has
provided approximately $3 million to Côte d’Ivoire.
In cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme, we have provided capacity-building
assistance for the national commission in charge of the
collection and disposal of small arms and light weapons
and also helped to set guidelines on the control of those
weapons, to be used by national authorities. We hope
that such efforts will lead to sustainable peace in postconflict areas.
20/21

18/12/2017

It is evident that the excessive stockpiling of
conventional arms can destabilize domestic and
regional situations, and that proper international trade
and stockpile management are indispensable. In that
regard, Japan would like to emphasize the importance
of the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) as the first legally
binding Treaty regulating international trade in
conventional arms. The ATT sets high standards for
the regulation of the arms trade, and its implementation
contributes to eradicating the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. However, although three years have
passed since the entry into force of the Treaty, only 93
States have joined it. In the Asia-Pacific region, only six
countries have joined the Treaty. Japan, as President of
the upcoming Conference of States Parties to the ATT,
is committed to the universalization of the Treaty. We
will approach those who have not yet joined the Treaty
and call for a joint effort of the international community.
As other speakers have already mentioned, in June
of next year, the third Review Conference of the United
Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons will be held in New York. The Programme of
Action provides a framework for activities to counter
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. Japan
believes that the Conference will be an important
opportunity to take stock of our progress. Japan is
strongly committed to the success of the Conference.
We will continue our efforts, together with the
international community, to eliminate the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The negative impact on the implementation
of the Package of Measures for the Implementation of
the Minsk Agreements, which remains the only option
for resolving the situation in south-eastern Ukraine, is
exacerbated by overall instability in the country, the
exploitation of the Donbas factor to foment internal
political strife and the rise of radical and extremist
forces that are condoned by the authorities.
More and more often, it is the weapons in the hands
of the extremists that are becoming the instruments
that settle conflicts, and the country’s authorities
are incapable of prosecuting the trafficking of those
weapons. In that regard, we would like to draw
17-44805

18/12/2017

Small arms

the Council’s attention to the fact that, according
to data published in April by the independent
non-governmental organization the Small Arms
Survey, the volume of illegally traded small arms in
Ukraine stood at approximately 3 million units in 2013.
The 2014 coup d’état only exacerbated the situation.
It was under the passive eye of the coupists that army
depots were looted — which was well documented in
the media — including in western areas of the country,
and small arms and light weapons were distributed
willy nilly to the extremists, who were subsequently
legalized by their inclusion in the country’s armed
forces. In that regard, we hope that the Kyiv authorities
fulfil their international obligation to control the
circulation of small arms and light weapons and take
the necessary measures to combat their illegal trade.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I will be brief. Russia is
the sole supplier of arms, heavy weaponry, mercenaries,
ammunition and a whole host of other deadly weapons
to Russian separatists and terrorists in eastern Ukraine,
including the infamous Buk missile that downed
Malaysia Airlines flight MH-17, killing the almost 300
people on board. Russia therefore has neither a moral
nor legal right to lecture any delegation in the Council,
especially given that it is recognized by the General
Assembly as a party to the conflict and an occupying
Power in Ukraine.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In response to what was just said about Russia
being the only supplier of weapons to Ukraine, let me
go into more detail regarding our theory about how
various countries supply Ukraine with lethal weapons.
We have already mentioned that Canada publicly stated
its readiness to license its companies to supply them. As

S/PV. 8140

it recently turned out, some American companies, and
in particular AirTronic USA, which makes handheld
grenade launchers, are already supplying Kiev with
weapons, having been secretly authorized to do so
with the agreement of both the State Department and
the Pentagon, although the official United States line
is that no final decision has been made on that matter.
We would like to suggest to those promoting and
making such decisions to consider their responsibility
for the results. It is entirely obvious that pouring
American and Canadian weapons of war into Ukraine
is pushing the country’s leaders, who are already
sabotaging the Minsk agreements, into undertaking
new military ventures. Everyone must understand that
the conflict in Donbas cannot be settled by force, and
the blame for the lives lost will be on those who put
weapons in the killers’ hands.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I apologize for taking the
floor once again. The Russian representative omitted
to mention one particular point, which is that Ukraine
is defending its own territory, territorial integrity and
sovereignty against Russian aggression.
Lastly, the Russian delegation’s carefully prepared
statement and data speak to major preparation on its
part for this meeting, which is somewhat ominous,
as if Russia were preparing for a further phase of
military aggression against Ukraine, which I hope does
not materialize.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Very briefly, I would like to say that the
Russian delegation prepares extremely thoroughly and
carefully for every Security Council meeting.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

17-4480521/21
