S/2018/1065

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 November 2018
Original: English

The situation in Central Africa and the activities of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement of the President of the
Security Council dated 10 August 2018 (S/PRST/2018/17), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to keep it informed about the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). It provides an assessment of
the major political and security trends in Central Africa since the report of the
Secretary-General dated 1 June 2018 (S/2018/521), and an update on progress in the
implementation of the mandate of UNOCA. The report also provides an update on the
situation in the Lake Chad basin region, pursuant to Council resolution 2349 (2017).

II. Major developments in the Central Africa subregion
A.

Political, peace and security developments and trends
2.
The political situation in Central Africa was dominated by elections held in a
number of countries in the subregion, including Cameroon, Gabon, Rwanda and Sao
Tome and Principe, and the ongoing preparations for upcoming elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo later in 2018. The security situa tion remained
fragile in some parts of the subregion and social tensions continued to rise in some
countries.
3.
The Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) held a joint summit of
Heads of State and Government on peace, security, stability and the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism in Lomé on 30 July. The Heads of State and
Government adopted a joint communiqué and the Lomé Declaration on Peace,
Security, Stability and the Fight against Terrorism and Violent Extremism, in which
they committed to strengthening cooperation on peace and security issues.
Political development and trends
4.
On 2 July in Cameroon, at the request of its President, Paul Biya, the National
Assembly extended the mandate of all Members of Parliament for one year, beginning
29 October 2018, thereby postponing scheduled legislative elections. Local elections

18-19142 (E)

031218

*1819142*

S/2018/1065

were also postponed to 2019 by a presidential decree, citing challenges in organizing
the presidential, legislative and local elections simultaneously. The presidential
election took place on 7 October. The electoral management body noted that the
turnout was particularly low in the North-West and South-West regions. According to
the final results announced by the Constitutional Council on 22 October, the President
was re-elected with 71.28 per cent of the vote. The voter turnout rate was 53.8 per
cent.
5.
The security situation in the North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon
continued to deteriorate. Sporadic fighting between security forces and armed groups
was reported throughout the reporting period. On 12 July, the convoy of the Minister
for Defence was attacked on two separate occasions near Kumba in the South -West
region. On the night of 28 to 29 July, an armed group attacked a prison in Ndop in the
North-West region, resulting in the escape of 163 inmates. On 26 September, armed
individuals also attacked a prison in Wum in the North-West region, leading to the
escape of 80 inmates. On 5 November, nearly 80 students and staff from a secondary
school in Bamenda, in the North-West region, were kidnapped. All of the students
were released the following day. During the reporting period, there were reports of
sexual violence perpetrated by both security forces and armed groups. In response,
“gender desks” were established at police stations in the South-West region in an
effort to establish a safe and confidential reporting process on sexual and genderbased violence and related crimes. On 11 October, religious leaders of the Catholic,
Protestant and Muslim communities in the English-speaking regions held a meeting
in preparation for an “Anglophone General Conference” scheduled to be held in Buea,
in the South-West region, on 21 and 22 November, but which was later postponed. At
the same meeting, they reiterated their appeal for the cessation of military and
insurgent operations in the English-speaking regions.
6.
At a press conference on 11 August, the President of Chad, Idriss Deby Itno,
reported that his country needed 70 billion CFA francs (approximately $122 million)
in order to organize the legislative elections scheduled for November. He also
indicated that consultations were ongoing with the Government ’s technical and
financial partners to seek the necessary assistance. The legislative elections were
postponed, reportedly due to financial constraints.
7.
On 15 June and 19 October, transhumance-related clashes were reported in the
Ouaddaï region of Chad, leading to seven and five deaths, respectively. On 11 August,
some 100 armed vehicles attacked two Chadian military garrisons at Kouri
Bougoudi — a gold-mining area where many immigrants and Chadians are engaged
in mining activities — in the Tibesti desert, near the border with Libya, resulting in
the death of at least three Chadian soldiers and the theft of approximately 20 military
vehicles. The Chadian armed group, Conseil de commandement militaire pour le salut
de la République, claimed responsibility for the attack. In response, the Government
requested all mine workers to leave the area prior to the initiation of air and ground
operations by the armed forces. The Chadian Air Force bombarded two mining
operations in the area of Kouri Bougoudi on 13 September, killing two miners and
seriously injuring two others. More than 8,000 people of multiple nationalities left
the area and requested assistance. On 24 October, another attack against the Chadian
defence and security forces was reported in Miski department, near the border with
Libya. The spokesperson of the Chadian armed forces announced that the attackers
had been neutralized and the situation was under control.
8.
The Congo made progress in the implementation of the ceasefire agreement
signed on 23 December 2017. In June, 81 supporters of former rebel leader Frédéric
Bintsamou, also known as Pastor Ntumi, were released after having been detained
since 2016. The judicial authorities lifted the arrest warrant against Pastor Ntumi and
two of his allies on 28 July. On 21 August, Pastor Ntumi joined the weapons collection
2/17

18-19142

S/2018/1065

operation in the Pool region, which had begun on 7 August. On 31 August, the
Government adopted a disarmament, demobilization and r eintegration programme.
With a total budget of $16.6 million, the programme aims to support 7,500 former
rebel combatants as well as displaced populations of the Pool region. On 8 October,
the Government reported that 5,665 ex-combatants had been identified and 8,007
weapons had been collected and destroyed.
9.
In Equatorial Guinea, the sixth national political dialogue took place from 16 to
23 July with the participation of representatives of the Government and 17 recognized
political parties and representatives of civil society and religious groups, as well as
the diaspora. International, regional and subregional organizations and diplomatic
missions were invited to the dialogue as observers. The opposition group Ciudadanos
por la Innovación de Guinea Ecuatorial party was barred from participating in the
dialogue, although the President of Equatorial Guinea, Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo, had announced a total amnesty on 4 July. Several political leaders in exile
also boycotted the dialogue, and few women from the country were in attendance.
The final communiqué outlined agreements between the Government, representatives
of political parties and the diaspora. However, two opposition parties, Convergencia
para la Democracia Social and Unión de Centro Derecha, did not sign the
communiqué in protest against the non-application of the announced total amnesty to
political actors and the rejection of calls for a transitional government, among other
things.
10. In Gabon, the first round of legislative elections and the single round of local
elections were held on 6 October. The second round of legislative elections took place
on 27 October. The ruling Parti démocratique gabonais won 98 of 143 seats, thereby
securing a majority in the National Assembly. The opposition party, Les démocrates,
became the second political force with 11 seats. Nineteen women were elected,
compared with 15 in the previous legislature.
11. Gabon continued to experience increasing socioeconomic tensions. On 21 and
28 June, the Council of Ministers adopted several austerity measures, including a
reduction of salaries in the public sector by 5 to 15 per cent. That was criticized by
trade unions and the opposition. On 2 August, the major trade union confederation,
Dynamique unitaire, filed an appeal with the Constitutional Court to invalidate the
austerity measures and decided to organize demonstrations in Libreville on 13 and
28 August. Despite both demonstrations being banned by the Government, members
of the confederation attempted to demonstrate on 28 August, resulting in the arrest of
29 people.
12. In Rwanda, legislative elections took place on 2 and 3 September. The
Rwandese Patriotic Front-Inkotanyi coalition party secured 40 of the 80 seats in
Parliament, followed by the Social Democratic Party with 5 seats and the Liberal
Party with 4 seats. For the first time, representatives of the Democratic Green Party
of Rwanda and the Social Party Imberakuri, secured two seats each. The
parliamentarians were sworn in on 19 September. Overall, women obtained 61 per
cent of the seats. Youth, who were accorded a minimum of two seats by a quota
system, gained a total of seven seats. Persons living with disabilities were also given
one seat by quota. Of the 80 members of the National Assembly, 53 are dire ctly
elected and 27 are indirectly elected by representatives of special interest groups.
13. In Sao Tome and Principe, legislative, local and regional elections took place
on 7 October. On 19 October, the Constitutional Court announced the final results o f
the legislative elections. The ruling party, Acção Democrática Independente, won 25
of 55 seats, while the main opposition party, the Movimento de Libertação de São
Tome e Príncipe — Partido Social Democrata, gained 23 seats. The opposition
coalition, comprising the Partido da Convergência Democrática, the Movimento
18-19142

3/17

S/2018/1065

Democrático Força da Mudança and the União para a Democracia e
Desenvolvimento, secured five seats, and the Movimento de Cidadãos Independentes
de São Tomé e Príncipe won two seats. The overall turnout rate was 80.8 per cent.
The Minister for Defence and Internal Affairs issued a communiqué on 21 June
informing the public that a plot to assassinate the Prime Minister, Patrice Trovoada,
had been uncovered and foiled. Subsequently, two suspects, including a member of
the Movimento de Libertação de São Tomé e Príncipe — Partido Social Democrata,
were arrested but released shortly thereafter due to lack of evidence. On 4 August, the
judicial police arrested five people suspected of an alleged attemp t to subvert the
Constitution.
14. In the Central African Republic, the peace process under the auspices of the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation was ongoing, including the
preparations for the direct dialogue between the authorities and the main recognized
armed groups.
15. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, progress was made in the
implementation of the 31 December 2016 political agreement as well as in the
preparations for the general elections scheduled for 23 December 2018. On
19 September, the Independent National Electoral Commission announced the final
list of candidates for the presidential, legislative and provincial elections, in
accordance with the electoral calendar. The security situation remained fragile in
eastern parts of the country, notably in the Beni, Lubero and Masisi territories of
North Kivu, in Ituri province, and on the high plateaux of Uvira and the Shabunda
territory in South Kivu, where armed groups continued to carry out destabilizing
activities. The situation also deteriorated in parts of Haut-Uélé province as a result of
the cross-border movements of South Sudanese armed elements; however, in Ituri
province, intercommunal violence between the Hema and the Walendu continued to
recede.
16. In Burundi, in accordance with the new Constitution revised in May, the
National Assembly and the Senate approved new members of the Independent
National Electoral Commission on 29 August. The opposition boycotted the
parliamentary session, denouncing the new configuration of the Commission as
overwhelmingly pro-ruling party and deploring the lack of consensus in the selection
and confirmation of its members.
Security developments and trends
Boko Haram/Lake Chad basin
17. From June to 15 October, Boko Haram was responsible for 70 security incidents
leading to 104 civilian fatalities in Cameroon, and 13 security incidents resulting in
27 civilian fatalities in Chad. In June, there was a resurgence of suicide attacks
perpetrated by the group in the Far North region of Ca meroon. On 16 June, a double
suicide attack carried out by young girls resulted in the death of a child in Limani,
Cameroon. On 20 June and 4 October, double suicide attacks took place in Kolofata
in the Mayo-Sava department near the Cameroon-Nigeria border that killed six and
seven civilians, respectively. They were the first suicide attacks in the Far North
region since March. Other major incidents included the abduction of four children
from Baljoel, near the Cameroon-Nigeria border, as well as the incursion into
Talkomari, in the Mayo-Moskota arrondissement of the Mayo-Tsanaga department,
where Boko Haram beheaded five people and seriously injured several villagers. In
response to the increased attacks, the Cameroonian authorities imposed systematic
checks on administrative and security vehicles across the country. There were reports
on the arrests, detention and expulsion of several Nigerian asylum seekers in
Cameroon.
4/17

18-19142

S/2018/1065

18. In Chad, suspected Boko Haram elements committed multiple violent attacks
against villages and islands in May and July, made easier by the low water level in
Lake Chad during the dry season. On 19 July, 18 individuals, including women and
children, were killed and 10 women were abducted in Mairon village. On
29 September, 4 civilians and 2 soldiers were reportedly killed in an attack attributed
to Boko Haram in Moussarom and Ngueleya in the Lac region, while the Chadian
army reportedly killed 17 assailants in a counter-offensive. On 4 October, suspected
Boko Haram militants launched mortars into a Chadian army base in Litri, 4
kilometres from the border with Nigeria in the Lac region, killing one soldier and
injuring another. On 10 October, it was reported that 8 Chadian soldiers were killed
and 11 wounded in another attack on the army in Kaiga Kindji. The Chadian army
reportedly killed 48 Boko Haram elements.
19. At a ministerial conference of the Lake Chad Basin Commission, held in Abuja
on 30 August, member States validated the regional strategy for the stabilization,
recovery and resilience of the Boko Haram-affected areas of the Lake Chad basin.
Lord’s Resistance Army
20. The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) continued to pose a regional security threat,
notably through the abduction of youths for recruitment. From mid -June to
September, in the Central African Republic, 17 attacks and 50 abductions targeting
villages and mining sites were recorded in the Haute-Kotto and Haut-Mbomou
prefectures, an increase over the last reporting period. From June to September, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, 20 attacks and 23 abductions were recorded near
Garamba National Park and in the areas of Banda and Mugalie in the Uélé regions.
The attacks resulted in the death of two police officers and one park ranger, and
another police officer was injured.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
21. From June to September, a total of three attacks were recorded in the Gulf of
Guinea, without any casualties. A tanker with 17 Georgian and 2 Russian sailors was
reported missing on 14 August in the Gulf of Guinea. The tanker was found off the
coast of the Congo 10 days later.
Poaching and illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources
22. There were continued reports of poaching activities in Garamba National Park
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where LRA and other criminal groups from
South Sudan operate. However, the number of poached elephants declined because of
reinforced anti-poaching measures. Two cases of elephant poaching were reported in
Garamba in the first half of 2018, compared with 45 during the first six months of
2017. In June, Virunga National Park in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
announced its closure to tourists until 2019, after 12 rangers were killed and 2 tourists
were abducted in less than a year.
23. In August, Cameroonian authorities arrested six suspected traffickers carrying
700 kilograms of live pangolins and pangolin scales at the airport in Douala. The
suspected traffickers indicated that the animals were destined for Asian countries.
24. In August, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) deployed
a programme coordinator to Libreville to open a subregional office for Central Africa
and coordinate the implementation of a four-year project aimed at strengthening
national and regional capacities to combat wildlife crime and illicit trafficking in
natural resources.

18-19142

5/17

S/2018/1065

Effects of climate change, ecological changes and natural disasters on the
stability of Central Africa
25. Several countries in the region faced humanitarian crises and intensified
conflicts, including transhumance-related clashes, the causes of which could also be
linked to climate change. In fact, the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were listed as the most vulnerable countries in the world in
the Climate Change Vulnerability Index 2017.
26. In Chad, the impact of climate change over the past two decades, including land
degradation and diminishing water resources, has resulted in chronic food insecurity
and malnutrition. The lean season, which usually occurs from June to August, began
prematurely in some regions of Chad, depleting food stocks and causing early
transhumance. In northern Cameroon, droughts and recurrent floods caused serious
land degradation and loss of livelihood, leaving some 2.6 million people in need of
food assistance.

B.

Humanitarian developments
27. Persistent violent conflicts in some parts of the subregion triggered population
displacements, aggravated food insecurity, epidemics and sexual and gender-based
violence and hindered access to basic services.
28. In Cameroon, more than 400,000 persons have been internally displaced and
over 26,000 have crossed the border into Nigeria as a result of the crisis in the North West and South-West regions. On 20 June, the Prime Minister of Cameroon, Philémon
Yang, announced a Government-led emergency humanitarian assistance plan of
12.7 billion CFA francs (approximately $22.3 million) for the affected regions.
29. In the Central African Republic, continued violence increased the number of
refugees to more than 572,000 as at 1 October, while approximately 616,000 remained
internally displaced. So far in 2018, 7 humanitarian workers have been killed and 18
have been injured by hostile action, while 294 security incidents against humanitarian
actors or organizations have been reported.
30. The humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remained
worrisome, with 13.1 million people in need of protection and humanitarian
assistance, 7.7 million facing food insecurity and 4.5 million internally displaced,
2.4 million of whom were displaced in 2018 alone. Some areas witnessed a significant
increase in return movements, notably in the greater Kasai region and Tanganyika.
The country hosted more than 536,000 refugees from neighbouring countries while
more than 800,000 Congolese sought refuge in the Great Lakes region. Since October
2018, more than 350,000 Congolese nationals were expelled from Angola and arrived
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, mainly in Kasai province. Local
populations, as well as those that have been displaced from the Kasai region since
August 2016, require urgent assistance including food, household items and shelter,
nutrition, health, protection and water and sanitation. The food security situation
deteriorated significantly in 2018, affecting 2 million children und er the age of 5 who
were suffering from severe acute malnutrition. Although in decline since 2017, the
cholera epidemic continued to spread. Measles and epidemic malaria currently affect
numerous provinces. On 1 August, the Government declared a new outbre ak of the
Ebola virus disease in North Kivu province, only one week after the first epidemic
was declared contained in the western Équateur province. As at 26 November, more
than 35,000 people had been vaccinated against the virus; as of the time of writin g,
236 casualties (out of 412 cases) have been reported. The increase in the frequency

6/17

18-19142

S/2018/1065

of attacks by armed groups in the vicinity of Beni continued to hamper response
activities.
Boko Haram/Lake Chad basin
31. As of August, some 2.4 million people remained displaced by the nine-year
Boko Haram crisis in the Lake Chad basin, including some 97,000 Nigerians who fled
to Cameroon and another 10,000 Nigerians who fled to Chad. The crisis has led to
significant internal displacement in both Cameroon and Chad, resulting in a major
need for assistance with regard to food, nutrition, health and protection, as well as
livelihood support. On 4 September, during the High-Level Conference on the Lake
Chad Region, co-hosted by Germany, Nigeria, Norway and the United Nations,
donors pledged $2.17 billion to support humanitarian, peacebuilding and
development activities in the region by addressing immediate and long -term needs
and building the resilience of the affected population. In addition, the African
Development Bank, the Islamic Development Bank and the World Bank announced
$467 million in concessional loans.

C.

Human rights trends
32. In Cameroon, there were continued reports of killings, kidnappings and
plundering attributed to Boko Haram in the Far North re gion. In the English-speaking
regions, fighting between security forces and armed elements continued to cause
casualties, and has paralysed a significant portion of economic activity. Civilians,
including children, in those regions were victims of extrajud icial killings, killings,
abductions, restrictions of movement and access to health and education, as armed
confrontations continued. A significant number of internally displaced persons were
reportedly seeking refuge in the forests, and had no access to b asic services. Human
rights organizations and humanitarian actors continued to face restrictions to access
in the regions and thus were unable to effectively monitor the situation. Meanwhile,
following video footage circulated through social media of the e xtrajudicial execution
of two women and two children by members of the security forces, the authorities
arrested the alleged perpetrators and referred them to a military tribunal. The trial of
47 Cameroonians extradited from Nigeria and detained in late Ja nuary has yet to
begin. Civil society and international organizations have denounced the detention of
political prisoners and the ill-treatment and torture of detainees. During the period in
the run-up to and following the presidential election, cases of r estrictions of the
freedom of assembly were reported.
33. In the Congo, on the night of 22 to 23 July, 13 youths between the ages of 16
and 28 were found dead while in custody at the Chacona police station in Brazzaville.
The information was first reported by a non-governmental organization, the
Observatoire congolais des droits de l’homme, and later confirmed by the Minister
for Interior. An administrative inquiry into the incident concluded that the young men
were assaulted before succumbing to death. Local non-governmental organizations
continued to call for an independent, impartial and international investigation. The
organizations also denounced the impunity of high-ranking officials involved in the
incident.
34. In Equatorial Guinea, allegations of political persecutions, arbitrary arrests and
the mistreatment of prisoners continued, notwithstanding the outcome of the sixth
national dialogue and the announced amnesty measures. In July, a member of the
opposition party Ciudadanos por la Innovación de G uinea Ecuatorial died in the
Evinayong prison centre. A magistrate was also found dead in the central police
commissariat in Malabo, and several judges in the country were arbitrarily arrested.
In August, the President appointed Fermín Nguema Esono, a former political

18-19142

7/17

S/2018/1065

opponent, as the new President of the Constitutional Court. On 11 October, the
President of Equatorial Guinea pardoned 81 prisoners, resulting in the release of
34 members of the Ciudadanos por la Innovación party on 22 October.
35. In Burundi, the Human Rights Council-mandated Commission of Inquiry on
Burundi issued a report on 12 September warning that crimes against humanity and
other serious violations, including extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, ill treatment, arbitrary arrests and detentions continued unabated through 2017 and 2018.
Hundreds of people took part in Government-sponsored demonstrations against the
report on 15 September. In recent months, several unidentified bodies have been
recovered from lands, rivers and lakes, some of them displaying signs of violence.
According to reports from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), the police did not carry out investigations into most cases,
claiming that the perpetrators were unidentifiable. Owing to the lack of an official
inquiry and the absence of credible and independent human rights monitoring bodies,
it remains difficult to confirm events leading to the deaths. The Government of
Burundi continued to impose restrictions on freedom o f association and expression,
especially for members of the opposition or individuals perceived as opponents to the
Government. On 13 August, Nestor Nibitanga, a human rights defender and former
head of a non-governmental organization, was sentenced to five years in prison in
Gitega city for undermining State security and inciting rebellion.
36. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, persisting restrictions on civil and
political rights and democratic space remained a concern. Activities of armed groups
and militias continued to affect the lives of civilians. Such activities, along with
continued inter-ethnic violence, led to large-scale displacements, which notably
affected women and children. Conflict-related sexual violence continued to be
perpetrated by armed groups and militias, the Congolese armed forces and, to a lesser
extent, the national police.
37. In Gabon, little progress was made with regard to the situation of detainees,
such as political opposition figures who continued to spend months in pr ison
following various incidents including post-electoral violence. The dates of their trials
have yet to be announced.
38. In Chad, concerns persisted with regard to freedom of expression, association
and opinion. The Government was accused of systematically repressing protesters in
N’Djamena, using live ammunition to disperse them. The Government continued to
restrict access to social media. Gender inequality and violence against women and
girls remained a concern. The persistent strikes by public service providers continued
to constrain the population’s access to basic public services, including in the health,
education and justice sectors. The new Constitution adopted on 4 May mandated the
establishment of a national human rights commission; however, the national process
to establish the commission was not in conformity with the Paris Principles.
39. In Rwanda, following a presidential pardon, 2,140 prisoners were released on
parole on 15 September. In addition, on 5 October, the High Court of Rwanda gran ted
bail to Diane Rwigara, a former presidential candidate in the 2017 election, who was
arrested on charges of forgery and incitement of insurrection, and her mother. The
bail was granted under the condition that they would surrender their travel document s
and not leave Kigali, pending the result of the trial scheduled for 6 December.

D.

Socioeconomic trends
40. Continued tensions and strike actions, partly in response to austerity measures
adopted by some member States of ECCAS, dominated the general socioeconomic

8/17

18-19142

S/2018/1065

environment in the subregion. The situation was also exacerbated by the persisting
insecurity and violent conflicts in several countries.
41. In N’Djamena, on 25 July, the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of
Central African States held its second ordinary meeting to discuss the economic and
monetary situation in the Central African Economic and Mone tary Community
(CEMAC). Both economic activities and the external position of CEMAC countries
were forecasted to improve, especially with real growth rate in gross domestic product
estimated at 2.5 per cent, compared with zero growth in 2017. The projectio ns were
based on an upward revision of oil production, mainly in the Congo and Chad,
reduced public spending and the ongoing implementation of the CEMAC programme
of economic and financial reforms. However, challenges remained in most countries
in the subregion with regard to the slow resumption of non-oil activities and the
countries’ increased reliance on external resources linked to programmes of the
International Monetary Fund (IMF).
42. On 22 August, the President of Gabon, Ali Bongo Ondimba, in his ca pacity as
Chair of ECCAS, met with the President of Equatorial Guinea in Malabo. Both leaders
agreed on the need to convene an extraordinary summit of CEMAC Heads of State
and Government to discuss the ongoing economic crisis in the subregion. On
25 October, the extraordinary summit took place in N’Djamena. In a final
communiqué, the Heads of State and Government reaffirmed the urgency of
implementing the economic programmes of IMF. They also urged member States to
accelerate subregional integration and common sectoral policy reforms, and to
improve governance.

III. Activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa
A.

Good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation
Cameroon
43. From 17 to 22 November, my Special Representative for Central Africa
travelled to Yaoundé. He held consultations with the Prime Minister, the Minister for
External Relations, the Minister for Decentralization and Local Development, the
President of the electoral management body, religious leaders and memb ers of the
diplomatic corps. The discussions focused on past and upcoming elections and efforts
to assist the Government in addressing the crisis in the English-speaking regions.
From 4 to 9 August, my Special Representative for Central Africa travelled to
Yaoundé and held consultations with national authorities, including the Prime
Minister. The discussions focused on the situation in the country, especially the crisis
in the English-speaking regions, the related humanitarian situation and preparations
for the presidential election. From 29 September to 13 October, UNOCA conducted
a working-level mission during the electoral period in support of the United Nations
Resident Coordinator.
44. In line with the recommendations of the electoral needs assessment mission
conducted in July 2017, a technical adviser deployed to the United Nations country
team on 24 April continued to help coordinate United Nations support to the electoral
management body and other entities involved in the electoral process.
Central African Republic
45. My Special Representative for Central Africa actively engaged the regional
actors in support of the political process led by the panel of facilitators of the African

18-19142

9/17

S/2018/1065

Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation. On 27 September, on the margins of the highlevel segment of the seventy-third session of the General Assembly in New York, my
Special Representative for Central Africa and my Special Representative for the
Central African Republic participated in a high-level ministerial meeting on the
Central African Republic, which I co-chaired with the President of the Central African
Republic, Faustin Archange Touadera, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of ECCAS. The meeting aimed at taking stock
of progress with regard to the political process and strengthening international
coordinated engagement for the stabilization of the country, as well as support for the
African Initiative.
Chad
46. On 5 and 6 July, my Special Representative accompanied the Deputy SecretaryGeneral to Chad on a high-level mission, jointly conducted by the United Nations,
the African Union and Sweden, to assess and reaffirm the role of women in peace,
security, development and the prevention of violent extremism. The miss ion met with
the President of Chad and Cabinet Ministers, as well as representatives of the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. It also
conducted a field visit to Bol in the Lac region.
Equatorial Guinea
47. Prior to the sixth national dialogue, my Special Representative visited
Equatorial Guinea from 23 to 27 June to consult with national authorities, including
the President, as well as representatives of the political parties and international
stakeholders. On 16 July, he attended the opening ceremony of the national dialogue
convened by the President. In his statement, my Special Representative welcomed the
President’s initiative to hold an inclusive dialogue. A working-level team from
UNOCA accompanied the Resident Coordinator in Equatorial Guinea to the dialogue,
which was held from 16 to 20 July.
48. On 12 October, on my behalf, my Special Representative attended the official
ceremony of the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the country’s independence.
During his visit, he held consultations with key national stakeholders, including the
President, to discuss outstanding issues following the national dialogue.
Gabon
49. In the context of social tensions resulting from austerity measures taken by the
Government, my Special Representative met with the leaders of the main labour
unions on 15 August at their request and was informed of their key demands.
Following the meeting, my Special Representative addressed a letter to the Prime
Minister listing the concerns raised by the labour unions and encouraging the
Government to address the issues through dialogue.
50. On 6 September, an international partner coordination group, which included
UNOCA, ECCAS, the International Organization of la Francophonie, the dele gation
of the European Union and the Embassy of the United States of America, met with
the electoral management body to discuss the status of preparations and international
support for the legislative and local elections. The group issued a joint statement on
the eve of the electoral campaign on 24 September, calling for credible, inclusive and
peaceful elections. On 22 October, the group met to review the conduct of the first
round of legislative elections and the single round of local elections. The group
decided to reconvene after the announcement of the final results.

10/17

18-19142

S/2018/1065

51. From 9 to 12 October, UNOCA, in cooperation with ECCAS and the national
police of Gabon, organized a workshop on police and peacebuilding challenges and
trained 33 police officers, including 11 women.
Congo
52. My Special Representative continued to follow up on the implementation of the
ceasefire agreement signed on 23 December 2017. UNOCA provided support to the
United Nations Resident Coordinator Office with regard to the implementation of a
project funded by the Peacebuilding Fund aimed at contributing to efforts towards
sustaining peace in the Pool region. A working-level team undertook a mission to
Brazzaville from 15 to 23 September and worked jointly with the United Na tions
Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa to organize a
series of training sessions for members of the police and gendarmerie on the
principles of human rights and public order. The mission also met with key political
actors to operationalize the permanent political dialogue framework, the Conseil
national du dialogue.
Sao Tome and Principe
53. From 16 to 19 August, my Special Representative undertook a mission to Sao
Tome and Principe and held consultations with national stakeholders, including the
President, Evaristo do Espirito Santo Carvalho, and the Prime Minister, on the
political situation in the country and preparations for the legislative, local and
regional elections. From 12 to 14 September, UNOCA facilitated a capacity-building
workshop for journalists on reporting related to elections, which was jointly organized
with the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). From 29 September to
11 October, UNOCA deployed a working-level team to the country to monitor the
electoral process in support of the Resident Coordinator. After the elections, my
Special Representative visited the country from 14 to 21 October for consultations
with political actors.

B.

Support to the United Nations, regional and subregional initiatives
on peace and security
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa
54. The forty-sixth ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, for which UNOCA serves as
the secretariat, took place in Brazzaville from 29 May to 1 June 2018, with the
participation of all ECCAS member States. During its closed -door meeting, the
Committee stressed the need for confidence-building measures as an essential tool for
conflict prevention that would lead to the adoption of a declaration on confidence building measures.
55. The ECCAS secretariat provided an extensive briefing on the status of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) in Central Africa during
the forty-sixth meeting of the Committee, including the recent validation of a regional
action plan. The Committee urged its member States to increase the representation of
women in delegations attending the biannual meetings of the Committee in
accordance with the Sao Tome declaration (see A/72/363, annex II). The Committee
also recommended: (a) setting up an observatory on gender-based violence;
(b) conducting a study on women’s role in preventing violent extremism;
(c) establishing a steering committee to monitor the implementation of the regional

18-19142

11/17

S/2018/1065

action plan; (d) increasing the number of women within national defence and security
forces and United Nations peacekeeping operations; and (e) supporting the HeForShe
campaign in Central Africa.
56. From 15 to 18 October, representatives of the Bureau of the Committee (the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Chad), as well as the
representatives of Cameroon and the Central African Republic, conducted a field
mission to Sido, in the Moyen-Chari region of Chad, along the border with the Central
African Republic. The forty-seventh ministerial meeting of the Committee is
scheduled to take place in N’Djamena on 7 December 2018.
Collaboration with regional, subregional and intergovernmental organizations
57. As a follow-up to the workshop organized by UNOCA and the ECCAS
secretariat in Brazzaville in May to validate the regional action plan for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) in Central Africa,
UNOCA facilitated a briefing for members of the Government of Gabon, civil society
and United Nations entities in Gabon in Libreville on 12 July. A steering committee
was established to develop a national action plan for the implementation of Council
resolution 1325 (2000) in Gabon.
58. In cooperation with UNESCO and ECCAS, and using extrabudgetary funds
from the Department of Political Affairs, UNOCA initiated a study on the state of
youth organizations in seven States of Central Africa. The study assessed current
national legislation and governmental initiatives as well as opportunit ies to involve
more youth in early warning systems and the fight against violent extremism.
59. On 18 July, my Special Representative attended the sixteenth regional meeting
of the African, Caribbean and Pacific States and the European Union Joint
Parliamentary Assembly in Yaoundé. Participants discussed regional integration and
cooperation, peace and security challenges and natural resources while welcoming
ongoing efforts to unify ECCAS and CEMAC.
60. UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) assisted ECCAS and ECOWAS in convening their joint summit
mentioned in paragraph 3 above. In a statement issued on 2 August, I commended the
Central and West African subregions on the successful summit and reiterated the
commitment of the United Nations to support the implementation of the adopted
decisions.
61. With the support of UNOCA, the ECCAS secretariat organized a workshop in
Libreville from 30 October to 2 November to enhance the operational capacity of the
early warning mechanism for Central Africa. The workshop led to the roll -out of the
Africa Reporter software application.
62. In Libreville, from 7 to 9 November, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa,
my Special Representative and the ECCAS Secretary-General participated in an
expert group meeting on strengthening subregional conflict prevention capabilities in
Africa. The meeting resulted in the validation of an assessment undertaken by the
Office of the Special Adviser from May to August 2018 to map the existing
institutional capacities and gaps of regional economic communities with regard to
conflict prevention.
Boko Haram
63. In N’Djamena on 28 and 29 June, UNOCA participated in a technical workshop
on the regional stabilization strategy to examine security, humanitarian,
socioeconomic, gender and education issues mentioned in paragraph 1 9 above.

12/17

18-19142

S/2018/1065

UNOCA continued to support the Lake Chad Basin Commission in the elaboration of
its resource mobilization plan for the implementation of the strategy.
64. From 17 to 19 July, UNOCA participated in a regional meeting on the screening
and prosecution of persons associated with Boko Haram in N’Djamena. The event
was organized by UNODC and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, in close consultation with the African Union, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and the International Organization for Migration (IOM). During the
meeting, the countries affected by Boko Haram developed coherent approaches on
screening and adopted an action checklist to guide the screening efforts.
65. Cameroon is one of the beneficiaries of a project co -implemented by the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and OHCHR to train law enforcement officials on human rights,
the rule of law and the prevention of terrorism.
66. On 3 and 4 September, my Special Representative participated in the High -Level
Conference on the Lake Chad Region mentioned in paragraph 31 above.
Regional integration
67. On 12 September, UNOCA attended a regional workshop in Libreville on the
regional integration strategy paper for Central Africa for 2018 –2025 developed by the
African Development Bank. The workshop also reviewed a study on sustainable
forestry industrialization in the Congo basin countries carried out by the Bank. More
than 50 participants, including from CEMAC and ECCAS, recommended the
acceleration of the regional integration process in Central Africa and the finalization
of the regional integration strategy paper.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
68. The Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security of the
Gulf of Guinea in Yaoundé continued to assess the legal frameworks related to the
operationalization of the Centre and developed a training syllabus to enhance
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. Initiated in April with the support of various
partners including UNODC, the activities were expected to end in December.
Regional strategy and plan of action on counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in Central Africa
69. On 6 and 7 September, my Special Representative hosted a meeting in Libreville
with the Secretary-General of ECCAS and the Director of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa to discuss the joint
implementation of the project entitled “Supporting African States towards the vision
of ‘Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020’: capacity-building in Central Africa”. The
project aims at strengthening national capacities to address the illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons in accordance with the Kinshasa Convention. In a joint
letter dated 25 September, my Special Representative and the Secretary-General of
ECCAS encouraged the four remaining signatories that had not yet ratified the
Kinshasa Convention, namely Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea and Rwanda, to do so.
Coordination of the implementation of the United Nations regional strategy to
address the threat and impact of the Lord’s Resistance Army
70. At the 795th meeting of the African Union Peace and Security Council on
20 September, the United Nations encouraged the Peace and Security Council to
review the scope of the African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army, in accordance with the conclusions of the
18-19142

13/17

S/2018/1065

sixth meeting of the Joint Coordination Mechanism held on 29 a nd 30 March 2017 in
Addis Ababa. Emphasis was placed on the need for regional and international support
for the African Union Regional Task Force, especially in the context of the security
vacuum exploited by LRA and other armed groups to intensify crimina l activities
following the withdrawal of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and the United
States Special Forces in June 2017. The African Union Peace and Security Council
decided to maintain the Regional Cooperation Initiative, pending the development of
a strategy to progressively phase out the Initiative without leaving any security
vacuum that LRA could exploit to renew and intensify its destabilization activities in
the affected areas. In that regard, the Peace and Security Council requested that the
African Union Commission develop an exit strategy for the liquidation of the
Initiative that includes realistic timelines and the development of concrete
alternatives to the Initiative.
Transhumance and farmer-herder conflicts
71. UNOCA supported subregional initiatives to address growing conflicts between
farmers and herders affecting several countries in Central Africa. From 15 to
18 October, the representatives of the Bureau of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa visited Sido, Chad, to
assess the security and humanitarian situation in the border area between Chad and
the Central African Republic. Following the visit, they formulated recommendations
and an action plan to address the issues related to transhumance, including supporting
sustained peace in the Central African Republic, the Sudan and the Lake Chad basin,
where security issues are linked to transhumance; advocating for the adoption and
implementation of transhumance regulations; reinforcing conflict prevention and
early warning mechanisms at both the national and regional levels; strengthening the
role and participation of women and youth as peacebuilders in both farmer and herder
communities; and analysing the relevance of a disarmament programme focused on
pastoralists and farmers in the subregion. A new $3 million cross -border project,
funded by the Peacebuilding Fund, was approved for implementation by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and IOM. The project is aimed at
strengthening dialogue and peacebuilding at the community level for the prevention
and management of conflicts between agropastoral communities along the ChadCentral African Republic border, including through strengthening institutional and
political dialogue on transhumance dynamics between the two countries.
Link between illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources and financing
of armed groups in the subregion, including the Lord’s Resistance Army and
Boko Haram
72. Allegations of illicit trafficking and the financing of armed groups continued.
UNOCA participated in technical meetings with ECCAS and UNODC and exchanged
views regarding the implementation of a four-year project funded by the European
Union aimed at combating illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources in the
subregion. The project also seeks to increase national capacities and address
corruption and money-laundering issues.

C.

Enhancing United Nations coherence and coordination in
the subregion
73. My Special Representative for Central Africa and my Special Envoy for
Burundi, along with representatives of the Department of Political Affairs, attended a
meeting in Nairobi organized by my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region on

14/17

18-19142

S/2018/1065

29 June. They discussed joint efforts by the United Nations to support the East African
Community-led dialogue process in Burundi, in cooperation with the African Union.
74. On 2 July, my Special Representative attended the fifth coordination meeting of
the United Nations senior leadership in the Great Lakes region, in Nairobi.
Participants reviewed the political and security situations in the region and discussed
issues related to coordination within the United Nations.
75. In Libreville on 5 and 6 November, UNOCA organized the first working-level
coordination meeting among United Nations entities in Central Africa with the
participation of political affairs units, peace and development advisers and experts of
other United Nations entities and regional economic communities. Th e meeting was
convened to discuss regional challenges. Its conclusions should, among other things,
feed into the preparations for the next meeting of heads of United Nations presences
in Central Africa, to be held in 2019.

IV. Observations and recommendations
76. As highlighted in the present report, electoral processes were at the heart of
political activity in a number of Central African countries. I encourage the continued
efforts of all stakeholders to ensure inclusive and credible electoral proces ses in their
respective countries. It is an important step towards sustaining peace and
consolidating stability in the subregion, which has on many occasions witnessed
tensions and violence related to contested electoral processes in the past.
77. I am pleased to note that elections took place without major incident in several
countries of the subregion. In particular, I congratulate all political stakeholders in
Sao Tome and Principe for resolving their differences through dialogue. I also invite
all countries in the subregion to arrive at a consensus on contentious issues and build
confidence in electoral processes. UNOCA will continue to support such efforts for
timely, inclusive, credible and peaceful electoral processes.
78. I welcome the political dialogue processes, with a view to finding lasting
solutions to conflicts, that are ongoing in several countries of Central Africa.
However, in many countries the situation remains volatile. I encourage ECCAS
member States to continue reaching out to all stakeholders to resolve differences
peacefully, through inclusive dialogue, in order to build consensus to overcome
common challenges. I also appeal to all parties to uphold international human rights
and humanitarian obligations and fulfil their commitments. I reiterate the full
availability of my Special Representative to continue to work with countries in the
subregion towards consolidating stability and preventing further conflict.
79. The regional dimension of the conflict in the Central African Republic and the
importance of the subregion in the stabilization of that country should be highlighted
once again. In that context, it is important that all regional States continue to play a
constructive role and provide coordinated support to the authorities of the Central
African Republic and its political process. Engagement will be crucial in the long run,
and will last well beyond mediation efforts. The long-term engagement of the
subregion in the Central African Republic will lead to greater stability throug hout
Central Africa.
80. Likewise, it is crucial that all international partners of the Central African
Republic continue to remain committed to the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation as the principal framework for the political process in th e country. The
Initiative continues to enjoy the full support of the United Nations, and my Special
Representative for Central Africa will continue to play his subregional role, in

18-19142

15/17

S/2018/1065

cooperation with my Special Representative for the Central African Republic , in
garnering support for the Initiative.
81. I remain deeply concerned by the deteriorating security situation in the North West and South-West regions of Cameroon, which has led to displacement,
abductions and civilian deaths, as well as casualties among the defence forces and
security services. Since it began in November 2016, the crisis has deteriorated and
violent episodes have become more frequent. I am also concerned by the deteriorating
human rights situation in the two regions. The conduct of legi slative and local
elections in 2019 in those regions may be a challenge, and the United Nations stands
ready to provide support to the Cameroonian authorities as they endeavour to ensure
an inclusive and peaceful electoral process through dialogue. I call upon all national
stakeholders to work together and to refrain from acts that may aggravate the
situation. Solutions to any disputes should be sought through inclusive dialogue.
82. I note with satisfaction the holding of the joint summit of the Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS and ECCAS on peace, security, stability and the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism in July. The summit illustrates the genuine
commitment of the two subregional bodies to working together in the face of common
threats to peace and security. The United Nations will continue to work closely with
ECCAS and ECOWAS to contribute to the effective implementation of the Lomé
Declaration on Peace, Security, Stability and the Fight against Terrorism and Violent
Extremism. I equally encourage other partners to lend support in that regard.
83. I deplore the acts of terrorism and violent extremism which have aggravated the
humanitarian crisis in Central Africa and continue to hamper socioeconomic
development in the subregion. It is our collective responsibility to redouble our efforts
to counter those threats and address their root causes. In that regard, I welcome the
recent validation of the African Union and Lake Chad Basin Commission regional
strategy for the stabilization, recovery and resilience of the areas of the Lake Chad
basin affected by Boko Haram activities, as well as the international assistance
pledged by partners in Berlin on 3 and 4 September. I encourage partners to speedily
disburse their pledges in view of the urgency of the situation. The United Nations,
through my Special Representatives for Central Africa and West Africa and the Sahel,
will continue to lend its support to those efforts. I also call on the Multinational Joint
Task Force and troop-contributing countries to ensure that all counter-terrorism
operations are conducted in full compliance with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law.
84. I remain concerned by the persistent atrocities committed by LRA in the
subregion, and the group’s negative impact on the civilian population, especially in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic. The group ’s
activities related to poaching and illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources,
if unaddressed, may inflict irreversible damage to the ecosystem and impede the
development of the affected countries. In the long term, the activities have the
potential to exacerbate conflict. I therefore welcome the decision of the African Union
Peace and Security Council to maintain the African Union-led Regional Cooperation
Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army and call upon the African
Union as well as international partners to provide renewed support to the mechanism.
85. The proliferation of small arms and light weapons in the subregion remains one
of the main catalysts of the ongoing conflicts, as various armed groups and
transnational criminal organizations continue to profit from their trafficking. The
recent meeting of State parties to the Kinshasa Convention as well as the decision to
establish a secretariat and a trust fund for the implementation of the Convention are
important steps towards curbing that plague. It is important for countries that have

16/17

18-19142

S/2018/1065

yet to ratify the Convention to do so at the earliest opportunity to boost its
implementation and facilitate resource mobilization.
86. The past months have witnessed a rise in transhumance-related conflicts in the
subregion, aggravated by the impact of climate change. I commend the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa for
the field visit to Chad regarding that issue. I invite all concerned to continue working
together to address the challenges related to transhumance, including through
strengthening border management and regulating cross-border activities. UNOCA
will continue to provide its full support to ECCAS and its member States, including
within the framework of the implementation of the Lomé Declaration and in close
cooperation with UNOWAS.
87. I would like to express my appreciation to the Governments of the region,
ECCAS, CEMAC, the African Union, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and other
regional and subregional institutions for their continued collaboration with UNOCA.
I would also like to express my appreciation to the Multinational Joint Task Force and
troop-contributing countries for their dedication and commitment to the service of
peace and stability. I am grateful to the Government and people of Gabon for their
generous hospitality and support to UNOCA. I would like to thank the various entities
of the United Nations system working in Central Africa, including the heads of United
Nations peace operations, regional offices, country teams and other entities, for their
support to and cooperation with UNOCA.
88. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, François Louncény
Fall, and the staff of UNOCA for their continuing support to regional efforts to
advance the cause of peace and security in Central Africa.

18-19142

17/17
