United Nations

A/RES/71/297

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 July 2017

Seventy-first session
Agenda item 149

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 30 June 2017
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/708/Add.1 and Corr.1)]

71/297. Special measures for protection from sexual exploitation
and abuse
The General Assembly,
Recalling all relevant resolutions on sexual exploitation and abuse, including
its resolution 71/278 of 10 March 2017,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse: a new approach”, 1 the
report of the Secretary-General on combating sexual exploitation and abuse 2 and the
related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrati ve and Budgetary
Questions, 3 as well as the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of an
independent review on sexual exploitation and abuse by international peacekeeping
forces in the Central African Republic, 4
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse: a new approach”, 1 the
report of the Secretary-General on combating sexual exploitation and abuse 2 and the
note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of an independent review on
sexual exploitation and abuse by international peacekeeping forces in the Central
African Republic; 4
2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 5
3.
Notes with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General on special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse;
4.
Reaffirms the collective and unanimous position that one substantiated
case of sexual exploitation and abuse is one case too many;
5.
Welcomes the determination of the Secretary-General to fully implement
the United Nations policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse , and
_______________
1

A/71/818 and Corr.1 and Add.1.
A/71/97.
3
A/71/643 and A/71/867.
4
A/71/99.
5
A/71/867.
2

17-10993 (E)

*1710993*

Please recycle

A/RES/71/297

Special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse

requests the Secretary-General to report on the results achieved and challenges
encountered in his next report on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse;
6.
Expresses serious concern over the allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse reported in 2016, in particular the number of allegations involving the most
egregious forms of sexual abuse;
7.
Notes that proposals of the Secretary-General on promoting protection
from sexual exploitation and abuse require further consultations with Member
States, in particular with troop- and police-contributing countries, in order to
accommodate their views and concerns, and requests the Secretary -General to hold
such consultations and to report on the outcomes at the second part of th e resumed
seventy-second session of the General Assembly;
8.
Notes with appreciation the work of the Special Coordinator on
Improving the United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to harmonize
system-wide the United Nations approach to addressing sexual exploitation and abuse;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his next report, to outline specific
measures for increasing cooperation within the United Nations system, including
between the Secretariat and its separately administered funds and programmes, to
address identified gaps in screening and investigative capacity and in the case
management and reporting of allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse;
11. Welcomes the steps taken to introduce victims’ assistance support
functions at Headquarters and in the field, looks forward to future proposals from
the Secretary-General in this regard, and emphasizes the importance of providing
expeditious support to victims;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his next report on special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse a holistic analysis of
United Nations inter-agency cooperation at the country level for the provision of
assistance and support to victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, including
identified gaps, lessons learned, the responsibilities of the respective agencies and
recommendations, as appropriate;
13. Welcomes the determination of the Secretary-General to fully enforce the
newly promulgated policy on the protection of whistle -blowers in order to empower
and encourage staff to report wrongdoing, including in cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse;
14. Also welcomes the determination of the Secretary-General to strengthen
investigative capacity in cases of sexual exploitation and abuse, of the Secretariat
and its separately administered funds and programmes system-wide, in consultation
with relevant offices, and looks forward to receiving information in the next report;
15. Commends the intention of the Secretary-General to instruct senior
leadership to develop and submit an annual plan of action to combat sexual
exploitation and abuse, with specific actions and timelines, and requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly thereon in the context of his
next report;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to immediately inform the Member States
concerned about allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, of which United
Nations entities may become aware, in missions operating under a Security Council
mandate, and also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Member States
2/3

Special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse

A/RES/71/297

concerned receive all available information to allow for appropriate follow -up by
their national authorities;
17. Reaffirms that all personnel across the United Nations system must be
held to the same standard of conduct so as to preserve the image, credibility,
impartiality and integrity of the United Nations, and remains committed to further
consideration of ways of ensuring managerial, command and individual
accountability;
18. Welcomes the strong commitment of troop- and police-contributing
countries to the United Nations policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
sexual abuse, and commends their efforts in this regard;
19. Encourages the Secretary-General to foster capacity-building and
learning, including by facilitating the cooperation of troop - and police-contributing
countries on best practices;
20. Calls upon Member States, including those deploying non-United
Nations forces authorized under a Security Council mandate, to take appropriate
steps to investigate allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, hold perpetrators
accountable and repatriate units when there is credible evidence of widespread or
systemic sexual exploitation and abuse by those units;
21. Urges all non-United Nations forces authorized under a Security Council
mandate to take adequate measures to prevent and combat impunity for sexual
exploitation and abuse by their personnel;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to include in future reports
information on allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by non -United Nations
forces operating under a Security Council mandate;
23. Recalls paragraph 80 of its resolution 70/286 of 17 June 2016, notes that
the report of the Secretary-General on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse did not contain recommendations on mitigating risk factors
linked to recent allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, and requests the
Secretary-General to include in his next report recommendations on comprehensively
mitigating those risk factors;
24. Also recalls paragraphs 16 and 21 of the report of the Advisory
Committee, 5 and requests the Secretary-General to provide full justification for any
proposed requirements in the context of his proposals for the regular budget for the
biennium 2018–2019 and the proposed budgets of the relevant peacekeeping
missions for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure transparency and costefficiency in budgeting for the Office of the Victims’ Rights Advocate and its staff
and to include detailed information on related costs, functions, duties, workload,
expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement, in accordance with
relevant rules and regulations, in the context of future budget proposals;
26. Also requests the Secretary-General, in future budget requests for
peacekeeping operations, to report on the findings of risk assessments conducted by
missions regarding sexual exploitation and abuse and actions under way to address
those risks and to include an assessment on the implementation by missions of the
zero-tolerance policy for all United Nations uniformed and civilian personnel.
89th plenary meeting
30 June 2017

3/3
