S/PV.8779

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8779th meeting

Tuesday, 25 May 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun/Mr. Dai Bing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2021/485)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-13009 (E)
*2113009*

S/PV.8779

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of welcome on return to the Chamber
The President (spoke in Chinese): I welcome all
members of the Security Council back to the Chamber.
This is the first time in the past six months that the
Council is convening an in-person meeting. With the
improvement of the situation of the pandemic, the
United Nations Headquarters and the Security Council
are gradually resuming their work. At the same time,
we hope that, until the pandemic officially ends, we
will remain vigilant and abide by the regulations so as
to pave the way for the Council’s normal work.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia (S/2021/485)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Abdirizak Mohamud, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Somalia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia; and Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of
the African Union Mission in Somalia.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/485, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Swan.
Mr. Swan: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
2/18

25/05/2021

situation in Somalia. I am pleased to do so again together
with the Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union (AU) Commission for Somalia,
Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira. That underscores
the importance of the relationship between our two
organizations in Somalia. The African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) continues to play a critical
role in Somalia every day, and I commend the bravery
and determination of the Somali and AMISOM forces
as they advance peace and security in the country. I
also very much look forward to the comments of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdirizak Mohamud.
The political process to implement elections in
Somalia has faced many obstacles in recent months. The
talks between the Federal Government and the leaders
of the federal member states, which began in March,
regrettably broke down in early April. Abandoning the
17 September electoral agreement, the House of the
People of the Somali Parliament then adopted a special
law, reverting to a one-person-one-vote model and
extending the mandates of the current office holders
for up to two more years. Opposition to such moves led
to the mobilization of militias and exposed divisions
within the Somali security forces. Violent clashes
ensued on 25 April, risking broader conflict.
Since then, Somalia has come back from the brink
of that worst-case scenario. Under intense pressure, on
1 May the House of the People reversed the special law at
the request of President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
Farmajo. The President subsequently empowered
the Prime Minister to lead the Federal Government
of Somalia’s involvement in the electoral process,
including the security arrangements and negotiations
with the federal member states. Those measures greatly
eased tensions.
I commend all the Somali leaders who sought
compromise and consensus during that period in order
to de-escalate the situation in the interests of the nation
and the Somali people. That spirit of compromise
remains an urgent necessity going forward.
Prime Minister Mohamed Hussein Roble convened
a new summit between the Federal Government of
Somalia and the federal member states on 22 May.
That is a welcome return to dialogue after the earlier
period of confrontation. Following a series of closeddoor confidence-building meetings, discussions are
21-13009

25/05/2021

The situation in Somalia

now centred on resolving the outstanding issues related
to the implementation of the 17 September agreement
and the proposals of the Baidoa technical committee.
We are encouraged that a positive atmosphere prevails
so far, and all sides report progress being made in the
discussion. And if I may add, the news this afternoon
is also highly positive. It appears that the Somali
principals are very close to an agreement, but it will for
them to announce that. We hope it will be delivered in
the coming hours.
The United Nations team has been honoured to
support the Office of the Prime Minister in arrangements
for the summit and greatly appreciates the contributions
of key donors in that regard. We are coordinating
closely with the African Union, the European Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other partners in our diplomatic engagements. With
regard to those concerted diplomatic efforts, we deeply
regret the Somali Government’s rejection of the African
Union High Representative for Somalia.
I once again urge Somali leaders to find solutions
in good faith and to demonstrate the leadership the
country requires of them at this historic moment.
The signatories to the 17 September agreement must
now commit to a clear way forward with the holding
of elections. Without that, progress on key national
priorities will continue to be hampered — or worse,
reversed — in critical areas, including in the security,
economic and development sectors.
In proceeding to elections, it is crucial that the
women’s minimum 30 per cent representation in both
houses of the federal Parliament be implemented. The
inclusion of women, but also of youth and minority
groups, in political decision-making going forward is
necessary to ensure the development of the country and
sustainable peace in Somalia.
The security situation continues to be of grave
concern. Al-Shabaab remains a serious threat,
manifesting the ability to plan and execute complex
attacks on a range of targets across Somalia. Recent
incidents are outlined in greater detail in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/485). Suffice it
to say that Al-Shabaab has demonstrated both initiative
and resilience in recent months. The operations of the
Somali security forces and AMISOM therefore remain
crucial in maintaining the pressure on that group.
Some progress has been made in the implementation
of the revised Somalia transition plan. Key developments

S/PV. 8779

include the handover of forward operating bases in
Awdheegle and Bariirre to the Somali National Army,
near the end of 2020, and Afgooye, in March 2021. In
early April, Awdheegle and Bariirre came under attack
by Al-Shabaab, but Somali forces displayed great
courage and held their ground.
The pace of implementation of the Somali
transition plan has been impacted negatively by the
political impasse. Major commitments are behind
schedule, and significant efforts will be needed to
accelerate progress. The United Nations Support Office
in Somalia continues to provide logistical support to
AMISOM and stands ready to continue to furnish
non-lethal support to the Somali National Army and
the Somali Police Force using voluntary contributions
to the trust fund in support of the Somali security
forces, as authorized by the Security Council. I note
with great concern that the trust fund will be depleted
by the end of June. Without urgent contributions, that
vital operational and life-saving support to the Somali
security forces will cease.
Meanwhile the United Nations and the African
Union continue to engage on the way forward in
relation to the Somali security transition and a
future reconfigured AU mission. The AU and United
Nations are in the initial stages of those discussions at
Headquarters level, and further updates will be provided
to the Security Council as preparations advance in line
with the relevant resolutions of the Council.
The humanitarian situation is still dire, with
5.9 million Somalis, or more than one third of the
population, in need of humanitarian assistance this year.
Of those, over 3 million are in acute need of life-saving
assistance. While 80 per cent of the country is impacted
by drought conditions, heavy rains are at the same time
causing seasonal flash flooding in some riverine areas.
Erratic climatic shocks have led to greater displacement
and increased food insecurity. Regrettably only 19 per
cent of the humanitarian response plan for 2021 has so
far been funded. That will not be enough to respond to
the life-saving needs of Somalis across the country. I
appeal to Member States to make further contributions.
On a more positive note, Somalia received the first
batch of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccines
through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility
in March. The United Nations has worked closely
with Government counterparts to ensure the effective
distribution and administering of the vaccines to

21-130093/18

S/PV.8779

The situation in Somalia

front-line workers. As of today, Somalia has been able
to administer 42 per cent of the 300,000 doses of the
vaccines it received. Going forward, it is essential that the
international community continue to support Somalia’s
needs for achieving optimal vaccination coverage.
Let me conclude by underscoring the opportunity
now before Somalia’s leaders. It is imperative that the
ongoing summit in Mogadishu yield an implementable
agreement to hold elections in the shortest time possible.
Without such an agreement, along with the goodwill and
sincerity to implement it, the gains that have been made
in Somalia in recent years may be reversed, risking
further instability and insecurity. I therefore greatly
appreciate the close attention the Council continues to
pay to the situation in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Swan
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: Let me begin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, and your country, China, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I thank you, Sir, for inviting me
to brief this organ on the situation in Somalia.
In the period under consideration, localized floods,
below-average rainfall and a desert locust infestation
are adversely impacting populations in various regions
of Somalia. In Jawhar and its environs, the Hirshabelle
River burst its banks, and many villages have been
submerged. There were 338,000 people directly affected
by those floods. On the other hand, Mataban, BuluBurte, Mahaday and Balcad received below-average
rainfall and will need humanitarian assistance
Huge swarms of desert locusts landed in Middle
Shabelle, devastating pasture and farms. Areas such as
Gambole, Fido, Ceel Dhere and Ceel Qoxle, in Middle
Shabelle, and Ferfer and Decor, in the Hiraan region,
have been particularly hit. Government efforts alleviate
the plight of the affected populations. Clearly, it needs
to be boosted by continued and dedicated support from
the international community.
The months of February, March and April were
months of very concerning political tension in Somalia.
National political stakeholders could not reach a
compromise on how to approach the outstanding issues
and take the country to elections at the earliest time
possible. That tension threatened to drive the country to
the brink, but Somali wisdom prevailed and averted the
4/18

25/05/2021

tension from deteriorating into widespread violence.
We congratulate the Somalis on that.
President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo
addressed the people of Somalia. He requested the
Lower House of Parliament to reverse the decisions of
12 April and reinstate the indirect election model as
enshrined in the agreement of 17 September. The Prime
Minister assumed full responsibility over implementing
the electoral process and ensuring the security of the
elections, thus easing the prevailing political tension.
He subsequently entered into intense engagement with
the members of the Council of Presidential Candidates,
opposition leaders, women’s organizations, elders,
the business community and other representatives of
civil society organizations and generated tremendous
consensus among Somali stakeholders on how to
successfully approach the situation.
This has led to all soldiers and armed groups
that were behind the armed confrontations in the city
accepting and returning to their bases. It also led to all
the federal member state leaders and the Governor of
Banaadir agreeing to return without preconditions to
the negotiating table on 20 May to finalize discussions
on the outstanding issues and move in earnest towards
the implementation of the 17 September agreement.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council is taking
place at the moment when the Somalia national
consultative meeting is in its fourth day of consultations.
We are informed that there is like-mindedness, firm
commitment to let the higher interests of the country
prevail, and engagement in a frank and open dialogue
capable of leading to consensus and compromise on all
the contentious issues regarding the implementation of
the 17 September agreement, including the 16 February
recommendations of the Baidoa technical committee
for the holding of indirect elections.
The Peace and Security Council of the
African Union welcomed those very important
and encouraging developments. It commended the
Somali political stakeholders for the great show of
leadership, commitment to the welfare of their people
and profound sense of national unity and solidarity.
Accordingly, the African Union, in close cooperation
with Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and the European Union, encouraged
the continued engagement among key stakeholders,
invited them to refrain from actions that might delay or
obstruct the ongoing negotiation process, highlighted
21-13009

25/05/2021

The situation in Somalia

the need for the establishment of an appropriate followup mechanism to sustain the implementation of the
summit outcomes and further reiterated the previous
decisions not to support any parallel process, partial
elections or new initiatives leading to any extension of
prior mandates.
From the way things are going at the hangar at
the airport, we feel that there will be no need for us to
appeal again for any extension or other type of parallel
process. We are really encouraged by the news that
things are going very well at the hangar in Mogadishu.
AMISOM has continued to deliver on its
election-related responsibilities, particularly with
regard to the provision of election security, training
and technical support. In this respect, AMISOM has
continued to provide operational support, strategic
advice and institutional capacity-building to the Somali
police and sustained coordination between its civilian
component and their counterparts in Government,
both at the Federal Government of Somalia and the
federal member state levels, and with Somali civil
society organizations. This enhanced cooperation,
coordination and partnership are essential, both in
building the relevant capacities and in supporting the
ongoing electoral efforts.
With regard to security, the situation over the
past four months remained relatively unpredictable.
Al-Shabaab has continued to operate asymmetrically by
launching attacks, including vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices-initiated complex attacks, probing
attacks, grenade and mortar attacks, sniping, ambushes,
targeted attacks and the assassination of senior
Government officials, security forces and civilians.
The militant-enabling activities include, among
other things, the infiltration of Amniyat operatives
into major cities, with special emphasis on Mogadishu;
the extortion of civilians; aerial drone reconnaissance
surveillance of friendly forces’ positions; and the
recruitment and training of militants. In the short to
medium term, the security situation is likely to remain
volatile as Al-Shabaab attempts to disrupt the electoral
process and take advantage of any perceived political
tension to prepare and launch operations and attacks,
both in Mogadishu and in the federal member states.
In line with resolution 2568 (2021), AMISOM,
jointly with the Somali security forces, made significant
progress in the process of planning, coordinating and
conducting joint operations to disrupt, degrade and

S/PV. 8779

deny Al-Shabaab and armed opposition groups freedom
of movement and action. Key among those operations
in the period under consideration was the opening of
the Xuddur-Buulobarde main supply route to facilitate
the safe movement of people and goods and the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to the Xuddur community.
The handover of the Afgooye forward operating base
to the Somali National Army, counter-attack operations
against Al-Shabaab at Barire and Awdheegle on 3 and
4 April, as well as stepping up operations in Ceel Marka
on 3 April, were some of the other activities and joint
operations with the Somali National Army during the
period under consideration.
In the same vein, I can report that tremendous
efforts have been made in the implementation of the
revised objectives and tasks set out in resolution 2568
(2021). In that regard, AMISOM held the first quarter
sector commanders’ conference on 14 and 15 April,
also attended by the Somali National Army leadership,
United Nations and other partners. It enabled key security
and stabilization stakeholders to work together towards
agreeing a harmonized operational plan, including the
establishment of joint operations coordination cells at
the sector level, whose implementation will be assessed
and ensured through, inter alia, the resumption of joint
sector visits and improved coordination with relevant
partners through the mission coordination group and
the quarterly activities implementation review.
Al-Shabaab remains a potent and ruthless enemy.
There is continued need to protect the populations from
Al-Shabaab attacks, secure the main supply routes
and maintain and extend the physical space in which
the Government can establish its presence and extend
its authority. There is a need to continue to hold and
protect areas liberated from Al-Shabaab and to preserve
the gains accumulated.
The continuation of our concerted and
complementary efforts to generate, help rebuild,
capacitate, empower and bring cohesion and unity of
purpose to the Somali security forces remain a crucial
necessity if we are to maintain the achievements I
mentioned and successfully realize the transition plan,
as approved by the Government, and the contents of
resolution 2568 (2021).
I wish to reaffirm the African Union’s continued
commitment to peace and security in Somalia and to
welcome the ongoing partnership and collaboration in
our quest for peace, stability and development in the

21-130095/18

S/PV.8779

The situation in Somalia

country. Somalia is a member of the African Union
and will remain so. As such, we will continue to
make concerted efforts towards the completion of the
constitutional review and to promote our joint initiative
to encourage the resumption of the dialogue between
the Federal Government of the Somalia and the federal
member states in order to support Somalia’s efforts to
hold national elections, on the basis of the 17 September
agreement and the Baidoa recommendations, without
further delay.
In order to sustain progress in the implementation
of the African Union objectives and mandate in
Somalia, AMISOM requires appropriate logistical and
financial support. In that vein, I wish to extend my
appreciation to all partners for their continued financial
and logistical support to AMISOM.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Somalia.
Mr. Mohamud (Somalia): At the outset, Somalia
warmly congratulates China, a true friend with whom
we have a long history of relations and cooperation, on
its presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I commend you, Mr. President, for the outstanding
manner in which you have been guiding the work of
the Security Council since the beginning of the month.
I also express my thanks and esteem to the outgoing
President, the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam,
for his able guidance of the Council’s work last month.
I furthermore thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2021/485) and thank Mr. James Swan, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
and Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, for their briefings.
Following
President
Mohamed
Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo’s speech at the beginning of the
month to the Somali Parliament and an agreement
in principle to go back to an indirect election model,
the Federal Government of Somalia and its federal
member states, as well as the Banaadir region, came
together on 22 May to discuss and agree on the election
implementation modalities of the 17 September
agreement. The meeting was chaired by His Excellency
6/18

25/05/2021

Mr. Mohamed Hussein Roble, Prime Minister of the
Federal Republic of Somalia. The three key outstanding
issues that needed to be addressed in order to complete
the agreement were all discussed and agreed upon in
principle. Those issues are the status of elections for
the Somaliland representatives, election arrangements
in the Gedo region and the election committees.
On the issue of Somaliland, the key actors,
including the Speaker of the Upper House, His
Excellency Mr. Abdi Hashi Abdullahi, and the Deputy
Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Mahdi Mohammed
Gulaid, met and are in the process —as we speak — of
finalizing that agreement.
On the issue of Gedo region elections, a full
agreement has been reached. That will be reflected in
the meeting communiqué, which will be released on
Thursday at the conclusion of the meeting.
On the issue of the election committees, an
agreement has also been reached. That will also be
reflected in the communiqué to come. The parties will
have a break tomorrow and will resume on Thursday
in order to issue the communiqué and hold a closing
ceremony. As was pointed out by the previous speakers,
the negotiation process has not been easy. Consensus
therefore remains vital. Without it, peace and
Government institutions in Somalia are fragile.
Fortunately, we have now reached an agreement
that will lead Somalia to free and fair elections. Going
forward, Somalia needs to have predictable political
transitions based on elections that are inclusive,
credible, free and fair. This is a challenge and an
opportunity that the Somali people, the Government
and their partners must capitalize on in order to ensure
sustainable development in the country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
draw the attention of speakers to paragraph 22 of
presidential note S/2017/507, which encourages all
participants in Security Council meetings to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less, in line with the
Council’s commitment to making more effective use of
open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank you, Mr. President, for bringing us back to
the Security Council Chamber. I would like to start
by thanking the briefers — Special Representative
21-13009

25/05/2021

The situation in Somalia

Swan, Ambassador Madeira — as well as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdirizak Mohamud.
The United Kingdom welcomes the opening of a
new round of talks in Mogadishu and their ongoing
positive progress aimed at reaching a consensus
on an electoral model. We give our full support to
Prime Minister Mohamed Hussein Roble as he chairs
that process.
I would like to make three points.
First, as talks in Mogadishu continue — and we very
much welcome the updates we received — we continue
to urge the Federal Government of Somalia and the
federal member states to continue their constructive
dialogue based on the 17 September agreement and the
recommendations of the Baidoa technical committee to
ensure that inclusive, credible elections can take place
as soon as possible and that we can break out of the
political impasse that risks exacerbating insecurity and
instability in Somalia.
Secondly, political turmoil has direct consequences
for Somali security, as we saw as recently as last month.
The United Kingdom strongly condemns the violence
that took place in Mogadishu on 25 April. We urge
all sides to continue to show restraint and engage in
dialogue to avoid a repeat of those scenes. Tragically,
that instability leads to loss of life and threatens the
transition towards Somali-led security, as laid out in
the Somali transition plan and endorsed by the Security
Council through the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) resolution — resolution 2568 (2021).
The United Kingdom encourages all parties, in
spite of current challenges, to continue to deliver the
Somali transition plan and to work constructively
to determine the nature of a new mission from 2022.
On this note, I welcome the engagement between the
Security Council and the African Union to renew the
AMISOM authorization and look forward to further
close engagement over the coming months as we discuss
the shape and mandate of a new mission.
Unfortunately, this division and instability also
benefits Al-Shabaab. While political leaders focus on
the elections, Government reserves are dwindling, and
Al-Shabaab is growing its profits and its influence.
Resolving the current impasse will enable everyone

S/PV. 8779

to focus on common challenges, namely, defeating
Al-Shabaab and supporting development in Somalia.
That brings me to my third point. The ongoing
political instability risks exacerbating Somalia’s
already dire humanitarian outlook. The 25 April clashes
alone displaced tens of thousands of Somalis, and we
are deeply concerned about the risk of further violence,
especially if the talks fail.
Respect for international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians is paramount for Somali
State legitimacy. Political violence only compounds
the impact of the existing threats of the coronavirus
disease, flooding, drought, food insecurity and locust
swarms, which all pose a substantial risk to the longterm stability of Somalia. Somali leaders should
continue to work to address the impacts of these issues.
Finally, the United Kingdom will maintain its
support for Somalia both in mitigating the impacts
of these events and in working to build longer-term
resilience against these problems. We call on the
international community to do the same. A long-term
approach to alleviating these problems is the only
way to break the cycle of dependency on international
humanitarian aid. And fundamentally, the Somali
people need and deserve effective and inclusive
governance to support this. There must be a political
settlement on how to share power and resources in a
federated Somalia. Somalia’s leaders need to be able to
turn their attention to managing these problems, which
affect the lives of millions of Somalis.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I am echoing the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom when I express
thanks to the Chinese presidency for bringing us back
to the Security Council.
I thank Special Representative of the Chairperson
Madeira, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Swan and Foreign Minister Mohamud for
their briefings.
First and foremost, Norway welcomes the
revitalized dialogue under the leadership of Prime
Minister Mohamed Hussein Roble. We are encouraged
by reports from Mogadishu that the atmosphere
in the negotiations is positive and that a solution
can be expected within a short time. But we call on
the Federal Government and federal member state
leaders to continue to engage constructively, without
preconditions, based on the 17 September agreement.

21-130097/18

S/PV.8779

The situation in Somalia

There is no more time, energy or goodwill to lose. The
current political impasse has severe consequences for
the Somali people, and we note from the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/485) that poverty continues
to increase.
We are fully behind the efforts of Prime Minister
Roble to get all relevant stakeholders on board. His
ability to build trust between the parties will be crucial.
Norway encourages the Somali leaders to make full
use of the good offices of the United Nations and the
African Union (AU). We applaud the active role played
by the AU Peace and Security Council in contributing
to getting the electoral process back on track. Through
its firm and effective involvement, it has helped prevent
the situation from spiralling out of control.
While our return to dialogue based on the September
agreement is a welcome step, we believe that active
involvement by the AU continues to be important,
including in breaking the cycle of distrust between the
Federal Government and federal member states. A key
measure will be supporting mechanisms for constructive
and inclusive dialogue in the implementation phase of
the agreed electoral model.
A significant flaw in the dialogue thus far has been
the lack of inclusion, particularly of women, but also
of a wider segment of Somali society, including civil
society. We strongly encourage the inclusion of women
in the resumed political dialogue. They are important
Somali political stakeholders and are key to finding
consensual electoral arrangements and sustainable
solutions for the future of all of Somalia.
We also appeal to Somali political leaders and
stakeholders to commit to and work towards defining a
clear mechanism for implementing the 30 per cent quota
for women in both Houses of Parliament. We hope the
AU and the United Nations will be able to continue to
provide support to ensure the fulfilment of this part of
the 17 September agreement.
We also note with concern the continued attacks
against and harassment of journalists and media
workers. We urge Somali authorities, in particular
the security sector, to facilitate press freedom in the
preparations for an electoral process.
Drought, desert locusts and the coronavirus disease
represent three looming threats to large parts of the
Somali population. The full attention of the Somali
Government is needed to manage these crises and
8/18

25/05/2021

other climate-related security risks. The high number
of civilian casualties caused by armed conflict is also
alarming and has increased in the last reporting period,
and we are very concerned by reports of the unlawful
detention of children associated with Al-Shabaab.
We reiterate that children recruited or used in armed
conflict, including children associated with armed
groups, must be treated first and foremost as victims.
The overall effect of the political impasse on reforms
is of great concern. The impasse’s implications for the
security situation and especially the transition process
must be assessed. We acknowledge the steps taken by
the AU to map out options to address and mitigate the
possible security implications of the impasse.
The timelines in resolution 2568 (2021) for
transferring responsibility for security to the Somali
authorities and for the reconfiguration of the African
Union Mission in Somalia are clear. We now need to do
our utmost to prevent significant delays.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and
Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
(A3+1).
At the outset, we would like to convey our thanks
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations for his
report on the situation in Somalia (S/2021/485) and to
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
his report on the same subject.
We also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, Mr. James Swan, and
the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
Mr. Francisco Madeira, for their comprehensive
briefings. We would also like to acknowledge the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdirizak Mohamud, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Somalia, in this meeting.
In this statement, we will focus on the political
developments, security situation and humanitarian
situation in Somalia.
The A3+1 joins others in welcoming the decision
of the Lower House of Parliament on 1 May to rescind
the 12 April 2021 special electoral bill on federal
elections. We hope that the return to the 17 September
21-13009

25/05/2021

The situation in Somalia

2020 agreement and the 16 February 2021 Baidoa
technical committee recommendations will contribute
to reducing tensions.
In that regard, we welcome the resumption of
dialogue among the Federal Government of Somalia,
the federal member states and other stakeholders, and
urge all parties to be guided by a spirit of compromise
in order to reach as soon as possible an agreement on
the outstanding issues regarding the organization of the
elections. We underline the vital importance of holding
free, fair, timely, transparent and credible elections in
Somalia so as to fulfil the legitimate aspirations of the
people of Somalia to security, stability, democracy,
good governance and development. We hope that the
agreement on the 30 per cent quota for women will
be upheld and that it will pave the way for stronger
representation and participation of women in the
future. We also reiterate our support for the objective
of holding one-person one-vote universal elections in
2024-2025 and encourage the continuation of efforts to
that end.
The A3+1 shares the concern over the potential
grave implications of the political crisis for the security
situation in Somalia and for the implementation of
the Somali transition plan, as demonstrated by the
recent fighting that broke out in Mogadishu between
members of the national armed forces along factional
and clan lines.
While welcoming the disengagement agreement
reached on 5 May, we underline the importance that all
Somali stakeholders refrain from any new and unilateral
action that might again exacerbate the situation and join
efforts against Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups,
which continue to represent the main threat to peace,
security and stability in the country. We are alarmed
by the increased ability of Al-Shabaab to generate
revenue through illegal taxation, which could be used
to intensify their terrorist activities in the region. There
is a need for urgent and decisive measures to disrupt
the illegal financial sources of the group, including
enhancing the capacity of the Somali Government
to regulate its public financial management, which
remains susceptible to infiltration by Al-Shabaab. We
also call for continued international support to Somalia
in its fight against Al-Shabaab and for its State capacitybuilding until it is able to take full responsibility for its
own security. That should be buttressed by stringent
weapons and ammunition management practices in

S/PV. 8779

order to ensure that weapons meant for Somali security
forces do not fall into the hands of Al-Shabaab.
In that regard, we pay tribute to the unwavering
dedication, courage and sacrifice of AMISOM in the
promotion of peace, security and stability in Somalia.
We look forward to the finalization of the report by
the African Union (AU) independent assessment team
on AMISOM and its recommendations on the AU’s
engagement in Somalia after 2021. If a reconfigured
AMISOM is confirmed by all partners as the most
viable option for Somalia after 2021, it will be crucial
to ensure that it is sufficiently, predictably and
sustainably funded, including through United Nations
assessed contributions.
The A3+1 deplores the civilian casualties recorded
in the latest report of the Secretary-General, a large
majority of which are attributed to Al-Shabaab.
We condemn the arbitrary detentions, including of
journalists, the sexual and gender-based violence and
the abuses against children reported by the SecretaryGeneral.
We encourage the Somali authorities to take the
necessary steps to prevent such violations and further
promote and protect human rights, in particular the
rights of women and children, freedom of speech and
access to information. The humanitarian situation
in Somalia also remains deeply concerning, with
approximately 6 million people in need of assistance
and an estimated 2.7 million people projected to be at
risk of crisis or emergency levels of food insecurity by
mid-June, including more than 800,000 children under
five who are likely to suffer from acute malnutrition, as
stated in the Secretary-General’s report.
In the particular context of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) and climate challenges, including drought,
floods and locusts, which exacerbate the already
volatile humanitarian situation, we reiterate our call
on all international partners to scale up funding in
order to support the humanitarian response plans for
Somalia and alleviate the suffering of its people. We
commend AMISOM’s humanitarian assistance efforts,
including its support to health workers in the context
of the COVID-19 pandemic, and renew our call for
additional international support to enable AMISOM to
fulfil its humanitarian action more effectively in all the
Mission’s sectors.
To conclude, the A3+1 would like to reiterate
its appreciation for the continued efforts of the

21-130099/18

S/PV.8779

The situation in Somalia

United Nations, the AU, the European Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and all
international partners in support of Somalia and to
reaffirm its unwavering commitment to the sovereignty,
unity, political independence and territorial integrity
of Somalia.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I wish to say that today is of
course a very special day for the Security Council.
For the first time since 8 December 2020, the Council
is convening an in-person meeting. We thank the
Chinese presidency for making that possible. That
was our consistent position, and we have long urged
that we return to the Security Council Chamber. In
our view, we could have done it much earlier, or we
should perhaps not have left the Chamber at all. Our
meetings were in fact suspended for almost half a
year. We trust that subsequent Council Presidents will
consistently maintain the same position and that the
number of meetings in the Chamber will increase until
the Council finally moves fully from the virtual format,
which we have had for the past year and a half, to an
in-person format.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. James Swan, and the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, Mr. Francisco Madeira, for their
informative briefings. We welcome the participation
in this meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Federal Republic of Somalia, Mr. Mohamed
Abdirizak Mohamud.
We have carefully studied the latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2021/485). The Russian
Federation continues to closely follow the evolving
situation in Somalia, which is experiencing an acute
internal political crisis. We welcome the convening
of a nationwide conference in Mogadishu, with
the participation of representatives of the Federal
Government authorities and the heads of regional
administrations in order to resolve outstanding issues.
We note that the Federal Government of Somalia, which
continues to demonstrate its flexibility and willingness
to negotiate, significantly contributed to organizing that
conference. We welcome the positive signs that some
agreement as to the electoral model has been reached.
We would particularly like to emphasize that the
violence must not reoccur. In that regard, we welcome
10/18

25/05/2021

the role played by Prime Minister Mohamed Hussein
Roble in de-escalating tensions in the capital and in the
withdrawal of opposition-controlled armed security
units and militias. We also welcome the announcements
regarding the resumption of diplomatic contacts
between Somalia and Kenya. Like the SecretaryGeneral, we hope that this will lead to a full restoration
of good-neighbourly cooperative relations between the
two countries.
We call on the United Nations and regional
stakeholders to continue assisting Somalia, while
strictly respecting its sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence, and without interfering in
its internal affairs.
We agree with the conclusion contained in the
Secretary-General’s report — that the security situation
in Somalia remains complex. Increasing Al-Shabaab
attacks with vehicle-mounted improvised explosive
devices, as well as their shelling of the capital’s airport
with mortars and their military pressure in Lower
Shabelle demonstrate that the group is attempting to use
the internal political crisis to strengthen its positions.
We call on the Somali authorities and AMISOM to
maintain their efforts to fight extremists.
We continue to believe that the African peacekeeping
mission remains a key element in ensuring the security
of Somalia. We expect that the African Union will
take the necessary decisions regarding the parameters
of transferring security responsibilities in the country
from AMISOM to the Somali National Army. The crisis
has convincingly demonstrated that all decisions in that
regard must be carefully considered and that forcing
through a drawdown of AMISOM is unacceptable.
In conclusion, allow me to once again express the
hope that Somali political forces will become cognizant
of national priorities and specific tasks for restoring
stability to the country. That would enable them to
expeditiously organize and conduct elections. Russia
intends to facilitate that to the best of its ability.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting in the Security Council Chamber. I would
like to thank Special Representatives James Swan and
Francisco Madeira for their informative briefings.
The situation in Somalia, without a doubt, continues
to evolve. The political electoral panorama continues
to be uncertain and the security situation remains
21-13009

25/05/2021

The situation in Somalia

troubling. We have taken note of the decision to rescind
the extension of the presidential mandate and the special
electoral law. We therefore welcome in particular
the return to, and preservation of, the 17 September
agreement as the basis for the next elections. We hope
that the resumption of high-level talks, led by Prime
Minister Roble, will be productive.
In that regard, the creation of a conflict resolution
committee is encouraging as a measure to promote the
resumption of dialogue among the primary political
actors. However, we express our concern about the
reservations of some parties to return to dialogue.
Amid the growing tensions and protests in Mogadishu
and elsewhere, we call on political and social leaders to
abstain from inciting communities to violence. We need
leaders to promote de-escalation and genuinely guide
people towards the best interests of the Somali people.
In the current situation, it is critical that the
international community, including the Security
Council, send timely and appropriate signals to promote
the urgent resumption of dialogue as a mechanism to
settle differences, and avoid taking unilateral actions
that could derail the political process.
The 17 September agreement continues to be the
only consensual basis for ensuring an inclusive electoral
process. That is why it is backed by the Security
Council, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. Regional and subregional
mediation are fundamental.
As we warned in our most recent analysis of
the situation in Somalia, the electoral impasse has
had security consequences throughout the country.
Al-Shabaab and other groups have taken advantage
of the situation to increase their power and influence,
as attested by the attacks on the Aden Adde airport
complex and in the vicinity of the Waberi Parliament.
We urge political leaders to commit to preserving
peace and stability in the country in the face of the real
threat posed by Al-Shabaab. Fractures in the security
sector, based on clan affiliation or support for members
of the political opposition, pose an imminent risk to
the viability of the transition plan. A trend towards a
deterioration of the fragile prevailing conditions and
the impossibility of consolidating the security forces
is unlikely to translate into a reconfiguration of the
African Union Mission in Somalia. On the contrary,
the desired transfer of security responsibilities would
be jeopardized.

S/PV. 8779

The humanitarian situation also requires special
attention, all the more so as the pandemic continues to
affect several fronts. We welcome the first delivery of
vaccines under the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
Facility, but in addition to vaccines being insufficient,
the prevailing security situation limits their effective
distribution, let alone their delivery to the most remote
locales, which are beyond State control.
While the first quarter of the year saw a decrease
in the number of incidents affecting humanitarian
operations, humanitarian access, in general, remains
a challenge. We reiterate our condemnation of attacks
on humanitarian and medical personnel and call on
all actors to respect and protect them. Efforts must be
redoubled to secure the necessary vaccines for the entire
country and to strengthen security for humanitarian
access to all locations.
Finally, we welcome announcements of a possible
restoration of diplomatic relations between Somalia
and Kenya. As the Secretary-General rightly notes in
his report (S/2021/485), such a relationship is central
to cooperation and stability in the wider region and,
in particular, to the support needed for the political
process and the containment of Al-Shabaab.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank you, Mr. President,
for bringing us back to the Security Council Chamber.
I would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdirizak Mohamud, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Somalia, and I thank him
for his statement. I would also like to thank Mr. James
Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia United, and Mr. Francisco Caetano José
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, for their
insightful briefings and for their work on the ground at
this very challenging time.
It is encouraging to see the positive developments
in the dialogue and collaboration between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member
states, the security and economic conditions and
the preparations for the upcoming elections. We are
encouraged by the improvements in the relations
between Somalia and Kenya, and we hope that the
two countries will soon fully normalize relations for
the sake of peace, stability and development in the two
countries and in the region as a whole.

21-1300911/18

S/PV.8779

The situation in Somalia

At the same time, we acknowledge that Somalia
will still face many challenges in the days to come.
We share the concerns of the international
community, including those expressed by the SecretaryGeneral and the observer of the African Union, about
the electoral impasse that might send the country into a
constitutional vacuum and further political instability.
In that context, we commend the decision of the House
of the People for the rescission of the 12 April Special
Electoral Bill for Federal Elections and the restoration
of the 17 September agreement. We also underscore
the importance of Prime Minister Mohamed Hussein
Roble’s initiative for convening a summit in Mogadishu
between the Federal Government of Somalia and the
federal member states on the electoral process. We
hope to see the commitment of all federal member
states leaders to participating in the summit.
In the pursuit of peace, security and development
in Somalia, the implementation of a Somali-led
and Somali-owned political process based on the
17 September electoral model must be acceptable to all
Somali stakeholders and include 30 per cent political
representation of women, minorities and youth. We
also call on the United Nations and the international
community to increase financial and technical
assistance to the Somali Government to achieve
this goal.

25/05/2021

Thirdly, on socioeconomic development, we are
concerned about the critical water shortages caused by
drought in many parts of the country. More than 80 per
cent of Somalia is facing moderate or severe drought
conditions. The weather-related crises — including
drought, desert locusts, floods and long-standing
threats and challenges — have worsened the situation
in Somalia and had a negative impact on segments of
population that were already vulnerable due to chronic
poverty and conflict. We cannot overemphasize the
need to address these challenges, especially though
agricultural development. Therefore, a comprehensive
approach must strive for sustained stability and
development in the country.
Peace, stability and development are the legitimate
aspirations of the Somalis. We call on the United
Nations, regional and international organizations
and relevant bodies to work towards this end, while
fully respecting the independence and sovereignty of
the country.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): My delegation joins
others in thanking the Chinese presidency for resuming
in-person meetings in the Council Chamber.

Secondly, on resilience for security, we are deeply
concerned about the armed clashes in Mogadishu in
April. Armed clashes and political division have often
been at the centre of the turmoil in Somalia. We strongly
condemn the violence and recent terrorist attacks
by Al-Shabaab on civilians, Government officials,
Somali security forces and the African Union Mission
in Somalia.

Let me begin by thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General James Swan for updating us on
the latest report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2021/485) and the implementation of the mandates of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia. I also
thank the Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of
the African Union in Somalia (AMISOM), Ambassador
Francisco Madeira, for his briefing. I also welcome the
presence of the Foreign Minister of Somalia, Mohamed
Abdirizak Mohamud, and thank him for his update.

National unity and reconciliation are the only way
forward for Somalia. We call on all relevant bodies to
refrain from all acts that might plunge the country into
chaos and jeopardize peace and security in the country.
We urge the Government of Somalia to redouble its
efforts in ensuring safety and security for civilians and
accelerating investigations into violence against and
killings of civilians, especially children, in order to
bring the perpetrators to justice. In this regard, we call
on international partners to maintain their support for
the Somali security forces through training, equipment
provision, capacity-building and implementing
operations against Al-Shabaab.

The developments over the past three months
reflect the complex nature of the political dynamics
in Somalia. The political brinkmanship of certain
Somali leaders and some of the federal member states
has created new challenges to the electoral process.
The decisions made a few weeks ago by constitutional
bodies and authorities brought the electoral process to
a standstill and created further uncertainty. The fact
that these developments took place despite repeated
calls of the international community, including the
Council, seeking forward movement on elections is
disappointing. These developments threaten to derail
the expectations of the international community for

12/18

21-13009

25/05/2021

The situation in Somalia

Somalia for this year. While the constitutional bodies
have taken some measures to redeem the situation by
rescinding the decision on the Special Electoral Bill for
Federal Elections, the entire episode has cast doubts on
the electoral cycle. We need leadership at this juncture
on the part of all stakeholders to put the country back
on the path towards representative democracy. In this
context, the consultative meeting that is currently
taking place in Mogadishu among the signatories of
the 17 September agreement provides some positive
direction. We also welcome the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General’s update on developments
over the past two days.
The 17 September agreement provides the basis
for all stakeholders to work and agree on all aspects
of electoral issues. We join other Council members in
reiterating the call on the Somali leadership, in both the
Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member
states, to work constructively to resolve contentious
issues so that elections are held without further delay.
Resorting to violence and unilateral actions must be
avoided, as they will only compound problems for the
people of Somalia.
It is worrisome that the political stalemate has
emboldened Al-Shabaab, as is evident from increasing
attacks and security incidents. Over the past three
months, Al-Shabaab has targeted both Somali
security forces and AMISOM. We strongly condemn
all attacks against innocent civilians. The worsening
security situation requires an effective response led
by the Somali security forces. The authorities need to
redouble their efforts to fast track the transition plan. In
this regard, we welcome the revised Somali transition
plan. We hope that the funds to support the Somali
transition plan can be augmented sufficiently in the
coming months.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation, the
impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic and desert
locusts remain causes for concern. We reiterate the call
of the Secretary-General for donor support to the United
Nations Humanitarian Response Plan for Somalia,
which has realized only one-fifth of its requirements
so far.
The unpredictable political and security situation
discourages eagerness on the AMISOM drawdown.
AMISOM has been playing an important role
in stabilizing the security situation and fighting
Al-Shabaab. The worsening security situation and

S/PV. 8779

strengthening of Al-Shabab will impact not just Somalia
but its neighbours as well. India commends and pays
tribute to all AMISOM troop- and police-contributing
countries for their sustained commitment and for the
sacrifices they have made. Renewing its commitment to
peace and stability in Somalia and the Horn of Africa,
India recently contributed $1 million to the United
Nations trust fund in support of the AMISOM.
In conclusion, India and Somalia are linked by
two millennia of shared history and culture. We are
neighbours across the seas. Until the late 1980s,
Mogadishu, Kismaayo and other Somali cities had
thriving Indian communities. Even today, India is
home to many Somalis and is a popular destination
for students and medical treatment-seekers. India
contributed a significant number of peacekeepers and
naval and air assets to United Nations operations in the
early 1990s. Over the past several years, India has been
training Somali Government officials and students
through our capacity-building programmes. Recently,
we also donated 27 buses to Somalia. A stable, peaceful
and prosperous Somalia is what we wish for. India will
continue to support Somalia and the Somali people in
these challenging times towards that objective.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I too join my voice to
those thanking you, Sir, for getting us back into the
Chamber. It does feel great and, as Estonia will be
President of the Security Council for the month of June,
I am hopeful that, except for high-level meetings, will
be able to return all meetings to the Council Chamber.
I join others in thanking the briefers for their
insightful overviews, and I would also like to welcome
the Foreign Minister of Somalia to today’s discussion.
As pointed out by previous speakers, today’s
meeting is taking place simultaneously with the summit
between Somali leaders to agree on the elections.
Estonia welcomes the resumption of talks and supports
the role of Prime Minister Roble leading on the issue.
Allow me to emphasize that dialogue, compromise and
consensus are the key to overcoming the stalemate.
Estonia will be following the summit closely and with
great hopes for a successful outcome.
It is regrettable how the ongoing political crisis is
diverting attention and resources away from Somalia’s
development, humanitarian, rule of law and security
priorities — areas where progress is desperately
needed. Moreover, the longer the stalemate lasts, the
higher the risk that it could reverse the gains Somalia

21-1300913/18

S/PV.8779

The situation in Somalia

achieved over the past decade. Therefore, Estonia urges
the leaders of Somalia to finally reach a solution based
on the 17 September electoral agreement and to move
forward with holding credible, inclusive and consensusbased elections without further delay.
In the upcoming elections, Estonia urges Somali
authorities to implement the quota of 30 per cent for the
participation of women and ensure that marginalized
groups, including youth, are included. Additionally,
Estonia underlines the need to put in place measures
and institutions to protect human rights. I reiterate the
call to establish an independent national human rights
commission, which would have a key role to play in
promoting and protecting human rights. The high
level of conflict-related sexual violence remains very
concerning. It is crucial to hold the perpetrators of
sexual violence accountable.
Therefore, I urge the Federal Government to take
steps to protect women and girls from sexual and
gender-based violence by enacting the 2018 Sexual
Offences Bill. Estonia also calls for the implementation
of the conclusions of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict in Somalia.
We are very concerned about the deteriorating
security situation and strongly condemn the violence
that has taken place in Somalia. The recent spike
in Al-Shabaab activity is a stark reminder of how
much there is to lose if the political stalemate is not
urgently resolved.
It was also alarming to see election-related
violence. The latest developments have highlighted the
need to make progress on the security front. Resolution
2568 (2021) sets out concrete steps with clear
timelines on how to achieve that. The continuation of
a post-2021 mission is critical, yet it is crucial that the
future mission learn lessons from the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and take into account
the changing conditions on the ground. Estonia,
as a member of the European Union, is proud of the
organization’s contribution to AMISOM and Somalia’s
security over decades. We call on all on stakeholders to
come together and play their part to support a successful
security transition.
Estonia welcomes the recent revision of the Somali
transition plan. However, as with any plan, its worth
is dependent on its actual implementation. In this
connection, Estonia calls on the Federal Government to
redouble its efforts for the implementation of the plan.
14/18

25/05/2021

Finally, Estonia is deeply concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation and that the Humanitarian
Response Plan for Somalia is currently only 19 per cent
funded. Without urgent assistance, millions of people
will be suspended from receiving critical humanitarian
aid. Estonia calls on international community to
provide the funding necessary to save lives in Somalia.
To conclude, this is the moment for Somali leaders
to rise to the challenge and break the political stalemate
so that the leaders’ full and undivided attention can
go to helping the Somali people. Allow me to reiterate
Estonia’s full support for the country and its people.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): Let me join
others in thanking our briefers this morning for their
insightful reports. I also want to thank the Foreign
Minister of Somalia for joining us this morning and
sharing his update.
As we have stated repeatedly before the Council,
Somalia’s holding of a peaceful, transparent, inclusive
and timely electoral process — agreed to on the basis
of consensus — is vital if the country is going to
resume progress on critical State-building reforms and
stabilization efforts.
In just the last few weeks, we have seen the risks
associated with actions that are undertaken without
broad consent among critical stakeholders in Somali.
As we have just heard from the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Somalia’s
stability was threatened and the country pushed to
the verge of conflict because of clashes between
Government forces and opposition-affiliated militia
that resulted from the 12 April mandate extension bill,
which was passed by the Lower House of the Somali
Parliament and signed by President Farmajo. We, like
many others represented here, therefore welcomed the
decision of President Farmajo to rescind this deeply
decisive action, which the Parliament joined in, and to
resume negotiations with the federal member states on
the basis of the September 2020 agreement.
We commend Prime Minister Roble and his
efforts to organize the discussions that are under way
in Mogadishu, and we welcome President Farmajo’s
announcement that the Prime Minister will oversee
the implementation of election planning, including
election security. Prime Minister Roble must be given
the latitude and the authority to deliver on the elections
without any interference.
21-13009

25/05/2021

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8779

We therefore welcome the talks in Mogadishu,
and we are encouraged by the reports we have heard
just this morning on the status of those talks and the
progress being made. What we have heard this morning
is certainly the best international news I have heard
over the last several days, so we hope it continues. We
continue to call, however, on all the political parties
participating in the talks, and all the parties, to set
aside their narrow, personal political agendas, do what
is right for Somalia and finalize an agreement that can
be implemented as soon as possible. The United States
remains prepared to take actions against individuals
who we assess are obstructing agreement or otherwise
threatening Somalia’s peace and security.

I recall the importance of inclusiveness in the
electoral process. The full participation of women
both as voters and as candidates must remain a
priority, with the 30 per cent quota of women’s
participation in Parliament being respected. We also
call for the participation of young people, in line with
resolution 2535 (2020) on youth, peace and security.
The inter-Somali dialogue should make it possible to
strengthen the rule of law and consolidate democracy
in Somalia, with the support of the United Nations and
of Special Representative James Swan, whose work I
commend. France also welcomes the engagement of the
African Union and all its efforts aimed at promoting
dialogue between the Somali parties.

Moving forward with elections and political
dialogue is essential to focusing on the pressing needs
of Somalia’s people and countering the threat posed
by Al-Shabaab. As we heard, we are already seeing
evidence that Al-Shabaab has taken advantage of the
political turmoil in Mogadishu for its own ends and its
own benefits. Addressing the threat from Al-Shabaab
is an urgent problem, not just for Somalia but for the
entire subregion, and one that is predicated on a stable
political situation.

France fears that the political deadlock will have
security repercussions. The international community
cannot accept that everyone’s efforts in the fight against
Al-Shabaab are being hampered, while the group
continues its deadly attacks, as we have seen recently.

Last month, the United States announced
$154 million in additional humanitarian assistance
to address the life-threatening challenges that result
from chronic food insecurity, violence, desert locusts
and the cycles of drought and flooding. We remain
committed to the Somali people, to supporting their
aspirations to a peaceful and prosperous future and to
addressing their urgent humanitarian needs.

All of the foregoing steps must be completed within
the time frame set out in resolution 2568 (2021), so that
the Council can take decisions on the handover to the
Somali forces and on the future of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which must include
the establishment of a reconfigured mission. There is
no alternative.

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I join my colleagues in thanking the President
for bringing us together in the Chamber today. I also
thank all the briefers for their briefings and insights.
France is concerned about the political impasse
in Somalia. The decision by Parliament to reverse
the unilateral extension of its mandate is a positive
development, and we are encouraged by Prime Minister
Roble’s commitment to the resumption of discussions.
We urge the Somali Federal Government and the
federated member states to reach a consensual political
agreement so that elections can take place across all
member states of the Federation without delay. The
sustainability of the Somali Federation depends on it.

We are concerned about the lack of progress in
the implementation of the Somali transition plan. This
plan is an essential component of the transition, along
with the Santos Cruz report and the upcoming African
Union assessment.

France also calls for a decision to be taken this
year on the financing of AMISOM. A discussion
must take place with all stakeholders, starting with
the African Union, but also with Somalia, its regional
partners, the troop-contributing countries and entities
giving financial support, including the European
Union, which, I would remind the Council, has, since
2007, given nearly €2 billion to AMISOM. I cannot
stress enough the urgent need for others to financially
support this Mission from now on.
France remains concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Somalia. The plight of the civilian
population is being worsened by the coronavirus
pandemic, but also by extreme weather conditions, be it
the locust crisis or the consequences of climate change.
Food insecurity is worsening. We know that one in

21-1300915/18

S/PV.8779

The situation in Somalia

eight children now dies before the age of five. This is
one of the highest child mortality rates in the world.
France calls for safe and unhindered humanitarian
access and condemns, in the strongest terms, attacks
on humanitarian and health personnel and obstructions
to humanitarian access. These crimes will not go
unpunished. Respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights is non-negotiable.
Finally, we are concerned about the increase in
violence against children. In this regard, we call for the
full implementation of the conclusions of the Working
Group on Children in Armed Conflict adopted last
August. France encourages Somalia to fulfil its
international and regional commitments by enacting
appropriate legislation on both child protection and the
condemnation of sexual and gender-based violence.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Like others, I would
like to thank the President for bringing us back to the
Chamber today. In our case, it is our first day in the
Chamber since we were elected to the Security Council
almost one year ago, so we are delighted to be here.
I also wanted to thank our briefers this morning. We
were glad that Foreign Minister Mohamud was able to
join us today.
Since our last meeting, I am encouraged that
Somalia has stepped back from the decision to extend
the mandates of both the Parliament and the President.
I think it is no exaggeration to say that the decision to
restore the 17 September agreement was vital for the
safety of the Somali people and for the stability of the
country. Restoring the 17 September agreement now, we
believe, provides a pathway to elections. Squandering
this opportunity would be unforgivable. Momentum
has been regained and must now be capitalized upon.
The next step is simple: Somalia’s leaders must
place the country’s interests above their own, and we
welcome the good breaking news this morning that
the preliminary talks are under way and that we may
have some positive news. We welcome the leadership
of the Prime Minister in those talks. The talks are a
very good start, of course, but there remains an urgent
need for compromise and agreement on next steps by
all parties.
Somalia’s political future still depends on timely
and inclusive elections. We urgently now need to see
clarity from Somalia on how we achieve this. It is
crucial that all parties engage in these talks in good
16/18

25/05/2021

faith and work to find consensus on the electoral
process in a timely manner. Any solution — we have
said it before, and we say it again now — must ensure
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
at every stage of that process. As we have done before,
we urge Foreign Minister Mohamud to ensure that the
30 per cent minimum quota for women’s participation
be respected.
Crucially, there must also be full and unambiguous
rejection of violence. The use of armed actors to
manipulate the electoral process simply cannot be
accepted. Those who resort to the use of violence for
political gain must be held accountable.
The African Union (AU) plays an important role
in ensuring peace and security in Somalia. We heard
that this morning from the representative of the AU.
we are therefore deeply disappointed that Somalia has
rejected the offer to deploy an African Union envoy. We
call on Somalia’s leaders to reconsider that approach
and constructively engage with the AU to find a way
forward. The recent political impasse has contributed
to a deteriorating security situation — we have heard
that today — which includes the diversion of military
resources away from operations against Al-Shabaab,
increased clan violence and the splitting of the Somali
National Army along clan lines.
At the same time, the threat of Al-Shabaab in the
region remains serious. In reality, Al-Shabaab is the
only one to have gained from this electoral impasse. Its
attacks on civilians, Government officials and security
forces are reprehensible. The Federal Government
must refocus and step up its efforts to protect civilians.
The distraction of the political impasse has also
exacerbated the effects of the grave humanitarian
crisis in Somalia. As the coronavirus disease pandemic
rages, we hear that the country is facing critical
water shortages, alongside flash flooding and other
climate-related impacts. The reports of conflictrelated sexual violence recently outlined by the Special
Representative Patten are horrifying and alarming. We
call on the Federal Government to take steps to protect
women and girls from all forms of sexual and genderbased violence by enacting the original 2018 Sexual
Offences Bill and by holding perpetrators of sexual
violence accountable.
I also want to say that it is deplorable that children
continue to be killed, abducted and recruited with
21-13009

25/05/2021

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8779

impunity. I call on all parties to prevent and end all
grave violations against children.

conditions conducive to the security transition and
national reconstruction there.

Before concluding, let me say a word about the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). In the
context of the security challenges that we have heard
about today, the role and the future of the Mission
remain vitally important. Through AMISOM, the
African Union has made significant gains in laying the
path for stabilization in Somalia.

China welcomes the restoration of diplomatic ties
between Somalia and Kenya and commends Qatar for
the mediation efforts in that regard.

We welcome the revision of the Somali transition
plan, and we call for it to be fully endorsed and,
importantly, for its implementation to be accelerated.
It is clear that the continuation of a post-2021 AU
mission in Somalia will be needed. As a member of
the European Union, which has proudly contributed
to AMISOM and Somali security over decades, our
view is that the post-2021 mission must be in line with
the needs on the ground and supportive of Somalia’s
security transition. We look forward to receiving the
African Union’s independent assessment and to the
joint United Nations-AU report in September.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. James Swan, and the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union (AU) Commission for Somalia, Mr. Francisco
Caetano José Madeira, for their briefings and for
their contributions to the maintenance of peace and
stability in Somalia. I also welcome the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Abdirizak Mohamud,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, on behalf of
Prime Minister Roble.
The situation in Somalia is currently at a critical
juncture. The political deadlock over the elections
continues. The leaders of the Federal Government have
reiterated their commitment to the electoral consensus
reached on 17 September 2020 and once again
convened a dialogue among the Somali parties, which
China fully recognizes. To break the current political
stalemate is in the common interests of the Somali
parties and people. We encourage the Somali parties to
put the country’s interests first, strengthen unity and
cooperation, make the necessary compromise, rebuild
political trust, swiftly agree on electoral arrangements
and restore Somalia’s political stability so as to create

The security situation in Somalia is still dire, with
frequent attacks by Al-Shabaab. China expresses its
concern with regard to the situation. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has made tremendous
efforts to maintain peace and stability in Somalia and
has made major sacrifices, which China commends. We
welcome the extension of the AMISOM mandate by the
AU Peace and Security Council. We note that an AU
independent assessment team will soon submit a report
on the reconfiguration of AMISOM, We encourage
the United Nations, AU troop-contributing countries
and the host country to enhance communication in
accordance with the principle of Somali leadership
and ownership so as to reach consensus on the future
configuration of AMISOM.
The European Union (EU) has provided significant
financial support to AMISOM. China expects the
EU to continue its strong support so as to make a
new contribution to the maintenance of security and
stability in Somalia. The international community
should increase its assistance in order to help the Somali
security forces to gradually assume responsibility
for security.
Somalia has long been suffering a profound
humanitarian crisis. A lack of development, the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, droughts
and the locust plague have further compounded
Somalia’s plight. The international community should
provide more assistance in areas such as combating the
pandemic, post-pandemic reconstruction, debt relief,
food security, poverty reduction and mitigation.
The recently adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2021/10, on post-pandemic reconstruction in
Africa, should be fully implemented. Greater attention
should be paid to the important role of poverty reduction
and development in realizing peace and stability in
Somalia so as to tackle the root causes. China has
long supported Somalia’s peace and reconstruction
within its capacity. We have helped Somalia to build
infrastructure and enhance capacity-building, and
we recently delivered donated COVID-19 vaccines to
the country. Along with the international community,

21-1300917/18

S/PV.8779

The situation in Somalia

we will strive to make a greater contribution towards
lasting peace and sustainable development in Somalia.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

18/18

25/05/2021

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

21-13009
